...


.


SELECT TREATISES


OF


ST. ATHAN ABIUS.


VOL. I.


.


SELECT TREATISES


0"(1


ST.


ATHANASIUS


IN CONTROVERSY WITH THE ARIANS.


FREELY TRANSLATED,


WITH AN APPENDIX,


RY


JOHN HENRY CARDINAIJ NEW1vIAN,


H01WTa'l'Jj Fellow of Trinity Oollege, Oxford,

and late Fellow of Oriel.


VOIJ. I.


TENTH IMPRESSION.


LON GMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER RO\V, LONDON

NEW YORK. BO

IBAY, AND CALCUTTA

1911


All rights re,erved


ADVERTISEMENT TO THE THIRD EDITION.


I AM obliged to accompany this new edition of my

translation of certain Treatises of St. Athanasius against

the Arians with some words of explanation, or even of

apology.

When Dr. Pusey, with that generosity which he has

on all occasions shown towards me, made no difficulty

in my includi11g in the unifon11 edition of my own

publications a work which I had written for his U Library

of the Fathers,'. it was my 1110st anxious wish and my

first concern so to avail myself of his kindness as not

to interfere with the interests of his "Library," and I

thought that, \vithout being unjust to any purpose of

my own, there were several ,vays in which I could

consult for him.


It is with this object in VIew that I have omitted in

this edition the so-called Fourth Oration, which is con-

tained in Iny Oxford volume, but which, as is shown in

one of my Theological Tracts, is not specially written

against the Arians. This Tract also, with four others,

is in the Oxford edition, and all five are Olnitted in

the present, though contained in my Theological Tracts.

A third divergence froin the Oxford edition requires

more words to explain.


vi


ADVERTISE1\IENT.


At the time of the translation, in 1841-1844, to be

literal In the English used in the work was a foremost

duty. r

ehose who at that date took part in Dr. Pusey's

great undertaking were regarded \vith much suspicion,

both by Catholics and Protestants, as if they were in-

troducing the Fathers to the English public with a

covert view of recomlnending thereby certain religious

theories of their own. I t was alleged that in truth the

only high-church doctrine to be found in the Fathers

was Baptismal Regeneration; translators, it was said,

who went beyond this were to be watched, and any de-

parture from grainmatical and literal accuracy in their

renderings was sure to be scored against thmn as a con-

troversial artifice. It Inay be added that. in sonle quar-

ters an over-estilnation prevailed of the early Christian

writers, as if they had an authority so special, and a

position so like that of a court of final appeal, that

those who had a title to handle their writings were but

few. It was under these conditions and disadvantages

of the times that Dr. Pusey's translators, certainly that

I myself, began our work.


Things are much altered SInce 1836-1845. 1 yield

to no one still in special de\ otion to those centuries of

the Catholic Chw.ch which the IIoly Fathers represent;

but I see no difliculty at this day in a writer proposing

to himself a free trallslation of their Treatises, if he

nlakes an open profession of what he is doing, and has

sufficient reasons for doing it; and in the instance of

St. Athanasius as little as of any of the Ill, inasrnuch as

tbat great theologian, writing, as he did, only when he


ADVERTISEMENT.


vii


had a call to write, and sometimes while he was driven

about from place to place, is led to repeat himself, is

wanting in methodical exactness, and, with all his lucidity

and force, nay even by reason of the Greek idiom, admits

or requires explanation. Not as if a translator had any

leave to introduce ideas, sentiments, or arguments which

are foreign to his original, or lnay dispense with a ,vatch-

ful caution lest he should be taking libérties with his

author; but that it was possible, as I thought, to Inake

a volume unexceptionable in itself, and sufficiently dis-

tinct from the one published in Dr. Pusey's series.. and

with a usefulness of its own, though I did not follow

Athanasius's text sentence by sentence, allowing 111yself

in abbreviation where he was diffuse, and in paraphrase

where he was obscure.


This then is what I determined on, and thus 1 set

off in this new Edition; and I so far acted upon this

view that I anl obliged in the title-page to call my work

"a free translation; It yet I am obliged to add that the

occupation of mind, consequent upon the high and un-

expected honours and duties which came upon me soon

after I had taken my new edition in hand, broke the

continuity of idea necessary for carrying out what I had

intended, and though the very want of uniformity in my

treatment of my author's text answers the purpose of

distinguishing this edition from the former, it is a great

defect in the translation considered as a cOinposition.

One undesirable consequence is, that what are really free

renderings may in SOllie places be taken for grd,mInatical

mistakes.


,


VIIl


ADVERTISEMENT.


Another alteration, far more noticeable, and unavoid-

able also, and involving more trouble than can easily

be imagined. separates this edition frorn the first. In

order to accommodate it to the reduced size of the" page

it has been necessary not only to leave out altogether

the marginal references and notices, but, what is a

much more serious matter, to change the relation of Lhe

Annotations tò the text of Athanac;ius. In the first

edition they ran. along the foot of the page, but this

the new page would scarcely allow. Yet annota,tions no

longer answer to their nalne if separated widely fron1 the

text oub of which they spring; nor are they cOinmonly

substantive and complete compositions, ,vhich bear to he

let alone and can stand of themselves. They are written

l Jro re natd, capriciously, or at least arbitrarily, with

Blatter which the writer happens to have at hand, or

knows where to find, and are composed in what may he

called an undress, conversational style

 and the excuse

for these defects is that they are mere appendages to

the text, and ancillary to it. Hence to place them bodily

at the end of the work which they comment on, besides

its inconvenience to the reader, would be a half measure

which deprived thern of their intelligible ollice and

drift, and of their claim on his attention.


If then the Annotations, originally illustrative of

the text, \vere of necessity to form a, separate vo

ume,

the only alleviation of a step in itself undesirable was

to throw them together, according to their respective

subjects, under various headings in alphahetical order,

'\\ ith such complemental quotations and such re-casting


ADVERTISEMENT.


ix


of matter as might be indispensable and not too laborious,

and might serve to form some sort of a whole, satisfactory

as far as it went, whatever criticism it might fairly pro-

voke for its many shortcomings. This accordingly has

been attempted.


But I feel constrained to express the feeling of dis-

appointment with which I let this new edition pass out

of my hands. I had hoped it would have been my least

imperfect work; but, being what it is, its publication

seems to carry with it some sort of irreverence towards

the great Saint in whose name and history years ago

I began to write, and with whom I end. But I have

done my best, bearing in mind while I write that I

have no right to reckon on the future.

Febr. 2, 1881. J. H. N.


POSTSCRIPT.


To the Third Edition.-As to the references in the

footnotes and in the Appendix to passages translated or

quoted, such references as are Blade to the original

Greek are marked with

, and those which belong to

the translation with n.


However, for the sake of convenIence, they will SOllle-

tinIes be found n1ade, not by means of a S or n, but

by the paging.


x


ADVERTISEMENT.


It should moreover be added that the work "Against

the Arians," which occupies the greater part of the 1st

volume, is here sOlnetimes called " Discourses" and

sometimes "Orations" according as the passage is or

is not English.


I may observe that the quotations from Holy Scripture

remain, here as in the Oxford editions, in the Protestant

version, except in cases in which the context of the pas-

sages of Athanasius, to which they severally belong,

require an alteration in them :-except in such cases,

a change did not seem inlperative, and would have

gIven great trouble.


To the Fourth Edition.-Also I regret that I have

not been able in this new edition to prosecute in any

sufficient way Iny intention of making the work ans,ver

the idea of a free translation. As far as I have been

able to act upon it I have been aided not a little by

the pains taken with its composition by Fr. vVillialn

Neville of this Congregation; nor can I forget the

trouble taken by Fr. Paul Eaglesim in the tiresome

task of verifying my references.


May 2, 1887.


TABI4E OF CONTENTS.


I.

ENCYCLICAL OF ALEXANDER EXCO

I

:lUNICATING

ARIUS.


Doctrinal Teaching of Ari us


PAGE

1


II.

EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE NICENE

DEFINITION OF THE HO

IOÜSION.


CHAPTER


"


I. Introductory

II. Conduct of the Arians towarùs the Nicene definition

of the Homoüsion .

Ill. The meaning of that word, as an appellation of our

Lord


11


14


"


IV. Defence of its meaning

V. Defence of its definition .

VI. A uthorities in support of it

VII. The Arian symbol" Ingenerate"

ApPE

DIX. Eusebius's letter to his people


18

31

35

42

49

55


"


"


.,


III.

EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS CONCERNING THE ARIAN BI-

PARTITE COUNCIL HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA.


CHAPTER I. Occasion of the Two Councils . 63

" II. Proceedings of the Arians in them . 70

III. Arian leaders 82

IV. Arian Creeds 91

V. On the Homoüsion, the Catholic Symbol. . 123

VI. On the Homæüsion, the Semi-Arian Symbol . 133


CHAPTER


"


.,


"


"


IV.

THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS AGAINST THE

ARIANS.


"


I. Introductory

II. Tenets of Arius .

In. The Son of Goll uncreate anù from everlasting.


. 155

159

. 162


"


.


xii


CHAPTER


PAGE

IV. Answers to intellectual objections to tile

doctrine: first, if the Son eternal, He existed

before His birth

V. 8econd: if co-eternal, then brother of the

Father


VlII.- Fifth: if He is a Son at all, the titles Word alid

\V isdom are irrelevant 188

IX. Sixth: if born at the divine will, then later than

that will. 191

X. Seventh: if God be the Oue Iugenerate, the Son

is not God 204

Xl. Eighth: if the Son has free will, IIe is liable

to change . 211

XII. Answers to objections from Scripture: first,

. 214

. 226

234


from Phil. ii. 9, 10 .

XIII. Second: Ps. xliv. 7 .

XIV. Third: Heb. i. 4

X V. Fourth: Heb. Hi. 2

XVI. Fifth: Acts ii. 36

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XX I II.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.


II


,.


"


"


"


n


"


.,


"


,.


"


"


,.


,.


"


,.


"


"


,.


"


"


,.


,.


"


"


"


CONTENTS.


VI. 'l'hird: if a Son, He began a Theogonia

VII. Fourth: if He is a Son at all, th(>n in subjection

to the laws of a human son


Sixth : }

continued

continued

continued )

continued f

continued


introductory to Provo viii. 22


Prov. viii. 22 .


continupd: Prov. viii. 22-30

Seventh: John xiv. 10

Eighth: John xvii. 3, &c. .

Ninth: John x. 30 ; xvii. 11, &c.

Tenth: introductory to 1\fatth. xxviii. 18, &c., &c.

contin'Ut'd:

Iatth. xxviii. 18; John Hi. 35

Eleventh: Mark xiii. 32; Luke ii. 5



Twelfth: l\Iatth. xxvi. 39 ; .John xii. '27, &c.


167


171

lï6


183


250

264

272

{ 281

289

{ 306

316

323

. 343

357

365

. 36



. 3

9

. 401

408

. 422


ENCYCLICAL LETTER Oli' ALEXANDER

,


ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA,


UPON HIS DEPObITION AND EXCOlVl

IUNICATION

OF ARIUS.


PHEFATORY NOTICE.


THIS Epistle, which belongs to the year 321, seems to have been

written by Athanasius, acting as secretary to his Archbishop,

and forms a suitable introduction to his acknowledged works

which follow. lIe was, it is true, at this date not lllore than

twenty-five or twenty-six years old, but he seems already to

have written his Contra Gentes and De Incarnatione, the two

Inost finished of his works, and was in familiar intercourse

with Alexander, and high in his esteem and confidence, if not

already his Archdeacon. In consequence Tillemont goes so

far as to say, "1Ve need not doubt that St. Athanasius had a

great share in the lnultitude of letters which at this thne

St. Alexander wrote on all sides to defend the faith."

Of course a vague probability, such as this, cannot determine

a matter of fact, but it may fairly be adduced in order to

obtain a hearing tor the proper proof of it, which lies 11'

ß


.


.)





PREFATORY NOTICE.


tbe style, so like Athanasius's, so unlike Alexander's. This

internal evidence shall be set before the reader in the Appendix

to this .V olumc. The text is here translated nlai n 1 y froBl

80cr. i. 6.


ENCYCLICAL,


&c.


\V HEREAS the Catholic Church is one body, and we are

bidden in HoJy

cripture to preserve the bond of cOllcorù

and peace, it .is fitting that we should write and signify to

each other what is happening in our own parts, so that,

whether one member suffer or rejoice, we all may suffer 01

reJoice with it. Now in this our diocese at this time there

have gone forth rebellious men and enemies of Christ,

teaching an apostasy, which nlay reasonably be accounwd

and called a forerunner of Antichrist. On a matter such

as this I could wish to be silent, in the hope that the evil

might spend itself in the persons of the apostates, without

spreading to other places and contaminating the ears of

the sÌ1llple; but, illaslnuch as Eusebius, at tbis time of

NicOInedia, having escaped all punislllnent for his covetous

seizure of that see, to the abandonment of Berytus, has now

proceeded, as if with him lay all matters of the Church,

to place himself at the head of these apostates,

nd has

taken upon himself to write letters all round in their

favour, with the hope, by some means, of drawing men

aside unawares to this last and nlost unchristian heresy, T

have felt it a duty, knowing what is written in the Law,

no longer to hold my peace, but to give you full informa-

n2


.


4


}

NCYCLICAL EPISTLE


EXCYCL. tiOll , in order that Y OU ma y all know who the y

EPISTLE.

are who have apostatised, and what their miserable

tenets, and may pay no attention to Eusebius, should he

write to you. For, with the purpose of reviving, by means

of these men, that old bad spirit, which of late had not

shown itself, he pretends to defend them, but really for the

furtherance of his own interests.

2. Those who have apostatised are Arius, Achillas,

Aïthales, and Carpones, another Arius, Sarmates, SOIne-

time presbyters; Euzoïus, Lucius, Julian, J\lenas, Hel-

ladius, and Gaïus, sometime deacons; and with them Se-

cundus and Theonas, sometime of the rank of Bishops.

3. .A..nd their un scriptural novelties are these :-" God

was not always a Father, but once was not a Father.

The Word of God was not always existing, but came into

being out of nothing; 1 for God who is, did make out of

nothing IIim who was not. Therefore once He was not,

for the Son is a creature anù work. He is neither like in

Bubstance 2 to the Father, nor the Father's true and natural

Word; nor is He IIis true 'Visdom; but He is one of

those things which were made and brought to be,s and only

by an abuse of words," VV ord and "\Visdom, having come into

existence IIimself by God's own 'V ord and God's intrinsic

'Visdom, by which God made all things, and 1100 in their

Humber. Accordingly He, the Word of God, is by nature

IDutable:' and variable, as are all rational beings; and

foreign and alien and separated off from the substance of

God. And to the Son the Father is an ineffable God,6 for

not properly and accurately does the Son know the Father,

nor can He perfectly see Him. For neither does the Son

know His own substance, as it really is; for He was made


1 i

 OVIe ÓVTWV. Hence the Ari-

ans were called Exucontii.

2 öJ.LOc.oç tear' OVt7wv. Viti. Ap.

pend. HomflusWn.

I V id. A pp. )'EV1}TW.


-I teU TaXPTJfTTI IeWç. Vid. p. 19,

infr.

5 TpurTÓt;. Vid. App. åTpE7rTUV.

6 åPfHI TÚÇ.


or AtExANDEn.


5


Cor our sake, in order that by I-IÏ1n, as by an instru- En. BEN.


 I-S.

ment, God- Inight create us; and lIe would not have

subsisted, 7 unless God had wished to create us." Accordingly,

when they were asked whether the Word of God could change,

as the devil had changed, they were not afraid to answer,

"Yes, He can; for having conle into being by creation,

He is of a mutable nature."

4. These were the avowals of Arius and his followers, and

when they boldly persisted in them, we together with the

Bishops of Egypt and Libya, nearly a hundred in number,

in Council assembled, anathematised them and their ad-

herents. On this Eusebius and his party received them,

having it at heart to confuse together falsehood with truth



and impiety with piety; but in vain, for truth ever con-

quers, nor is there any communion of light with darkne.r

s,

any agreement of Christ with Belial. Who ever yet heard

such language? and who that hears it now, but is shocked

and stops his ears, that its foulness should not enter into

them? Who that hears John saying, In the beginnin



was the Word, does not denounce the tenet, "Once He

was not"? Who that hears in the gospel the Only be-

gotten Son, and by Him all things were made, will not hate

nlen who pronounce that "the Son is one of God's

works "? How can He be on a level with His own

creations? how can He be Ouly begotten, who, as they

say, is to be numbered with all other creatures? how can

He be out of nothing, when the Father says, Jly heart

has burst out 'With a good Word? and Out of the womb

before the morniug star have I borne Thee 1 or how "un-

like the Father in substance," if He be the perfect

Image and Radiance of the Father, saying of Himself, TVhoso

hath seen l1fe hath seen the Father? And how, if the Son

be God's TVord and Wisdom, was He " Once not" in being?

for this is as Inuch as to say that once God was without


7' ,

V1íEClT1].


6


:NCYCLICAt EPISTLE


E!\CYCL. 111ind , without wis(lmn. IT ow , too , is fIe ßlutable , of

El'l

'I'J,I<:.

variable, who says by His own 1l1Outh, I am in the

þ'athe-I. Ltud the p'atlter in .J1 e, and I and tlte Father ære one;

and by the mouth of His Prophet, Behold lIe, for I am and

vary not. For, though these words belong also to the

Father, yet here they may be more appositely said of the

Son, that in His becoming man He was not changed, but

as the Apostle says is Jes'lts (]krist, the same yesterday to-

day and for ever. ...

nd what has persuaded them to say,

that, "for our sakes He was made," though Paul writes,

For whom are all things and by whom are all things? After

so extreme a step, we need not wonder to hear their blas-

phemy that the Son has not perfect knowledge of the

Father; for having once made up their minds to war

against Christ, they put aside even His own words, As the

Father 1cnou'eth !Jle, even so know I the Father. If then the

Father knows the Son imperfectly, then indeed it is plaiu

that the Son too has but an imperfect knowledge of the

Father; but if to say this is a sin, and the Father knows

the Son perfectly, then too, as the Father knows His own

Word, so, it is plain, does the Son know His own Father

whose "\V ord He is.

5. By such arguments and explanations of divine Scrip-

ture we have oftentimes refuted them; but still, like chame-

leons, they changed their colours,s as if ambitious of fixing

upon themselves the Scripture, The wicked man when

he is come into the depth of sins contemneth. 9 Certainly

many heresies have existed before them, which, venturing

where they ought not, have become foolishness; but these

men, scheming in all they have laid down to destro.r

the 'V ord's divinity, have made those others white by

the contrast of themselves, being so much nlore like

Alltichrist. rrhcrefore it is that they have been proscribed

and anatheTIlatised by the Church. Grieve, however, as


II p. 24 infr.


9 Prúv. xviii. 3.


OF ALEXANDEtt.


7


we do , over their ruin, and es p eciall y because , after ED. BEN.


3-6.

their early grounding in the doctrines of the Church,

they have now falIen away, nevertheless we are not much sur..

prised; for a fate like this befell Hyrnenæus and Philetus;

and before them Judas, who, once a follower of the Saviour,

was afterwards a traitor and apostate. Nor have we

been without lessons concerning these very persons; fOl'

the Lord foretold, Take heed lest any man deceive you, for

many shall come in Jrly name, saying, I am He, and tlte time

draweth near, and they shall deceive many. Go ye not after

them. And Paul, who was taught these things by the

Saviour, has written that In the last times some shall apos-

tatise from the sound faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and

teackings of demons who turn away from the truth.

6. Seeing then that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ

doth both by His own mouth charge us, and by the

Apostle warn us concerning such men, it was fitting that

we, the personal witnesses of their impiety, should anathe-

rnatise them as aforesaid, declaring them aliens from the

Catholic Church and faith; and we have further also

made thiB known to your piety, our beloved and most

honoured colJeagues, in order that you may be on your

guard against receiving any of them who may have the

insolence to come to you, or giving ear to Eusebius or

any other writing in their behalf. For it becomes us as

Cl1ristians to turn a way from all who by word and in

intention blaspheme Christ, as being God's foes and de-

stroyers of sonls; nor even to say God speed you to such

men, lest, as blessed John has charged UB, we become

partakers of their sins. Salute the brethren who are with

you. Those with me give you greeting.


"


,


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS


IN DEFENCE OF THE NICENE DEFINITION OP

THE HOMOÜSION.


PREFATORY NOTICE.


\V E have no means of determining the date of this Epistle,

and critics do but offer conjectures at variance with each

other. The Bollandists consider it to be earlier than A.D. 347,

if not soon after the Nicene Council, e.g. 330 (Vit. Athan.

c. 26). 1\iontfaucon assigns some time between 350 and 354.

1'illemont between 342 and 361.

Other aids towards determining it are such as these : it was

,vritten in a time of peace, aftel' the experience and with the

anticipation of persecution; but from 325 to 330 there was no

such experience, from 330 to 347 no peace, and from 352 to

361 severe persecution; what interval is left for the date is

from 348 to 352, which fulfils the requisite conditions, as being


 11 interval of peace, with persecution before and after it.

It may be added that the rise of the Anomæans was

about A.D. 350, and about the same time Acacius became the

leader of the Eusebian or court party on the tactic in con-

troversy of confining definitions of doctrine to Scripture

language, and thereby virtG.ally of annihilating dogmatic faith.

N ow the main topic and the occasion of this Epistle, as

Athanasius sho"\\s again aud again, is the revival of Arianism


\


10


PREFAtORY NOTICE.


proper in its original outspoken vigour, the prmnincnce of

Acacius, and the appeal to Scripture agninst orthodoxy uy him

a.nd other successors of EnseLius.


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS,


&c.


-.....-


CHAPTER I.


1. THOU hast done wen, in signifying to me the discus-

sion thou hast had with the ad vocates of Arianism, mnong

whom were certain of the party of Eusebius, as well as

\Tery many of the brethren who hold the doctrine of the

Church. Very welcome to me was thy Christian vigilance,

which excellently confuted the impiety 1 of their heresy;

while I marvelled at the effrontery which led theIn,

after the exposures already nlade of their bad reasonings

in the past, and of that perverse telnper to which all men

bore witness, still to be complaining like the Jews, "Why

did the bishops at Nicæa use terms not in Scripture,2 'Of

the substance' and 'Consubstantial'?" 3 Thou then, as a

Ulan of learning, in spite of their pretences, didst convict

them of talking idly; and they in those pretences were


I Vid. Appendix to this volume,

f:vtJÉßHa, &c.

2 The plea here used, the un-

scri ptural character of the Nicæan

symbol, had been suggested to

Constantius on his accession, A.D.

337, by the Arian priest, the fa.-

vourite of Constantia, to whom


Constantine had entrusted his

will, Th('od. Rist. ii. :3; and Euse-

bius of Cæsarea glances at it., at

the time of the Council, in the

letter to his Church, which Athana-

sius subjoins to this Epistle.

3 Or Homoüsion.


\


12 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. I. but acting in accordance with their own evil

--- disposition. For they are as variable and tickle

in their sentiluents, as chameleons 4 in their colours; and when

confuted they are confused; and when questioned they hesitate;

and then they lose shame, and betake themselves to evasions.

Lastly, when detected in these, they do not rest till they

have invented fresh pleas which have no substance, and all

this that they may pcrsist in being loyal to an impiety.

2. Now such tactics are nothing else than an obvious

token of their want of Divine Reason,5 and a copying,

as I have said, of Jewish malignity. For the Jews too,

when convicted by the Truth, and unable to confront it,

made excuses, such as JVhat miracles doest 'l'hou, that we

may see and believe Thee? }Vhat dost Thou work? though

so many n1Îracles were given, that they themselves said



JVhat do we? for this man doeth many miracles? In

t.ruth, dead men were raised, lame walked, blind saw afresh,

lepers were cleansed, and the water became wine, and five

loaves satisfied five thousand, and an of them wondered

and worshipped the Lord, confessing that in Him were

fulfilled the prophecies, and that He was God, the Son of

God ; all but the Pharisees, who, though the miracles shone

brighter than the sun, yet complained still, as ignorant men,

TVlty dost Thou, being a man, make Thyself God? In-

sensate, and verily blind in understanding! they ought

contrariwise to have sa.id, "'Vhy hast Thou, being God,

becmne luau?" for His works did prove llim Gael, that

thereupon they lnight both worship the Father's goodness,

and adinire the Son's descent frmn on high for our sakes.

However, this they did not say; no, nor would thcy

witness what lIe was doing; or they witnesscd indeed, for

this they could not avoid, but they cha.nged their ground

of complaint and said again, ""\Vhy healest Thou the

paralytic, why makest Thou the horn-blind to see, on the

I, Vie}. Appenò.ix, Cha"nrlf01/s. ð Vie1. App. åXoyía.


NIC

NE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. l



sabbath day?" But this too was a mere excuse ED. BEN.


 1-2.

and a finding fault; for on other days as well as the

sabbath did the Lord heal all manner of sickness, and all

manner of disease, but they complained still according to their

wont, and in calling HiIn Beelzebub, preferred the imputation

of Atheism, 6 to a recantation of their wickedness. And

though in sundry times and diverse manners the Saviour thus

showed His own Godhead and preached the Father to all

men, nevertheless, as kicking against the goad, they rashly

spoke against Him, as if in order that, according to the

divine proverb, they might find occasions for separating

themselves from the truth. 1

3. As then the Jews of that day, for acting thus

wickedly and denying the Lord, were with jURtice de-

prived of their laws and of the promise made to their

fathers, so the Arians, judaizing now, are in my judg-

ment in circumstances like those of Caiaphas and the con-

temporary Pharisees. For, perceiving that their heresy

is utterly unreasonable, they start difficulties, saying,

"Why was this defined and not that?" Yet wonder not

though in the event they do not persevere in that sort of

warfare; for in no long time they will have recourse to

outrage, and win be throwing out threats of the band and

the captain. 8 Such is their inconsistency; yet how can it

be otherwise with them? for, denying the Word of God,

Divine Reason they have utterly forfeited. Aware then of

this, I would of myself have made no reply to their attacks;

but, since thy friendlines

 has asked to know what was

done in the Council, I have not delayed to inform yon,

in order to show in few words how destitute Arianism

is of a religious temper, and how its very business is to

frame evasions.


6 Vid. App. ãew!:. 8 John xviii. 12, vid. Ufe of

7 A reference to Provo xviii. 1, Force.

as In the Sept. version.


,


14 EPISTLE O}' ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE O}' TIlE


CHAPTER II.


CHAP. II. 4. AND do thou, beloved, consider whether it be

not so. If, the devil having sown their hearts 9 with

this perverseness, they are so confident in the truth of their

reasonings, why do they not first clear themselves of the charge

of heresy which lies against them? and then will COlne the

tÏ1ne for them to criticise the definition 1 of the Council. For

no one, on being convicted of murder or adultery, is at liberty

after the trial to arraign the sentence of the judge, why

he spoke in this way and not in that. For this, instead of

exculpating the convict, rather increases his crime on the

score of petulance and audacity. 'Vhy did not they find

fault with the wording of the definition at the time when

it was framed? but now when their first duty is to repeat

after the Council those anathelnas in which its creed ends,

instead of this, they profess to have scruples as to the creed

itself, and they find matter for a subterfuge in the fact,

which no one denies, that the word "substance" is not ill

Scripture. Surely it is just that those who are under a

charge should confine thenlselves Lo their own defence.

While their own conscience is so unclean, they are not

quite the men to quarrel with an act which in truth they

do not understand. Rather, let them in vestig-ate the

matter in a docile spirit, and, in order to learn what

hitherto they had not known, let theIn cleanse their can;

in the strealfi of truth and the doctrine of piety.

5. Now it happened to the Eusebians in the Nicene

COll ncil in this wise :-On their making a stand in behalf of

their impiety, the assenlbled bishops, who we

e more or less

three hundred in number, mildly and courteously called


9 i1TU17r

íp(lVTO' TUV ðLaßóXo",

th

 allusion is to Matt. xiii.

5,

aud is very frequent in Athan.


chiefly with a reference tù Arian-

ism. . Vid. App.

7rf(17rtt,klÇ.

I V it!. Vejinitiun.


NICJ<

NE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSIO

. lá


upon them to explain and defend themselves. ED. BRN.


2-3.

Scarcely, however, did they begin to speak, when

they pronounced their own condellulation, 2 for one differed

from another; then, perceiving the serious straits in which

their heresy lay, they rmnained dumb, and by their silence

confessed the disgrace which can1e upon thell1. On this the

Bishops, after condemning the formulæ which they had

devised, published against theJn the sound and ecclesiastical

faith; and, whereas an subscribed it, the Eusebians subscribed

it too in those very phrases, of which they are now COll1-

plaining, (1 m

an, "Of the substance," and "Consubstan-

tial,") professing that "the Son of God is neither crea-

ture nor work, nor in the nUll1ber of things ll1ade from

nothing, but that the \V ord is an Offspring from the

substance of the :Father." Alld, what is strange indeed,

Eusebius of Cæsarea in Palestine, who had refused the day

before, yet afterwards subscribed, and sent to his church a

letter, saying that this was the Ðhurch's faith and the

tradition of the Fathers; and thereby !llade it clear to all

that his party were in error before, and were rashly con-

tending against the truth. For, though he was ashall1ed

at the monlcnt to adopt these phrases, and excused

himself to his Church in his own way, yet he certainly

ll1eans to signify his acceptance of theln, in that he does

not in his Epistle deny the" One in substance," and" Con-

substantial." And in this way he got into a difficulty; for,

in excusing himself, he thereby was attacking the Arians,

as if their stating that "the Son was not before His gene-

ration," was their denial of His existence even before His

birth in the flesh. And Acacius too knows this well, though

he also through fear may pretend otherwise because of the

times, and ll1ay deny the fact. Accordingly I have sub-


2 i. e. " convicted themselvps, ,. ,wT6')'opot, j. e. by their variations,

:nfr. p. 35, Ep. Æg.

 6, f.lLVn;W åEf vid. 'I j

. jii. t I, aVTolw.TálCptTO,.


,


16 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS Il'\ DEFENCE O.F THE


CUAP. II. joined at the end of these rernarks the letter of Euse-

bius, that thou mayst know from it the scanty regard

shown by Christ's enernies 3 towards their own masters, and

singularly by Acacius hirnself.

6. Are they not then committing a crime, in their very

thought to gainsay the decree of so great and ecumenical

a Council? are they not in transgression, when they dare

tt) confront that good definition against Arianism, acknow-

ledged, as it W:iS, by those who had in the fir

t instance

taught them their impiety? And supposing, even after

subscription, Eusebius and his did change again, and return

like dogs to their own vomit of impiety, then surely the pre-

sent gainsayer8 do but deserve still greater detestation, for

they are sacrificing their souls' liberty to those, as the

mastel'S of their heresy, who are, as James has said, doublf-

minded men, and unstable in all their ways, not having one

opinion, but changing to and fro, and now recommending

certain staten1ents, but soon dishonouring them, and ill

turn recommending what just now they were blaming. But

this, as the Shepherd 4 has

aid, is to be "the child of th



devil,"

 and is the note of hucksters rather than of doctor

.

Pðr, what our Fathers have of old delivered, this is

really doctrine; and this truly the token of doctors, to

confess the same thing with each other, and to vary neither

from theu1selves nor from their fathers; whereas they who

have not this character are not to be called true doctors

but charlatan

. Thus the Greeks, as not witnessing to the

&une doctrines, but quarrelling one with another, have JlO

truth of teaching; 5 but the holy and veritable heralds of

the truth agree together, not differ. For though they

lived in different times, yet they one and all tend the


me way, being prophets of the one God, and preaching

the

alne Word harmoniously.


1 Vie!. XPL(1TÓp a x o t.;.

, Henna.!. Pastor. ii. R


 Vid. Private Jut!.qmellf.


NIOENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 1 '1

7. And thus what }'Ioses taught, that Abraham ED. BEN.


 3-6.

kept; and what Abraham kept, that Noe and Enoch

acknowledged, discriminating pure from impure, and becOln-

ing acceptable to God. For _\..bel too in this way witnessed

unto death, taught in the "truths which he had learned

from Adam, who hiInself had learned from the Lord, and

He again, when He came in the last age for the abolishment

of sin, said, I give no new commandment unto you. Where-

fore also the blessed Apostle Paul, who had learnt it from

HiIn, when he is determining ecclesÜ:

stical duties, forbade

that even deacons, not to say bishops, should be double



tongued; and in his rebuke of the Galatians, he made

a broad declaration, If anyone preach any other Gospel unto

you than that ye have received, let him be anathema. As J

have said, so say I again; if even an Angel Iron'/, Heaven

should lJreach unto you any other Gospel than that ye have

received, let him be anathema.

8. Thus the Apostle. 6 If then truth lay,1 as the Euse..

bians afterwards said, otherwise than their subscription

inlplied, the present men ought to anathematise them for

subscribing; if on the other hand they subscribed to a

truth, what ground have they of conlplaint against the

great Council which imposed on them the subscription?

But if they blame the Council's act, yet let off those who

took part in it, they are thmnselves too plainly the sport of

every wind and wave, and are influenced by opinions, not

their own, but of others, and being such, are as 1ittle trust-

worthy now as before, in what they allege. Rather let them

cease to carp at what they understand not; lest so it

be that, not knowing to discriIninate, they at hazard call evil


6 Vid. Apostle.

7 There seems to be some error

in the text here, over and above

the (perhaps) error of the press,

Trapà Tà vTrÉypat/Jav. It is here

translated as if KaÀà was under-


stood or accidentally omitted:-

'1lCaì ouroL TOVt; TrEpì EV(jÉßwv JlEra-

ßaÀÀoJlf.VOVt; lCai ÀÉyovrat; ËrEpa

[ À ' ] ' ä " ,,, , ' ()

lCa,

 Trap " vTr

ypa'YavJ ava f.JW

'iTOLH rwaav, 1], &c.


c


18 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. III. goud and good evil, and think that bitter is sweet

--- and sweet bitter. Doubtless their real desire is

that doctrincs which have already been judged wrong and have

Leell reprobated should gain the ascendancy, and they make

violent efforts to prejudice what was rightly defined. Nor is

there reason for further explanation on our part or answer

to their excuses, nor for further resistance on theirs, insteaa

ûf acquiescence in what the leaders of their heresy sub-

scribed; but since, from an extraordinary want of modesty,

the present men perhaps hope to be able to advocate an im-

piety, which really is from the Evil One,8 with better success

than those who went before them, therefore, though in my

former letter written to thee,9 I have already argued at

length against them, notwithstanding, I am ready now

also to examine each of their separate statements, as I

did those of their predecessors; for now not less than then

their heresy shan be shown to ha ve no soundness in it,

but to be a doctrine of demons.


CHAPTER III.


9. THEY say then what the others held and dared to

Inaintain before thenl: 1 "Not always Father, always SOIl;

for the Son was not before Ilis generation, but, as others,

came out of nothing; and in consequence God was not

always Father of the Son; but when the Son came into being


8 Vid. ÒLaßo

ucóc;.

II This letter is not extant.

1 It may be convenient to set

down here the RnRthematisms

appended to the Nicene Creed,

though they occur presently in

Eusebius's Letter. They run

thus: II And as to those who say

t hat the Son once was not; and


that before His generation He

was not; and that He came into

being from nothing; or who

pretend that He was of another

hypostasis or substance, or that

the Son of God was created, or

alterable, or mutable, those men

the Holy Catholic and Apostulical

Church anathematises. ..


NléENE DEFINrrION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 19


and was created, then was God caned His Father. ED. BEN.


 5-6.


'or the Word is a creature and work, and foreign

and unlike to the Father in substance; and the Son is neither

by nature the Father's true 1V ord, nor His only and true

Wisdom; but being a creature and one of the works, He

is by an abuse of words 2 caned Word and Wisd01ll; for by

the 1V ord which is in God was fIe n1adc, as were all

things. 'Vherefore the Son is not true God." 3

10. Now it Inay serve to bring home to them what

they are saying, to ask them first this, what a son simply

is, and of what is that name significant. In truth, Divine

Scripture acquaints us with a double sense of this word :-one

which

Ioses sets before us in the Law, JVhen thou

shalt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep all

His commandments which I command thee this day, to do

that which is right in the eyes of the Lord thy God, ye shall

be children of the Lord your God; as also in the Gospel,

John says, But as many as received Him, to them gave He

power to become the sons of God :-and the other sense

is that in which Isaac is son of Abraham, and Jacob of

Isaac, and the Patriarchs of Jacob. Now in which of

these two senses, literal or figurative, do they understand

the Son of God in such figments as the foregQing? for

I feel sure they will issue in the same impiety as the

Eusebians.

11. First, let us suppose the word Son to be taken rin the

figurative, not the literal sense; and this is how they

really understand it (as their predecessors did), only many

of them shrink from saying so. If this is the sense in


2 lCaTaXP1Jt1TLlCWf;. This word

is noticed and protested against

by Alexander, Bupr. p. 4. by the

Semiarians at Ancyra, Epiph.

Hær. 73, n. 5, by Basil, contr.

Eunom. ii. 23, and by Cyril, DiaL

ii. pp. 432, 433. Also Cyril Cat.


xi. 4, Epiph. Hær. 69, p. 743,

and 71, p. 831; Euseb. c. Marc.

p. 40, Concil Labb. t. 2, p. 67

and abusivè, p. 210.

3 Vid. ad Ep. Æg.

 12, supr.

p. 4, infr. Disc. ch. 5, p. 160.


.


c 2


20 EPISTLE OF' ATltANAStUS IN DEFENCE OF 'rJ-tF.


O HAP. III. which the title" Hon of God" is to be taken, thell I

observe, first of all, that sonship in this sense is a

grace gained frmu above by those who haye made progress in

goodness, and who receive lJon'fr to becom(' sons of God;

and then, if so, He would surely in nothing differ fron1

us, who are also born of God; no, nor would lIe be Only-

begotten, as having obtained the title of Son, as others

have, frOlll IIis virtue. For granting what they say, that,

whereas His qualifications were foreknown, He, on that

account, from His very first beginning, by anticipation,

received the name, and the glory of the name, still there

will be no difference between Him and those who receive

the name for their actions, so long as this is the ground

on which He as others is recognised as Son. For Adam

too, though he received grace from the first, anù upon

his creation was at once placed in paradise, differed in no

respect either from Enoch, who was translated thither

after his birth on his pleasing God, or from the Apostle,

who also was caught up to paradise after his good actions;

nay, nor frOIn the thief, \"ho, by virtue of his confession,

receiyed a promise that he should be forthwith in paradise.

12. Next when thus pressed, they will perhaps make an

answer which has brought theni into difficulty Inany

times already: "'V e consider that the Son has this pre-

rogative over other beings, and therefore is called Only-

begotten, because lIe alone was brought into being by God

alone, and all other things were created by God through

the Son." Now I wonder who it was that suggested to

you 4 so futile and novel an idea as that the Father alone

wrought with His own hand the Son alone, and that all


Le. what is your authority?

is it not a novel, anrl therefore a

\\ rong doctrine P And presently

IW()wV iöiòalIlCEV, implying the tra-


dìtional nature of the teaching.

And so

t. Pa.ul himself, 1 Coï..

xv. 3. Vid. also supr. pp. 17, 23.

infr. p. G:'J,

erap. i.

 3.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 21

other things were brought into being by the Son as RD. BEN.

p.

.by an under-worker. If for the toil-sake God was

content with making the Son only, instead of making all things

at once, this is an impious thought, especially in the case

of those who know the words of Esaias, The everlasting

God, the Lord, the Oreator of the ends of the earth, hungereth

not, neither is weary; there is no searching of His under-

standing. Rather it is He who to the hungry gives

strength, and through His word refreshes the labouring.

On the other hand it is impious to suppose that He dis-

dained, as if a humble task, Himself to form the creatures

which came into being after the Son; for there is no pride

in that God, who goes down with ,Jacob into Egypt, and

for Abraham's sake corr

cts Abimelec in behalf of Sara,

and speaks face to face with }\tloses, who was but a man,

and descends upon Mount Sinai, and by His secret grace

fights for the people against Amalec. However, you are

false in your fact, for we are told, He rrtade us, and not we

ourselves. He it is that, through His Word, made all

things small and great, and we may not divide the

creation, and say this is the Father's, and this is the Son's,

but all things are of one God, who uses His proper "r ord

as a Hand, 5 and in Him does all things. As God Himself

shows us, when He says, All these things hath lIfy Hand

made; and Paul taught us as he had been taught, that There

is One God, from whom are all thin.f}s; and One Lord Jesus

Christ, through whom are all things. Thus He, always as

now, speaks to the sun and it rises, and commands the

clouds and it rains upon one place, and another, where it

does not rain. is dried up. And He bids the earth to give

its fruit, and fashions Jeremias in the womb. But if He

now does all this, assuredly at the beginning also He did

not disdain through the Word to make all things Himself;

for these are but parts of the whole.

ð Vid. Hand. .


22 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. III.


13. But now, thirdly, let us suppose, as sometimes

has been said, that the other creatures could not

endure to be wrought by the direct 6 Hand of the Ingenerate,

aHd therefore the Son alone was brought into being by the

Father alone, and other things by the Son as an under-

worker and assistant, for this is what Asterius 1 the

sacrificer has written, and what Arius has transcribed and

bequeathed to his own friends; and from that tÏIne they

used this formula, broken reed as it is, being ignorant,

the bewildered men, of its rottenness. For if it was im-

possible for things created to bear the hand of God, and

you hold the Son to be one of their number, how was even

He equal to this formation by God alone? and if an inter-

mediate was necessary that things that came into being

lnight come, and you hold the Son to be one of such, then

must there have been Borne medium before IIim, for His

own creation; and, that intermediate himself again being

a creature, it foHows that he too needed another

Iediator

for hiB own framing. And though we were to devise

another, we must still first devise his l\Iediator, so that we

shall never come to an end. And thus a

lediator being

ever in request, never would the creation be constituted,

because nothing that bas come into being can, as you say,

bear the direct hand of the Ingenerate. And if, on your

perceiving the extravagance of this, you begin to say that

the Son, though a creature, was nlade capable of being

nlade im1nediately by the Ingenerate, then a11 the other

things also, though they are lnere creatures, are capaùle

of being fraIned inlnlediately by the Ingenerate; for the

Son too is but a creature in your judglllent, as every-


hing else. And consequently the generation of the 'V ord is

superfluous, according to your impious and futile inmgillation,


6 ålCparoç, simple, absolute, un-

tempered, vid. Aria1

 argwnents,


7 Vid. Asterius.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HO

IOÜSION. 23

God being sufficient for the immediate forn1ation of ED. HEN


 8-9.

all things, and all things that have been brought out

of nothing being capable of sustaining His direct hand.

14. These impious men then having so little mind amid

their madness, let us see, fourthly, whether this particular

sophism will not prove even lllore irrational than the

others. Adam was created alone by God alone (through

the Word); yet no one would say that Adam differed

from those who came after him in having thereby SOlne-

thing in his nature more than all other men (granting that

he alone was made by God alone, and that we all spring

from Adam and consist by succession of our race) so long

as we consider him fashioned from the earth as others, and

that, at first not existing, he afterwards came to be. But

though we were to allow some prerogative to the Protoplast

as having been formed by the very Hand of God, still it

must be accounted to him as one of honour, not of nature.

For he caIne of the earth, as all other men; and the Hand

which then fashioned Adam, now also and ever is fashion-

ing and giving entire consistence to those who come after

him. And God Himself declares this to Jeremias, as I

said before: Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee;

and so He says of all, All those things hath lIy hand made;

and again by Esaias, Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer,

and He that formed thee from the womb; I arn the Lord that

maketh all things, that stretcheth forth the heavens alone,

that spreadeth abroad the earth by jJIyself. And David,

knowing this, says in the Psalm, Thy Hands have made me

and fashioned me; and he who says in Esaia8, Thus saith

the Lord who formed me frmn the wornb to be His servant,

signifies the same. Therefore, in respect of nature, he

differs nothing fronI us though he precedes us in time, so

long as we all consist and are created by the saIne Haud.

If then these be your thoughts, 0 Arialls, about the Son

or God also. that thus He subsists and came to be, then in


,


24 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIU:-5 IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. III. your judgment lIe will differ nothing on the score

of nature fronl others, supposing lie too once waR

not, and then was brought into being, and the name of Son

was, on His creation, for His virtue's sake, by grace united

to Him. For, from what you say, He Himself is one of

those of whom the Spirit says in the Psalms, He spake the

word and they were made; He commanded and they were

created. If so, who was it to whom Gød gave command

for the Son's creation? for a Word there mnst be to

whom God gave f'ommand,8 and in whom the works are

created; but ye have no other to show than the Word

whom ye deny, unless indeed you should again devise

SOlne new notion.

15. "Yes," they will say, "we have found another;"

(which indeed I have formerly heard from the Eusebia.ns,)

"on this score do we consider that the Son of God has a

prerogative over others, and is called Only-begotten,

because He alone partakes the Father, and all other

things partake the Son." Thus they weary thell1selves

in changing and varying their statements, like so many

pigments; however, this shall not save them from an ex-

posure, as men who speak empty words out of the earth, and

wallow as if in the mire of their own devices. For if

indeed He were called God'8 Son, and we the Son's sons,

their fiction were plausible; but if we too are said to be

sons of that God, of whom He is Son, then we too partake

the Father, who says, I have begotten and exalted children.

For, if we did not partake Him, He had not said, I hG'v8

begotten; but, if He Himself begat us, no other than He

IS our Father. 9 And, as before, it avails not, whether the

Son has sOlllething more and was made first, whereas we

have something less and were made afterwards, as long as

we aU partake, and arC' called sons, of the same Father.

For the more or less does not indicate a different nature; 9


8 Vid. .Z'Jinistratwft.


8 Vid. YfVV71TÓV.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE H0!\10ÜSION. 25


but attaches to each according to the practice of En. ERN.


 9-10.

virtue; and one is placed over ten cities, another

over five; and some sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve

tribes of Israel; and others hear the words, Come, ye blessed

of l11y Father, and, TVell dOllfJ, good and faithful servant.

,V ith these ideas, however, no wonder they imagine that of

such a Son GoÇ. was not always Father, and that such a

Son was not always in existence, but was brought into

being from nothing, as a creature, and was not before His

generation; for such a one is other than the True Son

of God.

16. But to persist in thus speaking inyolves guilt; for it

is the tone of thought of Sadducees, and of Samosatene 1 to

consider that the 'V ord and vVisdom of the Father is but

His Son by grace and adoption: it remains then to say

that He is Son in the second of the senses above specified,

viz., not by an extreme figure, but in a literal sense, as Isaac

was son of Abraham as being begotten of him. In other

words, the Son is of the nature of the Father,2 for nature

and nothing short of nature is implied in the idea of

sonship, generation, or deri vation. A son is a father's

increase, not acquisition; from within not from without.

I know the objection which will be made to this doctrine;

it will be said that I haye proposed a mere human conception


J Paul of Samosata is called

Samosatene, as John of Damascus

Damascene, from the frequent

adoption of the names Paul and

.John. Hence, also, John Chry-

sostom, Peter Chrysologus, John

Philoponus. Paul was Bishop

of Antioch in the middle of the

third century, and was deposed

for a sort of Sabellianism. He

was the friend of Lucian, from

whose school the principal Arians

issued. His prominent tenet,

to which Athan. seßms þere to


refer, was that our Lord became

the Son by 7rpOIC07rl], or growth in

holiness (vid. Luke ii. 52, 7rpO-

iIC07rTe), "advancing as a man."

Or Athan. may be comparing our

Lord's predestination as held by

the Arians (supr. p. 20. Theod.

Rist. i. 3, p. 732), with Paul's speak-

ing of Him as "Goil predestined

before ages, but from l\Iary re-

ceiving the origin of His exis-

tence. " Apoll. i.

 20.

2 Vid. Son of God.


26 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OJ!' THE


CHAP III. of a sacred truth, altogether earthly and utterly

unworthy of God, but I cannot accept such all

account of it. Such an objection only argues ignorance in

those who make it; for analogy does not involve likeness.

Spirit is not as body, God is not as man, nor man as God.


len are created of matter, and their substance is liable

to increase and loss; but God is immortal .and incorporeal.

And if so be the same terms are used of God and of lnan

in divine Scripture, yet the clear-sighted, as Paul injoius,

will study its text and thereby discriminate, and dispose

of what is written there according to the nature of each

subject, and will avoid any confusion of sense, so as not

to conceive of the attributes of God in a hunian way, nor

again to ascribe the properties of man to God. For this

were to mix wine with water, aud to place upon the altar

strange fire together with that which is divine.

17. For instance, God creates, and man too is said to

create, and God has being, and men too are said to be. Yet

does God create as man does? or has He being as luan

has being? Perish the thought; we understand the

terms in one sense of God, and in another of men. For

God creates in that He calls into being that which is not,

needing nothing thereunto: but men create by working

some existing material, first praying, and thereby gaining

the science to execute from that God who has frëuned all

things by His proper Word. And again, men, being

incapable of self-existence, are inclosed in place, and

haye their consistence in the 'V ord of God; but God is

self -existent, inclosing all things, and inclosed by none; 3

within all according to IIis own goodness and power, yet

without all in His proper nature. As then nlCn create

not as God creates, as their being is not such as (fod's

being, so men's generation is in one way, anù the Sou is

froin the Father in another. For the ofl"springs of nlen arc

3 Vid. Omllipr('s('1z,cf'.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 27


in some sort portions of their fathers, since the ED. BEN.


 10-12.

very nature of bodies is to be compounded and

dissoluble, 4 and to act by piecemeal; and men lose their

substance in begetting,5 and again they gain substance from

the accession of food. And on this account men in their

time become fathers of many children; but God, who is

individual, is Father of the Son without being parted or

affected, for there is neither loss nor gain to the Immaterial,

as there is in the case of men, and, being simple in His nature,

He gives absolutely and utterly all that He is, and thereby is

Father of One Only Son. This is why the Son is Only-

begotten, and alone in the Father's bosom, and alone is

acknowledged by the Father to be from Him, as in the

words, This is lJIy beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And therefore also, He is the Father's Word, 6 a title which

suggests that the Divine Nature is beyond liabiJity to

affection and division, in that Dot even a human word is be-

gotten with any such accidents, luuch less the Word of God.

vVherefore, also, He sits, as 'V ord, at the Father's right

hand; for where the Father is, there also is His Word; but

we, as being His works, stand in judgment before Him; and

He is adored, because He is Son of the adorable Father,

but we adore, confessing Him Lord and God, because we

are creatures and other than He.

18. If this be so, we come to this question :-supposing

by the appellation of Son of God must be meant God's off-

spring, the fulness of His very Self, can it be a light sin,

to lnaintain that He was made out of nothing, and was not

before His generation? It is of cour

e a subject which

transcends the thoughts of men, but, I repeat, God's

nature is not bound by the conditions of ours. 'Ve becOlne

fathers of onr children in tÍIne, but God, in that He ever

is, is ever Father of His Son. 1 And the generation of


4 Vide PWUTÓt;;.

IS Vid. à-rroppoiJ.


6 Vid. Àóyot;;.

'7 Vid. àH'YEVVÉÇ.


\


28 EPISTLE OF ATHANAS IUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. III. mankind is familiarised to us from earthly instance Q

that are parallel; but since no one knoweth the Son

but the Father, and no one knoweth. the Father but the Son,

and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him, therefore

the sacred writers, to whom the Son has revealed Him,

have giyen us a sort of image, but nothing more, from

things visible, saying, nrho is the brightness of His glory

and the impress of His Person; and again, For with Thee

is the well of life, and in Thy light shall we see light;

and when the Word chides Israel, He says, Thou hast

forsaken the Fountain of wisdOJn; and this Fountain it is

which says, They have forsaken .Ale, the Fountain of living

waters. And mean indeed and very dim is the illus-

tI-ation compared with what we desiderate; but yet it

is possible from it to understand something above man's

nature,S instead of thinking the Son's generation to be on

a level with ours. For instance, who can even imagine

that the radiance of light "once was not," so that he should

dare to say that "the Son was not always," or that "the

Son was not before His generation"? or who is capable

of separating the radiance from the sun, or of conceiving

of the Fountain as ever void of life, that he should say, even

if mad, "The Son is from nothing," (who says Himself, 1

am the life), or "alien to the Father's substance," (who says,

He that hath seen life hath seen the Father?) for the sacred

writers wishing us thus to understand, have given these

illustrations; and it is irrelevant and most impious, when

Scripture contains such images, to forn1 ideas concerning

our Lord from others which are neither in Scripture, nor

have any pious bearing.

19. Let us go by Scripture; then from what teacher or

by whali tradition have you derived these notions about

the Saviour? From what passage.

 of Scripture? "Yes,"

they will Bay, "in the Proverbs we read, The Lord hath

8 Vid. Eco1Wmicallall,q fto rr


NICENE D:F.:FINITION OF THÈ HOl\IOÜSION. 29


created 1.1Ie a beginning of His ways unto His ED. BEN.


 12-13.

'Works. 9 This the Eusebians used to insist upon in

former years, and you write me word that the present men

also, though overthrown and confuted by an abundance of

proof, still are putting about in every quarter this passage,

and saying that the Son is one of the creatures, and reckon-

ing Him with things which came into being out of nothing.

But I answer first, it cannot mean this, supposing we

have already proved fIirn to be a Son. Son and creature

are ideas incompatible with each other. If then Son,

therefore not creature: if creature, not Son: for vast is

the difference between them, and Son and creature cannot

be the same, unless His substance be considered to be at

once from God and yet external to God. This at first sight ;

but, fìecondly, these men seem to me to have a wrong

understandi ng of this passage. They ask us again and

again, like so many noisy gnats, 1 "Has the passage no

nleaning ?" Yes, it has a meaning, a pious and very

orthodox meaning, but not theirs, and had they understood

it, they would not have blasphemed the Lord of glory. It is

true to say that the Son was created, but this took place when

He became In an ; for creation belongs to man. And any

one may find this sense duly conveyed in the divine oracles,

who, instead of accounting their perusal a secondary matter,

investigates the time and persons, and the purpose, and

thus studies and ponders what he reads. Now as to the

season spoken of, he will find for certain that, whereas

the Lord always exists, at length in fulness of the ages

He became man; and whvrea

 He is Son of God, He


9 Eusebius of Nicomedia quotes

this text. Theod. Hist. i. 5.

And Eusebius of Cæsarea Dem.

Evang. v.I. It is the one

ub-

ject of Disc. chapt. 17-23, infr.

pp. 272-356.

I 7(EPtßOfLßOV{][v. So ad Afros.


 5, init. And Sent. D.

 19


7(EpífPXOVTaL 7(EptßofLßoVVTH;, and

Disc. i. ch. 9, init. And Gregory

Nyssen, contra Eun. viii. p. 234,

C. wç åv ToiJ(; à1rf.Í.povç TOVTWV

Taiç 7rÀaTwvucuiç Ka}..)..LtþwviaLf.

7(fptßofl-ßiJuf.LEV. Also Naz. Orat.

27. :3.


30 EPI

TLE OF ATHANARIUS IN DEFEMCF. OF THÈ


Orap. III. became Son of In

Ul also. And as to the need he will

understand that, wishing to annul our death, lIe

took on IIinlself a body from the Virgin

Iary; in order that,

by offering this unto the Father a sacrifice for aU, He

might deliver us an, who by fear of d'.3ath were all our

life through subject to bondage. And as to the person, this

is indeed the Sa.viour's, but it is then said of Him when

lIe took a body and said, The Lord has created lJIe a

beginning of His

oays unto His works. For as it properly

Lelongs to lIim, as God's Son, to be everlasting, and to

be in the Father's bosOln, so, on His becOlning man, the

words befitted Him, The Lord created .JIe. For then they

are said of Him, and then He hungered, and thirsted, and

asked where IJazarus lay, and suffered, and rose again.

And as, when we hear of Him as Lord and God and

true Light, we understand Him as being from the Father,

so on hearing The Lord created, and Servant, and He

suif(Y(ed, we shaH justly ascribe this, not to His Godhead,

for it does not belong to It, but we must interpret it of

that flesh which He bore for our sakes; for to it these

things are proper, and this flesh itself was none other's

than the Word's. And if we wish to know the advantages

we attain by this, we shall find them to be as follows: that

the 'V ord was made flesh, not only to offer up this body

for all, but that we, partaking of His Spirit, might be

made gods, a gift which we could not otherwise have

gained than by I-lis clothing Himself in our created

body; for hence we derive our nalne of "men of God"

and "men in Christ." And as we, by receiving the

Spirit, do not lose our own proper substance, so the Lord,

when made man for us, and bearing a body, was no less

God; for He was not lessened by the envelopment of

the body, but rather deified it and rendered it immortal.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE H01\IOÜSION. 31


CHAPTER IV.


20. THIS then is quite enough in order to denounce

D. BEN.

'11 14 -- 15 .

as infamous this Arian heresy; for, as the Lord ___

has granted, out of their own words is impiety brought home

to them. But now let us on our part act on the offensive,

and call on them for an answer; for it is fair tilne, when

their own ground has failed them, to question thelll on

ours; perhaps it may abash the perverse, and Inake them

see whence they have fallen. It has been shown abovE.'

that the appellation "Son" is so far from implying

beginning of existence as actually to suggest co-exis

ence

and co-eternity and co-divinity with God the Father.

But, besides this, I have incidentally referred to the

passages in Holy Scripture which speak of our Lord as

the Divine VV ord and Wisdom, and the meaning of these

titles, when carefully considered, is a confirmation that

He is truly and literally the Son. The Apostle, for

instance, says, Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of

God; and John after saying, and the Word was made flesh,

at once adds, And we have seen His glory the glory as of

the Only-begotten of the Father full of grace and truth;

so that, the Word being the Only-begotten Son, is also

that Power and that "\Visdom by which heaven and earth

and all that is therein were made. In like manner we have

learnt from Baruch that WisdOln comes from a Fountain, 2

and that that Fountain is God; what then is Wisdom

but His Son? Now, if they deny Scripture, they art:!

at once aliens from the Christian name, and may fitly be

called of all men atheists, and Christ's enemies, for they

have brought upon themselves these titles. But if they

agree with us that the sayings of Scripture are divinely

inspired, let them dare to say openly what they think in

secret, that the Word and Wisdom being the Son, the Word


2 Vid. 7rrryÍ}.


.


32 :BPIS'l'LE O.P ATltANASrUS IN DEFENCE OF T1t




0HAP. IV. and \VisdOlll of the Father had a beginning, that

is, that God was once wordless and wisdOlnless;

and let them in their madness say, "There was once when

He was not," and "before His generation, Christ was not; "

and again let theIn declare that the Fountain begat not

'VisdOIn from Itself, but acquired It from without, till they

have the daring to

ay, "The SOIl came of nothing;" whence

it will foHow that His origin is no longer a Fountain, but

a sort of pool, as if lnerely receiving water from without,

and usurping the n3.1ne of Fountain.

21. How full of iInpicty this is, I consider none can

doubt who has ever so little understanding; however,

they shall be answered as Arius was, and as I noticed when

I began. They whisper something about titles, Word

and 'Visdom are titles of the Son, only tit[es; 3 titles!

then what is His real name? What is He reahy? is He

nlore than those titles, or less than them? If He is

greater than the titles, it is not lawful from the lesser to

designate the higher, but, if lIe be in His own nature less

than the titles, then it follows that lie has earned what

is higher than His original self, and this ÏInplies in Him a

moral advance, which is an impiety equal to anything that

has gone before. For that He who is in the Father, and in

whom also the Father is, who says, I and tlte Father are

one, whom he that hath seen, hath seen the Father, to iInply,

I Hay, by the titles you give IIÌln that lIe has been im-

proved by anything external, is the extrmne of madness.

22. However, when they are beaten hence, and like the

old Eusebians are in these great straits, then they have

this renlaining plea, which Arias too in ballads, and in

his own Thalia, fabled, starting it as a new difficulty:

"1\1any words speaketh God; which than of these are we

to call Son and W orù, Only-begotten of the Father?"

Insemmte, and anything Lut Christians! for first, in using


;) rill. òvJp.a-ra.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HO

10USION. 33


such language about God, they are not far from En. BEN.


 16-17

conceiving .of IIim as a man, who speaks and

then modifies His first words by His second, just as if one

1V ord from God were not sufficient for the franling of an

things at the Father's will, and for His providential care of

all. For His speaking many words would argue a feebleness

in them all, each needing the service of the other. But

that God should act through One Word, which is the true

doctrine, both shows the power of God, and the perfection

of the \V ord that is from HiIn, and the pious understanding

of them who thus believe.

23. 0 that they would be led to confess the truth from these

their own adn1Ïssions now! how near they come to it, in

order to start off again in hopeless divergence! They grant

that "many words speaketh God," and what is such utter-

ance but in some sort a bringing forth? He is a Father

of words; then why not in that way which is most

perfect? why not rather the Father of One 1V ord than of

nlany ?-of a \V ord substantive and from His own fulness

rather than of mere utterances 4 which come and go and

have no stay? These men are loth to say that there

is no substantial Word of God, why then do they not

go on to confess that that VV ord is a Son also? Is Son a

mere title without substance? and must not also that

Word be a reflection or image? and, as God is One, is not

His Image substantive and one? and who is that but the

One Son? All these appellations look to one Object, and

each of thenl subserves the rest. For the Son of God, as may

be learnt from the divine oracles themselves, is IIimself

the 1V ord of God, and the \Yisdom, and the Image, and

the Hand, and the Power; for God's Offspring is One, and

of the rrencl'ation froni the Father these titles are tokcns. 5

b

If you say the

on, you have declared what is frUln the

Father by nature; and if you imagine the \V ord, you are


 Vide Economical language. 6 Vid. App. The

Vord, p. 337.

D


\


34 EPIBTLE OF ATilANASIUS IN DEFEXCE OF TilE


CHAP. 4. thinking again of what is from Him, and what is

inseparable; and speaking of 'Yisdom, again you

mean in like manner, what is not from without, but from

Him and in Him; and if you name the Power and the

IIand, again you speak of what is proper to the substance;

and, speaking of the Image, you signify the Son; for what

else is like God but the Offspring from Him? Doubtless the

things which caIne into being through the Word, these are

founded in TVisdom; and what are founded in Trisdom, these

are all made by the Hand, and caIne to be through the Son.

24. And we have proof of this, not from adventitious

authorities, but fron1 the Scriptures; for God Himself says

by Esaias the Prophet, jIy Hand also hath laid the founda- .

tion of the earth, and Jly 1"ight Hand hath spanned the heavens.

And again, And I have covered them in the shadow of 111 y

Hand, that I may plant the heavens and lay the foundations

of the earth. And Da vid being taught this, and knowing

that the Lord's Hand was nothing else than 'Visdom, says

in the Psalm, In TVisdom hast Thou made then

 all; the eartll,

is full of Thy 1"iches. Solomon also received the same from

God, anù said, The Lord by TVisdom hath founded the earth;

and John knowing that. the 'V ord "\\ as the Hand and the

,risd01n, thus preaches the gospel, In the be,qinning W((s the

HTord and the JVord was 'With God and the JVord 'lvas God;

the same 'Was in the beginning with God: all things were made

by Him, and without HÙn 'Was not anything made. And the

Apostle, understanding that the IIanù and the "\Yisd01l1 and

the "\V ord was nothing else than the Son, says God wllO at

sundry times and ù

 divers manners spake in time past unto

the Fathers by the ProJ}hels, hath in thpse last days spoken

unto us by His Son, 'lvhmn He hath appointed Heir of all

things, by .whom also He made the age.ç,. And again, There

is One Lord Jesus Christ, tltrou.'JIt whmn are all tltings, (f/ifl

we t/trough fIim. Aud knowing also that the \V ord, the

'Visdonl, the Son was the In1age Himself of the :Father, he saJs


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOl\lOÜSION. 35

in the Epistle to the Colossians, Giving thanks to ED. BEN.


 17-18.

God and the Father which hath made us meet to be

partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, who hath de-

livered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us

into the kingdom of His dear Son; in whom we have redemption,

even the remission of sins; who is the Image of the Invisible Goil

the First-born of every creature; for by Him were all things

created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and

invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities,

or J1owers; all things were created by Him and for Him:

and He is before all things, and in Him all things consist.

25. For as all things are created by the Word, so,

because He is the Image, 6 are they also created in Him.

And thus a Inan who directs his thoughts to the Lord

will be saved from stumbling upon the stone of offence,

and will go forward to that illumination which stremns

from the light of truth; for this is really the sentÏ1nent of

piety, though these contentious men burst with spite, neither

devout towards God, nor abashed by the argmnellts which

confute them.


CHAPTER V.


26. Now the Eusebians were at that former time exa-

mined at great length, and passed sentence on then1selves,

as I said before; on this they subscribed; and after this

change of mind they kept in quiet and retirement; llut

since the present party, in the wantonness of impiety, allrl

in their wild vagaries about the truth, are full set upon

accusing the Council, let them tell us, I repeat, what is the

sort of Scriptures from which they have learned, or who is

the Saint by whom they have been taught, to heap together

6 Vid. Image.


v2


36 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. v. their phrases, "Out of nothing," and "He was

- not before His generation," and "Once He was

not," and "Alterable," and the "Pre-existence," and "At

God's will;" which are their fables in mockery of the

Lord. Considering then that they on their part have Inade

nse of phrases not in Scripture, 7 and that with a vie\\

thereby of expressing impious notions, it does not becolnc

them to find fault with those who for a pious purpose go

beyond Scripture. Disguise it as you will by artful termR

and plausible sophisms, impiety is a sin; but represent the

truth under ever so strange a formula, while it is truth, it

at least is piety. That what these Christ-opposers advanced

was in1pious falsehood, I have proved both now and formerly;

that what the Council defined was pious truth is equalJy

dear, as will be granted by any careful inquirer into the

occasion of the definition. It was as follows:-

27. The Council wishing to condelnn the iInpious phrases

of the Arians, and to use instead the received terll1S of

Bcripture, namely, that tbe Son is not fronl nothing, hut

from God, and is the JVord and TVisdnm and not a creature

or work, but the propel' Offspring from the Father, the party

of Eusebius, out of their inveterate heterodoxy, understood

the phrase from God as comn10n to IIin1 and to us, as if in

respect to it the 1V ord of God differed nothing from us,

and this, because it is written, There is One God from whom

all things; and again, Old things are passed away, behold all

things a:e new, and all things ære from God. But the

Fathers, perceiving their craft and the cunning of their

impiety, were forced thereupon to express n10re dis-

tinctly the sense of the words from God. Accordingly,

they wrote "from the substance of God," in onlel. that

from God n1ight not be considererl COTnmon and equal in

the Son and in thin

s which are Blade, but that all

others might be acknowletlged as creatureR, and the ,r ord

7 V id. Script If, re.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 37

alone as fl

om the Father. For though all thin g s ED. BEN.


 18 -20.

be said to be from God, 8 yet this is not in the sellse

in which the Sun is frm11 Hin1; for as to the creatures, "from

God" is said of them, in that they exist not at random 01'

spontaneously, nor conle into being by chance, according to

those philosophers who refer theIn to the combination

of atml1s, and to elements which are homogeneous, nor as

certain heretics imagine son1e other Framer, nor as others

again say that the constitution of all things is from certain

Angels; not for these reasons, but because, whereas there

is a God, it was by Him that aU things were brought into

being, when as yet they were not, through His Word;

and as to the Word, since He is not a creature, He alone

is really, as well as is called, from the Father,. and this is

signified, when it is said that the Son is "from the sub-

stance of the Father," for to no creature does this attach.

In truth, when Paul says that all things are from God, he

immediately adds, and one Lord, Jesus Ghrist, through whom

all things, by way of showing all men that the Son is other

than all those things which caIne into being from God,9 (for

as to the things which came frOln God, it was through the SOIl

that they caIne); and he used the words which I have

quoted with reference to the world as framed by God, and

not as if all things proceeded from the Father as the SOIl

does. For neither are other things as the Son is, nor is the

\Vord one among those other, for He is Lord and Framer of

all; and on this account did the Holy Council declare

expressly that He was of the substance of the Father, that

we might be1ieve the Word to be other in nature than

things which have a beginning, as being alone truly

from God; and that no subterfuge should be left open to

the impious. This then was the reason why the Council

wrote "Of the substance."

28. Again, when the Bishops said that the Word must


II Vid. Yf.VVI]1'V,.1.


_I Vid. povoyevÝ]t;;.


.


38 EPISTI,E OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFEKCE OF THE


OllAr. v. be described as the True Power and image of the

Father as the exa.ct Likeness 1 of the Pather in all

things, and as unalterable, and as always, and as in I-IÍIn without

division; (for never was the ""\V orù not in being, but He was

always existing everlastingly with the Father, as the radiance of

light), then the l)arty of Eusebins endured it indceù, as not

dadng to contradict, being put to shaIne by the arguments

which were urged against thenl; but withal they were caught

whispering to each other and winking with their eyes, that

H like" and "always," and "the attribute of power," and

H in Him," were, as before, common to us and to the Son,

and that it was no difficulty to agree to these statements. As

to "like," they said that it is written of us, J[ an is the imaglJ

and glory of God; "always," that it was writtell, For 'We

which live are always; "In Goù," In Him we live and move

aud have our being; " unalterable," that it is written,

l.Vothing shall separate us from the love of Ghrist; as to

"power,'

 that even the caterpillar and the locust are

caned power and great jJower, and that it is often said of

the people, for instance, All tlw pOlcer of the Lord came

(Jut of tlte land of Egypt; and others are hcaycnly power:"

for Scripture says, The Lord of powers is 'with 'Us, tlte God oj

Jacob is our refuge. Indeed Asterius, by title the sophist.,

had said the like in writing, having learned it frOlll theIn,

and before him Arius having learned it also, as has been

said. But the Bishops, discerning in this too their simula-

tion, and whereas it is written, Deceit is in tlte /teart of tlte

impious that imagine evil, were again con1pelled on thcir

part to concentrate the sense of the Scripturcs, and to re-

say and re-write more distinctly still, what they had said

before, nmnely, that the Son is "Consubstantial" with the

Father; by \yay of signifying that the Son is frOln the

Father, and not lnerely like, but is the saIne in likeness,

and of showing that the Son's };kcness and ullalterqblc-


I Vid. á-7/'"apá

 \mCTOV.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HO)10ÜSIO:N. 39


nes!; are di

erent frOln such copy of the same as is ED. BEN.


 20.

ascribed to us, which we acquire from virtuous living

and the observance of the conlnlandments.

i9. For bodies which are like each other admit of

separation and of becOlning far off froin each other, as

are hlunan sons relatively to their parents, (as it is

written concerning Admn and Seth who was begotten

of him, that he was like him after his own pattern;) but

since the generation of the Son from the Father is not

according to the nature of men, and He is not only like

but also inseparable frOln the substance of the Father, and

He and the Father are One, as Hp. has said llimself, and

the "\V ord is ever in the Father and the Father in the

Word, as is the radiance relatively to the light, (for this

the very term indicates,) therefore the Council, as under..

standing this, suitably wrote "Consubstantial," 2 that they

might both defeat the perverseness of the heretics, and

show that the 'V ord was other than created things. For,

after thus writing, they at once added, "But they who

say that the Son of God is from nothing, or created, or

alterable, or a work, or frOln other substance, these the

Holy Catholic Church anathenlatises." And in saying this,

they showed clearly that "Of the substance," and "Con-

substantial," do condemn those inlpious words, "created,"

and "work" and " b rouO"ht into beinO"" and "alterable"

, b ð' ,

and" He was not before His geneloation." And he who holds

these contradicts the Council; but he who does not hold

with Arius, nlust needs hold and enter into the decisions

of the Council, suitably regarding theIn to inlply the

relation of the radiance to the light, and from thence

gaining an image of the sacred truth.

30. Therefore if these men, as their predecessors, make it

an excuse that the terms are strange, let them COl, sider the

sense in which the Council so wrote, and anathematise


2 Viet ÒfwotJl1Lov.


\


40 EPISTLE Of' ATIIANASIUS IN DEFE

CE OF' THE


CHAP. v. what the Council anathematised; and theu, if they

can, let thell1 find fault with thoBe very termR. FOl

I weB know that, if they hold the sense of the Con neil, they

will fully accept the ternlS in which it is conveyed; wherea')

if it be the sense which they wish to complain of, all

must see that it is idle in them to discuss the wording,

when they are but seeking for themselves excuses for a

ùoctrine which is iInpious.

31. This then was the reason of these words; but if they

still complain that such are not scriptural, I observe first,

that they have to blaIne themselves, and no one else in this

matter, for it was they who set the example, beginning their

war against God with statements not in Scripture; and

next, as anyone who cares to inquire may easily ascer

tain, granting that the terms employed by the Counci\

are not absolutely in Scripture, still, as I have said before,

they contain the sense of Scripture. 3 ßIoreover, should they

object that to speak of the substance of God is to teach

that He is of a compound nature, (substance implying

accidents,4 and divinity, fatherhood and the like being

therefore in the nunl,ber of cenain accidents by which Ilis

substance is clad or suppIClnellted,5) I reply that the bla

-

phemy, for such it is, is theirs, not ours. For we hold

nothing of the kind. This would be to hold that God is

material, and that Ifis Son is after all not from IIis substance,

but frOln a certain attribute or power which is attached

to IIin1. But no; on the contrary, God is transcendently

siInple, and being such, it follows that in saying "God"

and naming "Father," we name nothing besides IIÜn, buL

we signify His substance or essence Itself. For though to

cOlllprehend W

lat the substance of God is be iInpossible, yet

let us only understand of God that lIe is a Being or E

sence,

and then, if Scripture indicates TIiul by llieans of these


S Vid. Scripture.

& Vid. uVl1ßeß""ó.;.


15 'Tid. 7rEpLßOÀ

.


NICE

E DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 41


t1ame3, we too, with the intention of indicating Him ED. BEN'.


 21-23.

und none else, call1iim God, aud Father, and IJord.

32. 'Vhen then lIe says, I (t.m He that i.

,6 and I a'm the Lord

iloti, or when Scripture says, God, we understand nothing


lse by the words but an intimation of His incompre-

hensible substance Itself, and that He Is, who is spoken

of. Therefore let no one be startled on hearino- that the

b

Son of God is from the substance of the Father; rather

let him accept the explanation of the Bishops, who in

Blore explicit but equivalent language have for from God

written "Of the substance." For they considel'ed it the


alne thing to say that the Word was of God and " of

the substance of God," since the word "God," as I have

already said, signifies nothing but the substance or essence

of Hi'm who is. If then the Word is not in such sense

from God, as to be Son, genuine and natural, from the

Father, but only as creatures are from f-lim, as being framed,

and as all things are from God, then neither is He from the

substance of the Father, nor again is the Son according to

substance Son, but in consequence of virtue, as we who

are called sons by grace. But if only He is from God,

as a genuine Son, as He is, then let the Son, as is reason-

able, be called from the substance of God. And the

illustration of Light and its Radiance bears the same

way. For the sacred writers have not said that the

"\V ord was related to God as fire kindled from the heat

of the sun, which after a while goes out, for this is an

external work and a creature of its author, but they all

preach of HÜn as Radiance, 1 thereby to signify Iris being

from the Divine substance, proper and indivisible, and to ex-

press His oneness with the Father. This also will secure His

true unalterableness and imlnutability; for how can these

be His, unless He be proper Offspring 8 of the Father's


6 Vid. Ó11.

7 Vid. å.7ravyaf1p..a.


tj Vid. yÉlIl11]p..a.


\


42 EPISTI..E OF ATIIAXASIUS IN DEFEKCE OF TIlE


CIIAP. v. substance? For this too must be taken to confi1'111

Iris identity with Iris own Fa/ther. And so again, if

He be the 'V ord, the "\Visdmn, the Father's Image, as well as

Radiance, on these accounts lIe plail1ly must be consub-

stantial. For unless it be proved that He is not an

offspring from God, but an instrument 9 different both in

l1ature and in substance, surely the Council was happy

in its wording as well as orthodox in its sense.

33. By this Offspring the Father Inade all things, and by

HiIn, who is His radiance, diffusing His universal Provi-

dence, lIe exercises TIis love to Inen; not as if Light were a

simple property lodged in the Son (as perhaps they will say)

and only acted through Him, for it is Itself one with the

Father, no channel foreign in substance to the Light and to

its Fountain, no mere creation; no, this is the belief of

Caiaphas and Samosatene, but the Light which is from the

"Father He possesses in fulness, and of Him others receive

according to the Ineasure of each, no intermediate existing

between the Father and IIim by whon1 all things have becn

brought into being. And in j rim is the Father revealed

and known, and with IIim frames the world, and does all

things, and is partaken by all things, for all things partake of

the Son, as partaking of the Holy Ghost. And these preroga..

tives of the Son show beyond cavil that He is no creature, but

a proper offspring frOln the Father, as radiance is froni

light..


CUAPTER VI.

34. THIS then is the intention with which the Fathers

who met together at Nicæa made use of these terms;

and next, having shown this, I will recur to what I

said when I began. I said that at the Council, Ensc-

9 Vid. öpyavuv.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 43

bius, after objecting to the definition passed b y the ED. BEN.


 24-25.

Fathers assernblcd, acknowledged that it expressed

the Church's faith, as it had come down to us by tl.adition.

I then went on to say that certainly what those who went

before us had delíyered to us was the true doctrine, and of

final authority, and to be followed. However, I thought

it best, instead of siInply appealing to the voice of

Antiquity or of the agreemett of Bishops, to explain and

defend once more the phrases in which the Council had

thought right to convey the Christian Truth. This I

have now done; but I will not bring my letter to an

end without giving these heretical teachers specimens of

the language of writers of an earlier date, which are in

accordance with that to which the Arians take exception.

35. Know then first, 0 Arians, foes of Christ, that

Theognostus, l a learned man, did not decline the phrase

"Of the substance," for in the second book of his Hypo-

typoses, he writes thus of the Son:-


Testimony of Theognostus.

"rrhe snbstance of the Son is not any addition from

without, brought into the Divine Nature by a fresh Cl'ea-

tion, but It sprang from the Father's substance, as the

radiance of light, as the vapour 2 of water; for neither the

radiance, nor the vaponr, is the water itself or the sun

itself, nor is it alien, but is an effluence of the Father'e

substance, which, however, suffers no partition. For as

the sun reinains the same, and is not Ünpaired by the

rays poured forth by it,. so neither does the :Pathel"s

substance suffer change, though it has the Son as an

In1age of Itself."

Theognostus then, after first investigating in the way


I Vid. Tlleog1l,Ost'ltS.

2 Vid. Wisd. vii. 25. and so


Origen. Pcriarch, i. 2, n. fi, RfI. ü.

Anti Athan. Sent. Dian. 15.


.


44 EPISTI,E OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE O

" THE


CHAP. VI. of an exercise,3 proeeeds to lay down his own senti-

ments in the foregoing words.

36. Next lJionysius, who was Bishop of Ale-xandria,

upon his writing agaim;t Sabellius, and expounding at

large the

aviour's econOlny according to the flesh, and

thence proving against the Sabellians that not the Father

but His "\V ord was made flesh, as John has said, was

suspected of saying that the Son was a creature and

brought into being, and not consubstantial with the

Father; on this he writes to his namesake Dionysius,

Bishop of Rome, to explain that this was a slander upon

him. And he assured hinl that he had not called the

Son a creature, but on the contrary, that he did confess

J rim to be nothing else than consub::;tantiaL And his words

t'un thus:-


Testimony of Dionysius of Alexandria.

".A.nd I have written in another letter a refutation of

the false charge they bring against me, that I deny that

Christ was consubstantial with God. For though I say

that I. have not found this term anywhel'e in Holy

Hcripture, yet my remarks which follow, and which they

have not quoted, are not inconsistent with that belief.

For I instanced a human production as being evidently

homogeneous, and I observed that undeniably parents

differed from their children only in not being simply the

saIne, otherwi

e there could be neither parents nor chil-

dren. And lilY letter, as I said before, owing to present


:II Èv yvp.vnO'{çt i(ErÚo'U!:- And so

infr. 37 of OrigEm,

7JTWV ICnì }'Vp.-

vú'wv at a time when the points

discussed had not been defined.

Constantine, too, writing to Alex-

ander and Arius, speaks of alter-

cation, fþVf1ucijç rl.Voç yvp.vaO'íuç

ËVElCa. Socr. i. 7. In somewhat

ü. similar way, Athanasius speaks

of Dionysius writing lCur' ollCovo-


p.íav, economically, or with refer-

ence to certain persons addressed

or objects contemplated, de Hent.

D. 6. and 26. In somewhat the

S'1me manner St. ThomHs in his

Summa first sets down the

opinions he means to reject, and

t he reasons for them, and then

his own.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 45


circumstances I am unable to P roduce . , or I would E

D. BEN.

have sent you the very words I used, or rather a

 25-26.

copy of the whole, which, if I have an opportunity, I will do

still. But my menlory is clear that I adduced various

parallels of things

indred with each other; for instance, that

a plant, grown frOln seed or from root, was other than that

from which it sprang, yet was altogether one in nature

with it: and that a stream flowing from a fountain,

gained a new name, for that neither the fountain was

called stream, nor the stream fountain, and both existed,

and the streanl was the water from the fountain."

37. And that the Word of God is not a work or creature,

but an Offspring proper to the Father's substance and

indivisible from it, as the great Council wrote, here you

may see in the words of Dionysius, Bishop of Rome,

who, while writing against the Sabellians, thus inveighs

against those who dared to use their language:-


TesNmony oj Dionysius of Rome.

" Next, I have reason to mention those who separate and

tear into portions and destroy that most sacred doctrine of

the -Church of God, the Divine Monarchy,. resolving it

into certain three powers and divided subsistences anò

godheads three. I am told that some of your catechists

and teachers of the Divine Word take the lead in this

tenet, being in diametrical opposition, so to speak, to

Sabellius's opinions; for he blasphemously says that the

Son is the Father and the Father the Son, but they in

gO me sort preach three Gods, as dividing the Holy Monad

into three subsistences foreign to each other and utterly

separate. For it must needs be that with the God of the

Universe the Divine 1V ord is united, and the Holy

Ghost Inllst repose and hahitate in God; thus, in One as

in a snmlnit, I mean the God of the Universe, the Omni-

4 V ide Movapx la .


.


46 EPISTLE O

' ATHANASIUS IN ])EFEXCj

 OF TIlE


CHAP. VI. potent God, the Divine Tria.d á must of necessity be

gathered up and brought together. For it is the

doctrine of the preslunptuous l\Iarcion, to sever and divide the

Divine l\Ionarchy 6 into three origills,-a devil's teaching, not

that of Christ's trne disciples and lov(>rs of the Saviour's

lessons. For these know well that a Triad is preached by

divine

cripture, but that neither Old Testament nor New

preaches three Gods.

" Eq ually must we censure those who hold the Son

to be a work, and consider that the Lord has come into

being, as one of things which really came to be; whereas

the divine oracles witness to a generation suitable to 1 rim

and becoming, but not to any fashioning or Inaking. A

blaspheIny then is it, not ordinary, but even the highest,

to say that the Lorù is in any sort a lmndi work. For if

He becanle

on, once He was not; but He was al ways, if

(that is) He be in the Father, as lie says Himself, and if

the Christ be 1V ord and 1Visdonl and Power (which, as

ye know, divine Scripture says,) and these attributes be

powers of God. If then the Son came into being, once

these attributes were not; consequently there was a

season when God was without them; which is mo::;t

extravagant. And why treat nlore on these points to

you, men full of the Spirit, and well aware of the e"Xtrant-

gances which come into view from saying that the Son is a

work?

" Not attending, as 1 consider, to these, the originators

of this opinion have entirely mis8ed the truth, in unùer-

standing, contrary to the sense of divine and prophetic

Scripture in the passage, the words, 1'hf Lord !tatk created

J[e a beginning of l/is If'lI!Js unto His works. For He created,

as ye know, has various seuses; anc I ill this place it

TIlust be taken to 1l1ean, 'lIe set

Ie over the works nlade

by him,' that is, the works 'made IJY the Son Himself.'


, Vid. TpLác:.


8 Or, one Origin.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 47


And He created here must not be taken for made, ED. BEN.


 26.

for creating differs from Inaking; Is not He Thy

Father that hath bought thee? hath He not made thee and

created thee? says 1\10ses in his great Song in Deuteronmny.

And one may say to them, is He a work, 0 reckless men,

who is the First-born of every creature,

oho is born from

the 'l(}omb before the morning star, who said, as "\VisdOln,

Before all the hills He begets .J..1fe? And in many passages of

the divine oracles is the Son said to bave been generated,

but not to have con1e into being, passages which manifestly

convict of n1Ïsconception those men who presume to call His

divine and ineffable generation a making.

" Neither then Inay we di vide into three Godheads the

wonderful and divine 1\Ionad; nor disparage with the

name of 'creature' the dignity and exceeding majesty of

the Lord; but we must believe in God the Father

Almighty, and in Christ Jesus His Son, and in the Holy

Ghost, and hold that to the God of the universe the

Word is united. For I, says He, and the Father are one;

and I in the Father and the Fatlwr in lIe. For thus both

the Divine Triad, and the holy preaching of the l\lonarchy

will be secured."

38. And concerning the everlasting co-existence of the

Word with the Father, and that lIe is not of another

substance or subsistence, but proper to the Father's, as

the Bishops in the Council said, hear again from the

labour-loving Origen 7 also. For what he has written 8 as


7 Montfaucon's text runs as

follows:-å /Û.v cd!; (''lJTWV /Cai yvpvá-

r.wv iypwpe, TavTCl prj W!; aVTov fþpo-

VOVVTO!; ôexÉcrew TLç. áÀÀà TWV 7rpÒt;

ÊpLV qJLÀOVHlWVVTWV fV TiP t,'lJïfÌV,

àôewt; òpí

wv å7ro'þaíveTm, TOVTO

TOU fþt.À07rÓVOV TÒ fþpóv1]p.á fUn.

For àÀÀà he reads åÀÀ' å. "Certe

legendum àÀÀ' ä, idque omnino


xigit sensus." On the contrary


I keep á


à, remove the stop from

ÔEXf.crew Tt.!; to r.'lJTfìv, and for áÒH;'Ç

read å òÈ. wç, thus: TavTa piJ wç aVTOl)

fþPOVOVVTOÇ ÒEXÉ.crew Tl.t;, á

Àà TWV

7rpÒÇ 'ipfV fþt.ÀovHlwlwTwv lv Tip

r.'1Tfìv. ä òÈ. W!; úpít,wv Ú7rofþaiVETm

TOVTO TOV fþLÀ07rÓVOV TÒ fþpÓV1JpÚ

i UTI..

8 Vid. also Serap. iv. 9.


48 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. VI. if inquiring and exercising himself, that let ilO

one take as expressive of his own sentiments, but of

parties who are disputing in the course of investigation;

but what he definitely pronounces, that is the sentiment of

the labour-loving man. After his disputations then against

the heretics, straightway he introduces his personal belief,

thus :-


Testimony of Origen.

"If there be an Image of the Invisible God, it is an

invisible Image; nay, I will be bold to add, that, as being

the Likeness of the Father, never was it not. For when

was that. God, who, according to John, is called Light,

(for God is Light,) without the Radiance of His proper

glory, that a man should presume to assign the Son's

beginning of existence, as if He were not before? But

when was not in existence that Image of the Father's

Ineffable and Ind

scribable and Unutterable subsistence,

that In1press and Word, who alone knows the Father?

for let him understand well who dares to say, 'Once the

Son was not,' that he is saying, 'Once Wisd01ll was not,'

and 'the "\V ord was not,' and 'Life was not.'"

And again elsewhere he says:-


Anothpr 'l'estimony.

"But it is not without sin or peril if because of OUt

weakness of understanding we deprive God, as far as in

us lies, of the Only-begotten 'V ord ever co-existing with

Him, being the Wisdom in which He rejoiced; else He

must be conceived as not always possessed of blessedness."

39. See, we are proving that this view has been trans-

1Jlitted from father to father; but ye, 0 modern Jews and

disciples of Caiaphas, what fathers can ye assign to your


NICENE DEFINITION OF 'fHE nOMoÜH10N. 49


P hrases ? Not one of the understanding and wise; ED. BEN.


 27-28.

for all abhor you, save the devil alone; llone but he

is your father in such an apostasy, who both in the begin-

lling scattered on your minds the seeds of this impiety,

and now persuades you to slander the EClunenical 9 Council,

for cOlumitting to writing, not your doctrines, but that

which from the beginning those 'Who 'Were eye-witnesses and

ministers of the TVord have handed down to us. For the

faith which the Council has confessed in writing, 1 that is

the faith of the Catholic Church; to vindicate this faith,

the blessed Fathers so wrote, and thereby condeInned the

Arian heresy; and this is a chief reason why these men

apply theInselves to calumniate the Council. For it is

not the terms which distress them, but because those

terIns proved theIn to be heretics, and daring beyond their

fellows.


CHAPTER VII.

40. AT Nicæa then, many years since, their heretical

phrases _were exposed and anathematised; this has led to

their looking for new argu

ents, and it has issued in

their borrowing from the Greeks a weapon for their

need, nan1ely, the term "lng-enorate," 2 that by means

of it, they may reckon aInong the things which were

made that 'V ord of God, by whon1 those very things

came into being. However it would seein as if they

really did not know what the Greeks meant by the ternl,

for the Greek doctrine concerning it in fact tells pointedly

against the use to which they put it. The Greeks, let it

be observed, after deriving 1\find from Good, and the

universal Soul from l\tlind, have no difficulty in calling

all three lng-enerate; :M:ïnd and Soul as well as Good,

9 Vid. .l!-èumenical. 2 Vid. åyÉ.'VV'J}TOV.

I Vid. Definitio'J".


"Fc


"


50 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF TilE


CIiAP. VII. from which Mind and Soul proceed. 3 If then these

men must have recourse to heathen writers, let theIn

be quite sure that the said writers make for theIn; but well

I know, they never would have appealed to the Greeks in

defence of their heresy, if they had any sanction of it in

Scripture; and, as I on my part, have been stating the

reason and the meaning with which the Council, and the

Fathers earlier than it, defined and cmnmitted to writing

"Of the substance" and "Consubstantial" agreeably to

what Scripture 4 says, so I think I may fairly call upon

these Al

ians to tell us now, if indeed they can, what has

led them to this unscriptural term, "Ingenerate," what is

the sense in which they consider it to belong to God, and

why not to His Son and ""\V ord.

41. In truth, I aill told:; that the terili has various senses :

philosophers say that it means,6 first, "what has not yet

come, but nlay come, into being; next, what neither has

COllie into being, nor can come; and thirdly, what exist



without any birth or becoming, but is everlasting and

indestructible." The first sense is nothing to the PU1l)ose,

nor is the second; it is the third which they endeavour

to make available to their purpose, arguing thus: that

to be ingenerate is an attribute of God, that to be in-

generate is to be without birth or becoming, but that

a Son is born into being. But who does not comprehend

the craft of these foes of God? here is a nlanifest equivo-

catioll. It is possible to be ingenerate, that is from

eternity, and yet to have an origin, that is, a Father; in

other words, to have a birth and not a beconlÏng, a deri-


S Vid. M ovapx ía .

4 Vid. Scripture.

ð Vid. AthanasÏ'lts.

6 Four senses of aYEV1]Tov are

enumerated, infr. Disc. ch. 10, p.

205. 1. What is not as yet, but is

possible: 2. what neither has Le '11,


nor can be; 3. what exists, but has

not come to be from any cause; 4.

what is not made, but is ever.

Only two senses are specified, infr.

en. 6, pp. 141, 142, and in these the

question really lies: 1. what is,

but without a cause; 2. Ul'create.


lfICENE DEFIlflTION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 51


vation anù Y et not a be b O"innin g . Even the Greeks, ED. BEN.


 28-30.

as I have said, hold an eternal derivation. Our Lord --

is ingenerate as being eternally one with God, generate as being

His Son. He has a birth without a becoming.

42. However, the nlania of these men is such that they

say that a son is generate, and generate means made, and

what is made comes "out of nothing;" and what has an

origin "is not before its generation," and what is not

eternal "once was not. " Next, when detected in their

sophisms they begin àgain, after this fashion, that to be

in generate is to have no author of being, and an author is

a maker, and therefore the Son is nlade, and is one of the

creatures. Unthankful, and in truth deaf to the Scrip-

tures, who do everything, and say everything, not to

honour God, but to dishonour the Son, ignorant that he

who dishonours the Son, dishonours the Father! If He

be viewed as Offspring of the substance of the Father,

He is of consequence with Him eternally. For this name

of Offspring does not detract from the nature of the

"\V ord, nor does Ingenerate imply a contrast with the Son,

but with the things which come into being through the

Son; and as those who address an architect, and call

him framer of house or city, do not under this desig-

nation include the son who is begotten from him, but on

account of the art and science which he displays in his

work, call hini artificer, signifying thereby that he is not

such as the things made by him, and while they know the

nature of the builder, know also that he whom he begets

is in nature other than his works; and in regard to his

son call him father, but in regard to his works, creator

and maker; in like manner he who says that God is

ingenerate, invents a name for Him when compared with His

works, signifying, not only that He is not brought into being

but that He is nlaker of things which are so brought; yet

is aware wit.hal that the Word is Dther than the things that are

E: 2


"


52 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. VII. made, and alone is a proper Offspring of the Father,

through whonl all things canle to be and consist. 7

43. In like lUanneI', when the Prophets spoke of God as

All-powerfui, they did not so name Him, as if the VV ord

were inc1uded in that All; (for they knew that the Son was

other than things made, and Sovereign over thelll Himself,

by virtue of His likeness to the Father;) but because,

while Sovereign over all things which through the Son

He has made, God has given the authority of these things to

the Son, and having given it, still is Himself as ever, the

Lord of aU things through Him. Again, when they caUed

God, Lord of hosts, they sqid not this as if the Word was

included in those hosts, but because, while He is Father of

the Son, He is Lord of the hosts or powers which through

the Son have come to be. And the 'YoI'd too, as being

in the Father, is Himself Lord of them aU, and Sovereign

over all; for all things, whatsoever the Father hath, are

the Son's. This then being the force of such titles, in like

lnanuer let a man call God ingenerate, if it so please him;

not however as if the VV' ord were one of things generate or

made, but because, as I said before, God not only is not

made, but through His proper 'V ord is He the maker of

things which are Iuade. For though the Father be specially

called

Iaker, still the Word is the Father's Image and con-

substantial with Him; and being His Image, He must be

other than creatures altogether; for of whom He is the

Image, to Him doth he belong and is like : so that he who

calls the Father ingenerate and ahnighty, pcrcei yes in the

Ingenerate and the Almighty, His VV ord and His 'Yisdom,

'v hich is the Son. But these wondrous men, and prone to

impiety, hit upon the terlll Ingenerate, not as caring for

'G.od's honour, but from malevolence towards the Saviour;

for if they had regard to His honour and worship, it rather


7 Athanasius repeats this pas- Disc. ch. 10, p. 208, &c.; also vid.

sage in his first Orat. i. infr. Basil c. Eunom. i. 16.


NICENE DEFINITION O


 THE HOIUOÜSION. 53


had been rig-ht and g ood to acknowled g e and to caB ED. BEN.

'-'

 30-31.

Hinl Father, than to give Hhn this nanle; for in

calling Hhn ingenerate, they are, as I said before, caning Him

strictly from His relation to things which came into being, and

simply as a i\Iaker, that so they may imply even the

V ord to

be a work after their own desire; but he who calls God Father,

thereby in Him signifies lEs Son also, and will not fail to

understand tþat, whereas there is a Son, through this Son

ttll things that came into existence were created.

44. I repeat, it will be much more accurate to denotc

God frOln the Son, and to call Him Father, than to namc

Him and call IIim Ingenerate from His works merely; for

tbe latter ternl refers to the works that have been brought

into being at the will of God through the \V ord, but the

name of Father betokens the proper Offspring from His

6ubstancEP. And by how much the \V ord surpasses things

made or generate, by so much and more also doth calling

God Father surpass the calling Him Ingenerate; for the

latter is unscriptural and suspicious, as it has various

senses; but the former is simple and scriptural, and n10re

accurate, and alone implies the Son. And" Ingeneratc "

is a word of the Greeks who know not the Son: but

"Father" has been acknowledged and vouchsafed to us by

our Lord; for He, Himself, knowing whose Son He was, said,

I in the Father and the Father in 111e; and, He that hath

seen life hath seen the Father; and, I and the Father are one;

but nowhere is lIe found to call the Father Ingenerate.

l\Ioreover, when He teaches 11S to pray, He says not,

"\Vhen ye pray, say, 0 God Ingenerate," but rather TVhen

ye pray say, Ollr Father, who art in hell'l)en.

45. J\loreover, it was His 'ViII, that the cOll1pendinm of

our faith should look the same way. For He has bid us be

ba ptised, not into the llaIne of the Ingcncrate and generate,

not into the name of U ncreatc and creature, but into the

nanlC of Father, Son, and lIoly Ghost; for with such an


.


54 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


CHAP. VII. initiation we also are Inade sons verily,8 and, while

using the name of the Father, we acknowledge from

that name, the tVord ín the Father. But if He wills that we

should call His own Father our Father, we must not on that

account measure ourselves with the Son according to nature,

for it is because of the Son that the Father is so called by us ;

for since the Word bore our body and in us came to be,

therefore, by reason of the Word in us, is God called our

Father. For the Spirit of the 1V ord in us, addresses through

us His own Father as ours, which is the Apostle's meaning

when he says, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into

your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

46. So much on the term "Ingenerate," which admits

indeed of a pious use, but, in the hands of Christ's foes,

has but covered them with shame, as did their words and

deeds at the beginning. How the Council, then assem-

bled at Nicæa, Illet them, with what prudence and with

what fidelity to Holy Scripture and the Fathers, I have

related and eXplained to the best of my powers; but I

cannot hope that those restless spirits will give up their

opposition now any more than then. They will doubtless

run about in search of other pretences, and of others again

after those. "\Vhen, in the Prophet's words, will the Ethiopian

change his skin or the leopard his spots? Thou, however,

Beloved, on receiving this, read it by thyself; and, if thou

approvest of it, read it also to the brethren, who are with

thee, that they too, on hearing it, may respond to the

Council's zeal for the truth and for doctrinal exactness,

and may reprobate the heresy and the controversÜil devices

of the Arian faction; because to God, even the Father, is

due the glory, honour, and worship, with His co-nnoriginate

Rill and 1V ord, together with the All-holy and life-giving

Spirit, now and unto endless ages of ages. Amen.


8 Vid. ICÚPW!; and YEVV1JTÓV.


NICENE DEFINITIOY OF THE HOMOÜSION. 55


ApPENDIX.


LETTER OF EUSEBIUS OF CÆSAREA TO THE PEOPLE OF HIS

DIOCESE.


47. "r HAT was transacted concerning the Faith of EtiH

r

the Church at the Great Council assembled at

Nicæa, you have probably learned, Beloved, from other

quarters, rumour being wont to precede the accurate account

of what is doing. But lest in such reports the circumstances

of the case should have been misrepresented to you, we have

thought it necessary to transinit to you, first, the formula

of faith presented by ourselves, and then, the second,

which the Fathers put forth with some additions to our

words. Our own formula then, which was read in the

presence of our most pious 9 Elnperor, and declared to be

good and unexceptionable, ran thus:-

48. "As we have received from the Bishops who pre..

ceded us, and in our first catechisings, and when we

received Holy Baptism, and as we have learned from the

divine Scriptures, and as we believed and taught when in

the order of presbyters, and in the Episcopate itself, so

believing also at the time present, we l"eport to you our

faith, and jt is this :-

Creed oj Eusebius.

" vVe believe in One God, the Father Ahnighty, the


Iaker of all things visible and invisible.

"And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the "\V ord of God, God

from God, Light from Light, Life fro In Life, SOIl Only-

begotten, first-born of every creature, before aU the ages

begotten from the Father, through whom also all things

were made; who for our salvation was made flesh, and

lived among lnen, and suffered and rose again the third

day, and ascended to the Father, and wiU come again in

glory to judge quick and deaù.

9 Vid. lm;;erial titles.


56 EPISTLE OF A THAN ASIUS IN DEJi'ENCE OF THE


ApPEND. "And wè believe also in one Holy Ghost;

believing each of These to be and to exist, the

"Father truly Father, and the Son truly Son, and the Holy

Ghost truly Holy Ghost; as also our Lord, sending forth

His disciples for the preaching, said, Go, teach all the nations,

baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and

of the Holy Ghost. Concerning whom we confidently affirm that

so we hold and so we think, and so we have held aforetime,

and that we maintain this faith unto the death, anathe-

matising every godless heresy. That this we have ever

thought from our heart and soul, from the time we recol-

lect ourselves, and now think and say in truth, before

God Almighty and our Lord Jesus Christ do we bear

witness, being able by proofs to show and to convince you

that also in times past such was our belief and such our

preaching. "

49. On this faith being publicly put forth by us, no

room for contradiction appeared to anyone; but our most

pious Emperor himself before anyone else, testified that

it comprised most orthodox statements. He confessed

moreover, that such were his own sentiments, and he

exhorted all present to agree to it, and to subscribe its

articles and to assent to the same, with the insertion of the

single word, "Consubstantial," which moreover he inter-

preted as not in the sense of the affeetions of bodies, nor as

if the Son subsisted from the Father in the way of

div

sion or any severance; for that the immaterial, and

intellectual, and incorporeal Nature could not be the

subject of any corporeal affection, but that it became us

to conceive of such things in a divine and ineffable

manner. And such were the theological remarks of our

most wise and most reJigious Emperor; on which the

Bishops, with a view to the addition of Consu bstantial,

drew up the following fornlula:-


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE HOMOÜSION. 57


Nicene Oreed.


" We believe in One God , the Father Almi g ht y , ED. BEN.


3-5.

l\/Iaker of all things visible and invisible:-

"And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, be-

gotten of the Father, Only-begotten, that is, from the

Substance of the Father; God from God, Light from

Light, Very God from Very God, begotten not made, con-

substantial with the Father, by whom all things were

made, both things in heaven and things in earth; who for

us men and for our salvation came down and was lnade

flesh, was made man, suffered, and rose again the third day,

ascended into heaven, and cometh to judge quick and dead.

"And in the Holy Ghost.

"But those who say, 'Once He was not,' and 'Before

Uis generation He was not,' and 'He came into being

from nothing,' or those who pretend that the Son of God

is 'Of other subsistence or substance,' or 'created,' or

, alterable,' or ' mutable,' the Catholic Church anathelua-

tises. "

50. On their dictating this formula, we did not let it

pass without inquiry in what sense they introduced "Of

the substance of the Father," and "consubstantial with

the Father." Accordingly questions and explanations

took place, and the meaning of the words underwent the

scrutiny of reason. And they professed, that the phrase

"Of the substance" was indicati ve of the Son's being

indeed from the Father, yet without being as if a part of

Him. And with this understanding we thought good to

assent to the sense of such religious doctrine, teaching, as

it did, that the Son was from the Father, not however a

part of His substance. On this account we assen-ted to

this sense ourselves, without declining even the term "Con-

substantial," peace being the object which we set before

us, and maintenance of the olthodox view_


58 EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS IN DEFENCE OF THE


ApPEND. 51. In the Salne way we also admitted "Be-

gotten, not made;" since the Council alleged that

" made" was an appellative COlnmon to the other creatures

which came to be through the Son, to whom the Son had no

likeness. Therefore, it was said, He was not a work resem-

bling the things which through Him Calne to be, but was of

a substance which is above the level of any work, and which

the Divine oracles teach to have been generated from the

Father, the mode of generation being inscrutable and incon1..

prehensible to every created nature.

52. And so too on examination there are grounds for

saying, that the Son is "consubstantial" with the Father;

not in the way of bodies, nor like mortal beings, for He is

not consubstantial by division of substance, or by sever-

ance, no nor by any affection, or changing, or alteration

of the Father's substance and attributes 1 (since from aU

such the ingenerate nature of the Father is alien), but

because" consubstantial with the Father" suggests that the

Son of God bears no resemblance to the creatures which

have been made, but that lIe is in every way after the

pattern of His Father alone who begat Jlim, and that He

is not of any other subsistence and substance, but from the

Father. To which terlll also, thus interpreted, it appeared

well to assent; since we were aware that even among the

ancients, some learned and illustrious bishops and writers

have used the term "consubstantial" in their theological

teaching concerning the Father and Son. 2

53. So much then be said concerning the Faith which

has been published; to which all of us assented, not with-

out inquiry, but according to the specified senses, rnentioned

in the presence of the most religious Emperor himself, and

justifièd by the forelnentioned considerations. And as to the


I òvvafLEWt;.

2 Athanasius, in like manner,

speaks, ad Afr.

 6, of "tf'stimony


of ancient Bishops about 13U years

since," and infr., p. 80. Viti.

bjlOOVCILOV.


NICENE DEFINITION OF THE U0J\10ÜSION. 5D


anathematislll l )ublished b y the Fathers at the end ED. ]

EN.


 6--11.

of the Faith, it did not trouble ns, because it for- --

bade to use words n{)t in Scripture, from which almost aU

the confusion and disorder of the Ohurch has come. Since

then no divinely inspired Scripture has used the phrases,

"Out of nothing," and "Once He was not," and the rest

which follow, there appeared no ground for using or teach-

ing theln; to which also we assented as a good decision,

since it had not been our custom hitherto to use these

terms.

54. Moreover to anathematise "Before His genma.tion

He was not," did not seem preposterous, in that it is con-

fessed by all, that the Son of God was before the genera-

tion according to the flesh. Nay, our n10st religious

Emperor did at the time prove in a speech, that even

according to His divine generation which is before all ages,

He was in being, since even before He was generated in

act, He was in virtue 3 with the Father ingenerately, the

Father being always Father, as l{ing always, and Saviour

always, being all things in virtue, and having all things in

the saIne respects and in the same way.

55. This we have been forced to transmit to you,

Beloved, as making clear to you the deliberateness of our

inquiry and assent, and how reasonably we resisted even to

the last minute as long as we were offended at statements

which differed from our own, but received without con-

tention what no longer troubled us, as soon as, on a candid

examination of the sense of the words, they appeared to

us to coincide with what we ourselves had professed in the

Faith which we had already published.


3 Socrates, who advocates the

orthodoxy of Eusebius, omits this

heterodox sentence. lIist. 1 - -S-

Bull, Defens. F. N. iii. H, n. 3, sup-

poses it an interpolation. For its


refutation, vid. infI". Oral. i. ch. 8

fin. p. 189. For Eusebins's opin.

ions, vid. Append. EUSlJbÙts and

Semiari{(jnism.


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS,


ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA,


ON THE COUNCILS HELD AT ARli\IINUl\I IN ITALY

AND AT SELEUCIA IN ISAURIA.


PREFATORY NOTICE.


THE following Epistle consists of three parts or six chapters,

of which the first two chapters alone answer to the received

title" Of the Synods of Ariminum and Seleucia." So much

as this was contemporaneous history, froin inforlnation gained

with remarkable despatch, though cOIning short of the date of

the catastrophe at Ariminum, when to "the astonishment" of

the great mass of its members, the Council "found itself

Arian." This was in the year 359. In 361 Athallasius seems

to have added to his work several later documents. Vide Ed.

llen.

 30, 31, and their preceding lJfonitum.

The place is unknown from which he wrote. In 359 he

seems to have been in hiding; Tillemont, and Gibbon after

him, suggest in consequence of the wording of his opening

sentences, that he was present incognito at Seleucia.

The Arian party had long wished to accomplish the meet



ing of a general Council which might supersede that of Nicæa.

They had effected one great Eastern Council in 341 at Antioch,

and another at SirIniuIn in 351. And now in 359 they aimed

at a gathering of both East and "\Vest. It was originally con-

voked for Nicæa, the site of that first and great Council which

was to be put aside, but the party of Basil the Semi-arian, not

approving of this choice, Nicomedia was substituted. The

Bishops had set out when an earthquake threw the city into

ruins. Nicæa was then suhstituted, this time at Basil's wish,

Soz. iv. ] 6, but it was considered too near the seat of the


132


EPISTLE OF ATHAN ASIUS, ETC.


earthqua.ke to be safe. Then the Ellsebian or Acacian influence

prevailed, and the Council was divided into two, one portion to

meet at Al'ilninum, the other at Seleucia; but at first Ancyra,

Basil's see, was to have been one of thern (where a celebrated

Council of Semi-arians actually was sitting at the time), IIi!.

de Syn. 8, hllt this was changed for Seleucia. A delegacy of

Bishops from each Province had been summolled to NicOlnedia ;

but to Nicæa, according to Sozomen, all Bishops whatever,

whose health admitted of the journey; Hilary, however, says

only one or two from each province of Gaul were summoned to

Ariminum, he himself being at Seleucia by compulsion of the

local magistrate, as an exile there for the faith, Sulp. ii. 57.

As to this bipartite Council, it was the concluding act of a

long series of heretical attempts to commit the Church through

her Synods to Arian doctrine, attmnpts which AthaI1asius has

here, in his chapters iii. and iv., recorded and illustrated, after

his manner, viz., by the documentary evidence of the creeds

which were successively passed through those Synods, and

of the State papers which arose out of thmn.

Chapters v. and vi., with which the Epistle ends, recur to

the defence of the HOllloüsion, which has been the subject of

the foregoing Epistle. The latter of the two chapters is

specially directed towards the remcval of the difficulties which

the Semi-arians felt in accepting the Nicene definition, a party

to whom Athanasius is as gentle as he is fierce with the Arians.

It may be added, as has indeed appeared in what has gone

before, that the large Arian party was divided into three :-

(1) the pure Arians or Anomæans, who would not even allow

that the Son was like the Father; (2) the chief object of their

attack, the HOlnæüsians or Sen1i-arians, who maintained that

the Son was like the Father even in Substance; (3) and the

Court party, Eusebians or Acacians, who would not go farther

than to say vaguely that our Lord was like the Father, and

wished to keep to Scripture tenns.


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS,


&c.


CHAPTER 1.


1. PERHAPS news has reaehed even yourselves concern-

ing the Council, which is at this time the subject of

general conversation; for letters both frOln the Emperor

and the Prefects 1 were circulated far and wide for its

conyocation. However, you take such interest in the

events which have occurred, that I am led to give you

an account of what I have seen myself or have ascertained,

which Inay save you froin the suspense attendant on the

reports of others; and this the more, because there are

parties who are in the practice of misrepresenting what is

gOIng on.

2. At Nicæa then which had been fixed upon, the

Council did not meet, but a second edict was issued, con-

vening the Western Bishops at Arin1Ínum in Italy, and

the Eastern at Seleucia the Rocky, as it is called, in

Isauria. 'fhe professed reason given out for such a lneet-

ing was to treat of the faith touching our Lord Jesus


1 There were at this time four

Prætorian Prefects, who divided

between them the administration

of the Empire. They had been

lately made civil officers, Constan-

tino having suppressed the cele-


brated troops which they had

commanded. At Ariminum one of

them, Taurus, was present, and

was the instrument of the Emperor

in overawing the Council.


64


EPISTLE OF ATHANAS I US, ON THE


CHAP. I. Chl'ist; and those who alleged it, were U rsacius

and Valens, and one Germinius, from Pannonia;

and frOill Syria, Acacìus, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus of Scytho-

polis. 2 These lnen who had always been of the Arian party,

and understood neither how they believed nor whereof they

ajfir'lned, and were silently deceiving first one and then another,

and scattering the second sowing of their heresy, persuaded

801ne persons of consequence, and the Emperor Constantius

among them, being a heretic, on some pretence about the

}-'aith, to call a Council; under the idea that they should

be able to put into the shade the Nicene Council, and

prevail upon all to turn round, to the establislunent of

ilnpiety everywhere instead of the Truth.

3. N ow here I marvel first, and consider that I shall

carry every thinking nlan whomsoever with me, that, whereas

a Catholic Council had been fixed, and all were looking

forward to it, it was all of a sudden divided in two, so that

one part met here, and the other there. However, this

would seem providential, in order, in each Council, to

exhibit the faith without guile or corruption of the one

party, and to expose the dishonesty and duplicity of the

other. Next, this too was on the mind of lnyself and Iny

true brethren here, and made us anxious, the iInpropriety

in itself of this great gathering which we saw in progress;

for what then pressed so much, that the whole world was

to be thrown into confusion,3 and those who at the time bore

the profession of clerks, should run about far and near, seek-

ing forsooth how best to learn to believe in our Lord Jesus


2 Vid. App. Arian leaders.

S The heathen A mmianus

speaks of "the troops of ])ishops

hurrying to and fro at the public

expense," and "the Synods, in

their effOl'ts to bring over the

whole religion to their side, being

the ruin of the posting establish-


ments." Rist. xxi. 16. "rrhe

spectaele proceeds to that pitch of

indecency," says Eusebius

 "that

at length in the very midst of the

theatres of the unbelievers the

solemn matters of divine tNlching

were subjected to the basest

mockery." Vito Const. ii. 61.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 65


Christ? Certainly, if they were believers already, Efi


.

they would not be seeking, as though they were not.

And to the catechumens, this was no small scandal; but to

the heathen, it was something more than common, and even

furnished broad meniment, that Christians, as if waking

out of sleep at this time of day, should be making out how

they were to believe concerning Christ; while their pro-

fessed clerks, though claiming deference from their flocks

as teachers, were unbelievers on their own showing, since

they were seeking what they had not. And the party of

U rsacius, who were at the bottom of all this, did IJ.ot under-

stand what wrath they were storing up against themselves,

as our Lord says by the sacred writers, Woe unto them,

through whom JIy Name is blasphemed among the Gentiles;

and by His own mouth in the Gospels, Whoso shall offend

one of these little ones, it were better for him that a millstone

were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the

depth of the sea, than, as Luke adds, that he should offend one

of these little ones.

4. vVhat defect in religious teaching was there in the

Catholic Church, that they should be searching after faith

now, and should prefix this year's Consulate to the pro-

fession they make of it ? Yet U rsacius, and Valens, and

Germinius, and their friends have done, what never took

place, never yet was heard of, alnong Christians. After put-

ting into writing what it pleased thmnselves to believe,

they prefix to it the Consulate, and the n10nth and the day

of the cun'ent year; 4 thereby to show all thinking men that


4 "Faith is made a thing of

dates rather than of Gospels, while

it is marked off by years, and

is not measured by the confession

of baptism." Hil. ad Const. ii.

4 " We determine yearly anù

monthly creeds concerning God,

we determine them anù then re-


pent of them; we repent and then

defend them; we anathematise

after defending; we condemn our

own doings in the doings of others,

or those of other/:; in om. own, H nd

gnawing each other, we are well-

nigh devoured one of another. J:

Ibid. 5.


F


66


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON TIlE


CHAP. L their faith dates, not from of old, but now, from the

reign of Constantius; for whatever they write has

a view to their own heresy. Moreover, though pretending to

write about the Lord, they non1Ïnate another sovereign for them-

selves, Constantius, who has provided for them this supremacy

of impiety; and they who deny that the Son is everlasting,

have called him Eternal EUlperor instead; such foes of

Christ are they in behalf of their impiety.

5. But perhaps the dates in the holy Prophets form

their excuse for naming the Consulate; so bold a pretence,

however, will serve but to publish more fully their igno-

rance of the subject. For the prophecies of the sacred

writers do indeed specify their times; (for instance, Esaias

and Osee lived in the days of Ozias, Joatham, Achaz, and

Ezekias ; Jeremias, in the days of J osias; Ezekiel and

Daniel prophesied under Cyrus and Darius; and others in

other times;) yet they were not laying the foundations of

divine religion; that was before their date, and was always,

for before the foundation of the world had God prepared it

for us in Christ. N or were they signifying the respective

dates of their own faith; for they had been believers before

these dates, which did but belong to their own preaching.

And this preaching chiefly related to the Saviour's coming,

and secondarily to what was to happen to Israel and the

nations; but our modern sages, not in historical narration,

nor in prediction of the future, but, after writing, "The

Catholic Faith was published," immediately add the Con-

sulate and the month and the date; that, as the sacred

writers were wont to set down the dates of their histories,

and of their own ministries, so these may mark the date of

their own faith. Nay, it would be well if they had written

about "their own," (for it does date from to-day) and

had not taken in hand "the Catholic;" for they did not

write, "Thus we believe," but "the Catholic Faith was

published. "


COUNCIL

 HELD AT ARI1\UNUM AND SELEUCIA. 67


6. The boldness then of their purpose shows how E

.3


.

little they understand the subject; while the origin-

ality of their phrase befits their heresy. For thus they show

in set words when it was that their own faith began, and

from that same time present they would have it proclaÏ1ned.

And, as according to the Evangelist Luke, there 'Was made

a decree concerning the registration, and this decree before

was not, but began from those days in which it was made

by its framer, they also in like manner, by writing, "The

Faith is now published," showed that the views of their

heresy are young, and did not exist before. But when

they add "of the Catholic Faith," they haye fallen before

they know it into the extravagance of the Phrygians, and

say together with them, "To us first was revealed," and

"from us dates the Faith of Christians. " And as those

sectaries inscribe it with the names of Maximilla and

1\Iontanus, so do these with "Constantius, Sovereign,"

instead of Christ. If, however, as they would have it, the

faith dates from the present Consulate, what must the

Fathers do, and the blessed Maltyrs? nay, what will they

themselves do with their own catechumens, who went to

rest before this Consulate? how will they wake their pupils

up, that they may obliterate that old teaching which they then

thought so sufficient, and may sow instead the discoveries

which they have now put into writing? so ignorant are

they on the subject; with no knowledge but that of fra-

ming evasions, and those unbecoming and unplausible, and

carrying with them their own refutation!

7. Å.ß to the Nicene Council, it was no casual meeting,

but convened upon a pressing necessity, and for a reason-

able object. The Syrians, Cilicialls, and Mesopotamians,

were out of order in celebrating the Feast, and were wont

to keep Easter with the Jews;:; on the other hand, the


5 This seoms to have been an about fifty years old, or from about

innovation in these countries of the year 276. It is remarkable.

F2


68


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP.!. Arian heresy had risen up against the Catholic Church,

- and found supporters in the party of Eusebius, who

were both zealous for the heresy, and conducted the attack

upon religious people. This gave occasion for an Ecumenical

Council, that the feast might be everywhere celebrated

on one day, and that the heresy which was springing

up might be anathematised. It took place then; and

the Syrians subnlitted, and the Fathers pronounced the

Arian heresy to be a forerunner of Alltichrist,6 and drew

up a suitable formula against it. And yet, in this defini-

tion, for all their authority of numbers, they ventured on

nothing like the acts of these three or four men. 7 With-

out prefixing Consulate, month, and day, they wrote con-

cerning the Easter, "It seemed good as follows," for it

did then seem good that there should be a general com-

pliance; but about the faith they wrote not, "It seemed

good," but, "Thus believes the Catholic Church;" and

thereupon they confessed what was the ground of their

faith, in order to show that their own belief was not

novel, but Apostolical; and that what they wrote dowD

was no discovery of theirs, but is the same as was taught

by the Apostles.

8. Such was the Council of Nicæa; but the Councils

which they have set in motion, what colourable pretext

have these? If any new heresy has risen since the Arian,

let them tell us the statements which it has invented and

who are its inventors? and while they draw up a formula

of their own, let theIn at the same time anathematise the


that the Quartodeciman custom

had come to an end in Procon-

sular Asia, where it had existed

from St. John.s time, before it

began in Syria. Tillemont refers

the change to Anatolius of Lao.

dicea; I have befure now thought

it might bo tr(:L\

ed to the influence

of Zenobia and Paul of Sa.ffiosata;


vid. Arians, ch. i.

 1.

6 Vid. ntichrist.

7 òÀíyot Ttvi!;, says Pope Julius

in 342 a p. Athan. A pol. 3-1.

;ypa1/Júv Tt1IE

 7rEpi 7rí(jrElIJf..,., says

Athan. in 35ß ad Ep. Æg. 5.

lnfr. pp.. 70-73, supr. n. 2, p. 64,

he mentIOns by na.me six, Aca-

ci us, &c.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 69


(1Cresies antecedent to this their Council ainon g ED. Bl'

N.

,

 5-6.

which is the Arian, as the Nicene Fathers did, that

it may be made appear that they too have some cogent reason

for saying what is on any view a novelty. But if no such

event has happened, and they cannot produce such, but rather

they themselves are uttering heresies, as holding that very

iInpiety of Arius, and are held up day after day, and

day by day shift their ground, what need is there of

Councils, when the Nicene is sufficient, as against the

.A.rian heresy, so against the rest, which it has condemned

one and all already by setting forth the sound faith? For

even the notorius Aetius, who was surnained godless, vaunts

not of the discovering of any mania of his own, but under

stress of weather has been wrecked upon bare Arianislll,

himself and the persons whom he has beguiled. Vaillly

then do they run about with the pretext that they have

deInanded Councils for the faith's-sake, for divine Scrip-

ture is sufficient above all things; but if a Council be

needed on the point, there are the authoritative acts of

the Nicene Fathers, for they did not do their work care-

lessly, but stated the doctrine so exactly, that persons

reading their words honestly, cannot but find their memory

refreshed in respect to the pious doctrine concerning Christ

announced in divine Scripture.

9. Having therefore no show of reason on their side,

but being in difficulty whichever way they turn, in spite

of their evasions, they have nothing left but to say:

"Forasllluch as we contradict our predecessors, and trallS-

gress the traditions of the Fathers, therefore we have

thought good that a Council should meet; but again.,

whereas we fear lest, should it meet at one place, our pains

win be an thrown away, therefore we have thought good

that it be divided into two; that so, on our putting forth

our own formula to these separate portions, we may over-

reach with more effect, with the threat of Constantius our


70


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. II. patron in this impiety, and Jnayabrogate the acts of

Nicæa, under pretence of introducing a more siluple

faith." If they have not put this into words, yet this is the

meaning of their deeds and of their disturbances. Certainly

lnany and frequent as have been their speeches and writings in

various Councils, never yet have they made mention of the

Arian heresy as unchristian; but, if anyone present happened

to accuse the existing heresies, they always took up the

defence of the Arian, which the Nicene Council had ana-

thematised; nay, rather they cordially welcOlued its pro-

fessors. This then is in itself a strong argument, that the

aim of the present Councils has been not truth, but the

annulling of the acts of Nicæa; but the proceedings of

these men and their friends in the two Councils, make it

equally clear that this was the case :-It is necessary then

to relate everything as it occurred, as I proceed to do.


CHAPTER II.

10. 'VHEN all, as many as were named in the Emperor's

letters, were in expectation of one place of meeting, and to

form one Council, they were divided into two; and, while

some went off to Seleucia called the Rocky, the others

met at Ariminum, to the nUInber of four hundred bishops

and more, and among them Germinius, Anxentius, Valens,

U rsacius, Demophilus, and Caius. 8 And, while the whole

assembly was discussing the matter frOln the divine Scrip-

tures, these men produced a paper, and, reading the Con-

sulate, they den1anded that the whole Council should give

this the precedence of anything else, and put no tests

upon the heretics beyond it, nor inquire into its nleaning,

but take this confession as sufficient; and it ran as

follows :9__


8 Vid. Aria'l

 leaders.


9 The Creed which follows bad


COUNCILS HELD A'r AlUMINUl\I AND SELEUCIA. 71


Eiglltlt Conl"pssion, at Sirmium ( third Sif'Jllian, vide Eu. BEN.

'P

 7-8.

infr. p. 114).

11. "The Catholic Faith was published in the presence of

onr Sovereign the most religious and gloriously victorious

Emperor, Constantius, Augustus, the eternal and majestic,

in the Consulate of the most illustrious Flavians, Eusebius and

lIypatius, in Sirmium on the 11th of the Calends of June. l

" \Ve believe in one Only and True God, the Father

Ahnighty, Creator and FraIner of all things:

"And in one Only-begotten Son of God, who before all

ages, and before every origin, and before all conceivable

tÌlne, and before all cOlnprehensible substance, was begotten

impassibly from God; through whom the ages were dis-

posed and all things were made; and begotten as the

Only-begotten, as only from the Only Father, as God from

God, like to the Father who begat Hirn, according to the

Scriptures; whose generation no one knoweth save the

Father alone who begat IIiIn. We know that He, the

Only-begotten Son of God, at the Father's bidding can1e

from the heavens for the abolition of sin, and was born

of the Virgin Mary, and conversed with the disciples, and

fulfilled all the econon1Y according to the Father's will, and

was crucified, and died and descended into the parts

beneath the earth, and directed the economy of things

there, whom the gate-keepers of hell saw and shuddered;

and that He rose from the dead the third day, and con-

versed with the disciples, and fulfilled the econOlny, and,

whell the forty days were full, ascended into the heavens,


been prepared at Sirmium shortly

before, and is the third, or, as

some think, the fourth, drawn up

at Sirmium. It was the composi-

tion of Mark of Arethusn, yet it

was written in Latin; and though

:I\iark was a Semi-arian, it dis-

tinctly abandons the word 8ub-


stance. .But this point of history

is involved in much obscurity.

As it stands, it is a patchwork of

two views It will be observed,

that it is the Creed on which

Athanasi us has been animad vert-

iug above, p. 65.

1 J\Iay 22, 359, Whitsun Eve.


72


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. II. and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and will

- come in the last day of the resurrection in the glory

of the Father, to render to everyone according to his works.

"And in the Il01y Ghost, whom the Only-begotten of

God Himself, Jesus Christ, had promised to send to the

['ace of men, the Paraclete, as it is written, 'I go to the

Father, and I will ask the Father, and Hf\ shall send unto

you another Paraclete, even the Spirit of

l'l'uth. He shall

take of Mine and shall teach and bring to your remem-

brance all things.'

"But whereas the term 'substance,' has been adopted

by the Fathers in simplicity, and gives offence as unin-

telligible to the people, and not contained in the Scriptures,

it has seemed good to remove it, and that it be neyer in

any case used of God again, because the divine Scriptures

nowhere use it of Father and Son. But we say that the

Son is like the Father in all things, as all the Holy Scrip-

tures say and teach." 2

12. When this had been read, the dishonesty of its

framers was soon apparent. For on the Bishops proposing

that the Arian heresy should be anathematised together

with the other heresies, and all assenting, Ursacius and

Valens and their friends refused, and at length were con-

demned, on the ground that their confession had been

written, not in sincerity, but for the annulling of the Acts

of Nicæi:b, and the introduction instead of their miserable

heresy. Marvelling then at the deceitfulness of their lan-

guage and their unprincipled intentions, the Bishops said:

" Not as if in need of faith have we come hither; for we

have within us the faith, and that in soundness; but that

we may put to shame those who gainsay the truth and

venture upon novelties. If then ye have drawn up thiB

formula, as if now beginning to believe, ye are not so much

as clerks, but need to start with your catechism; but if

Vid. infr. Creeds vii. and ix., pp. 114-1 J6.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 73


Y OU meet us here with the saIne reli b O"ious sentiments ED. BEN.


 8-10.

with which we have come hither, let there be a un-

animity, of one and all, and let us anathmnatise the heresies.

and preserve the teaching of the Fathers. Thus pleas for new

CouncilB will not longer circulate about, the Bishops at

Nicæa having anticipated them once for all, and done all

that was needful for the Catholic Church." However,

even then, in spite of an unanimous agreement of the

Bishops a second time, still the above-mentioned refused.

So at length the whole assmnbly, condemning them as

ignorant and deceitful men, or rather as heretics, gave

their suffrages in behalf of the Nicene Council, and gave

judgment all of them that it was enough; but as to the

forenamed Ursacius and Valens, Germinius, Auxentius,

Caius, and Demophilus, they pronounced them to be

heretics, deposed them as not really Christians, but Arians,

and wrote against them in Latin what has been translated

in its substance into Greek, thus :-


13. Copy of an Epistle from the Council to Constantius,

Augustus :_3

" We believe it has been ordered by God's command,

upon the mandate 4 of your religiousness, that we, the

Bishops of the vVestern Provinces, came from all parts to

Arin1Ínum, for the manifestation of the Faith to all

Catholic Churches and the detection of the heretics. For

upon a general discussion, in which we who are orthodox

aU took part, it was our decision to adhere to that faith which


3 The same version of the Letter

which follows is found in Socr. ii.

39. Soz. iv. 10. Theod. Rist. ii.

19. Niceph. i. 40. On compari-

son with the La.tin original, which

is preserved by Hilary, (Fragm.

viii.) it appears to be so very freely

executed, that it has been thought


better here to translate it from the

text of Hilary.

-1 Ex præcepto. Præceptum be-

comes a technical word afterwards

for a royal deed, charter, or edict;

and it has somewhat of that

meaning even here.


74


PISTLE OF ATHANASltJS, ON TH]}


CHAP. II. has come down to us from antiquity, and which we

hold, as we have ever held, from Prophets, Gospels,

and A posUes, from God Himself and our Lord Jesus Christ,

the upholder of your dominion, and the author of your

welfare. For we' deemed it to be a sin to mutilate any

work of the saints, and in particular of those who in the

framing of the Nicene formulary, held session together

with Constantine of glorious mmllory, the father of your

religiousness. Which formulary was put abroad and

gained entrance into the minds of the Christian people,

and, as at that tin1e drawn up against Arianism, is found

to be of such force that heresies of all kinds are over-

thrown by it; from which, if aught were subtracted, an

opening is made to the poison of the heretics.

"Therefore it was that Ursacius and Valens formerly

came into suspicion of the said Arian heresy, and were

suspended frOln communion, and had to ask pardon, as

their letters show, which they obtained from the Council

of Milan, in the presence of the legates of the Roman

Church. And since Constantine was at the Nicene

Council, when the formulary in question was drawn up

with great care, and after being baptised into the profes-

sion of it, departed to God's rest, we think it a crime to

mutilate aught in it, and in anything to detract from so

many Saints and Confessors, and Successors of Martyrs,

who took part in framing it; considering that they pre-

served all the doctrine of the Catholics who were before

them according to the Scriptures, and that they remained

with us unto these times in which your religiousness has re-

ceived the charge of ruling the world from God the Father

through our God and Lord Jesus Christ. As for these

men, they were attempting to pull up what had been

reasonably laid down. For, whereas the letters of your

religiousness con1n1anded us to treat of the faith, there

was proposed to us by the aforenamed troublers of the


OOUKCILS HELD AT ARIltIINUM AND SELEUOIA. 75


Churches, Gernlillius and his associates Auxentius 6 En. BEN.


 JO.

and Caius, something siInply novel for our considera-

tion, which contained nlany particulars of perverse doctrine.

And next, when they became aware that what they proposed

publicly in the Counci] was unacceptable to the Fathers,

they determined to draw np another determined statement.

Indeed it is notorious that they have often changed these

formularies in a short time; accordingly, lest the Churches

should have a recurrence of these disturbances, we held

to our resolve to retain decisions which were both ancient

and reasonable. For the information therefore of your

clelnency, we have instructed our legates to acquaint

you with the judgment of the Council by our letter, to

whom we have given this sole direction, not to execute

their office otherwise than for the absolute stability and

permanence of the ancient decrees; in order that your

wisdom might also know, that peace would not be accom-

plished by the removal of those decrees, as the aforesaid

Valens and U rsacius, Germinius and Caius, promised. On

the contrary, troubles have in consequence been excited

in all regions and in the Roman Church.

"On this account we ask your clemency to receive and

hear all our legates with favourable ears and a serene

countenance, and not to suffer aught to be abrogated to

the dishonour of the ancients; so that all things may con-

tinue which we have received from our forefathers, who,

as we are sure, were prudent men, and acted not without the


ti Auxentius, omitted in Hilary:s

copy, has been in

erted here, and in

the decree which follows, from the

Greek, since Athanasius has thus

given his sanction to the fact of

that Arian :Bishop being con-

demned at Ariminum. Yet Aux-

entins appeals to Ariminum trium-

phantly. Hi!. contI.. Aux. fin.

Socrates, Hist. ii. 37, says, that


Demophilus also was deposed, but

he was an Eastern Bishop, if he be

Demophilus of Berea, yid. Cou-

stant. on Hi!. Fragm. vii.. p. 1342.

Yet he is mentioned also b,}'

Athanasius as present, supr. p. 70.

A few words are wanting in the

Latin in the commencement úf one

of the sentences which follow.


76


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIU8, ON THE


CHAP. II. Holy Spirit of God; because by these noveltieR not

-- DIlly al-C f

tithful pOplllations llnsettled, bllt infidels

also are deterred from believing. ,Ve pray also that you would

give orders that so many Bishop

, who are detained at

Ariminum, among whom are numbers who are broken with

old age and poverty, may return to their own country,

lest the people of their Churches suffer, being deprived of

their Bishops. This, however, we ask again and again,

that nothing be innovated, nothing withdrawn; but that

all remain incorrupt which has continued through the

tinles of the father of your sacred piety and your own

religious days; and that your holy prudence will not per-

omit us to be harassed, and torn from our sees; but that

we may without distraction ever give ourselves to the

prayers which we do always offer for your personal wel-

fare and for your reign, and for peace, which may the

Divinity bestow on you, according to your merits, pro-

found and perpetual! But our legates will bring the sub-

scriptions and names of the Bishops and their titles, as

another letter informs your holy and religious pnldence."

14. And the Decree of the Council 6 ran thus :-

"Aß far as it was fitting, dearest brethren, the Catholic

Council has had patience, and has so often displayed the

Church's forbearance towards Ursacius and Valens, Ger-

minius, Caius, and Auxentius; who by so often changing

what they had believed, have troubled all the Churches,

and still are endeavouring to introduce their heretical

spirit into Chrj

tian minds. For they wish to annul the


6 This Decree is also here trans-

lated from the original in Hilary,

who has besides preserved the

" Cat.holic Definition 0' of the

Council, in which it professes its

adherence to the Creed of Nicæa,

and, in opposition to the Sirmian

Confession which the Arians had


proposed, acknowledges in parti-

cular both the word and the

mpaning of "substance:" "suh-

stantiæ nomen et rem, à multis

sanctis Scripturis insinuatam men-

tibus nostris, obtinere debere sui

firmitatem." Fragm. vii. 3.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIl\IINUM AND SELEUCIA. 77


formulary drawn up at Nicæa, which was framed :

ö


r

against the Arian and the other heresies. They have

presented to us besides a creed drawn up by themselves,

which we could not lawfully receive. Even before this have

they been pronounced heretics by us, and this has been

confirmed by a long period,-whom we have not admitted

to our conlmunion, b

t by our separate voices condemned

in their own presence. Now then, give your judgment

on this matter afresh, that it Inay be ratified by the sub-

scription of each.

"All the Bishops answered-It seems good to us that

the aforenamed heretics should be condemned, that the

Church may reinain in that unshaken faith, which is truly

Catholic, and in perpetual peace."

Matters at ArÏIllinuln then had this speedy issue; for

there was no disagreement there, but all the Fathers with

one accord both put into writing what they decided upon,

and deposed the Arians. 7

15. Meanwhile the transactions in Seleucia the Rocky

were as follows: it was in the month called by the Romans

Septeinber, by the Egyptians Thoth, and by the

Iace-


7 Athanasius seems to have

known no more of the proceedings

at Ariminum, which perhaps were

then in progres

, when he wrote

this Treatise; their termination,

as il:; well known, was very un-

happy, "Ingemuit totus orbis,"

says St. Jerome, "et Arianum se

esse miratus est," ad. Lucif. 19.

A deputation of ten persons was

Bent from the Council to Constan-

tius, to which Valens opposed one

of his own. Constantius pre-

tended the barbarian war, and

dela.yed an anfo;wer till the begin-

ning of October, the Council hav-

ing opened in l\Iay. The Post-

script to this Treatise contained


the news of this artifice and of

the Council's distress in conse-

quence, which Athanasius had just

heard. This he also seems to have

inserted into his work, infr. pp.

118 -122. upon the receipt of the

news of the mission of Valens to

Constantinople, a mission which

ended in the giving way of the

Catholic delegacy. Upon his re-

turning to Ariminum with the de-

legates and the Arian creed they

had signed (vid. infr.), Valens,

partly by menaces and partly by

sophistry, succeeded in procuring

the subscriptions of the Council

also to the same formula.


78


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. II. donians Gorpiæus,8 and the day of the month

according to the Egyptians the 16th, upon which

all the members of the Council assembled together. And

there were present about a hundred and sixty; and whereas

there were many who were accused among them, and their

accusers were crying out against them, thereupon Acacius,

and Patrophilus, and U ran ius of Tyrè, and Eudoxius, who

usurped the Church of Antioch, and Leontius, and Theo-

dotus, and Evagrius, and Theodulus, 9 and George who

has been driven from the whole world, pursue an un-

principled course. Fearing the proofs which their

accusers had to show against them, they employed for their

purpose the other section of the Arian party, those hire-

lings of impiety, who had been ordained by that Secundus,

whom the great Council had deposed,-such men as the

Libyan Stephen, and Seras, and Pollux, who were under

accusation upon various charges, next Pancratius, and

one Ptolemy a 1\leletian. Accordingly, to divert the

Fathers from the consideration of the charges lying

against them, they n1ade a pretence of discussing the


8 Gorpiæus ,vas the first month

of the Syro-Macedonic year among

the Greeks, dati ng according to the

era of the Seleucidæ. The Roman

date of the meeting of the Council

was the 27th of September. The

original transactions at Ariminum

had at this time been finished as

much as two months, and its

deputies were waiting for Con-

st,antius at Constantinople.

9 There is little to observe of

these Acacian Bishops in addition

to what has already been said of

several of them, except that George

is the Cappadocian, the notorious

intruder into the see of S. Atha-

nasius. The charges which lay

against them wcre of various kinds.


Socrates

ays that the Acacian

party consisted in all of about 36;

other writers increase it by a few

more. The Eusebianor Court party

is here called Acacian, and was Ano-

mæan and Semi-arian alternately,

or more properly as it may be

called Homæan 01. Scriptural; for

Arians, Semi-arians, and Anomæ..

ans, all used theological terms as

well as the Catholics. The Semi-

arians numbered about 100, the

remaining dozen might be the

Egyptian Bishops who were zeal-

ous supporters of the Catholic

cause. However, there were be-

sides a few Anomæans, or Arians,

as Athan. calls them, with whom

the Acacians now coalesced.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARININUM AKD S

LEUCIA. 79


question of faith, but it wa.s clear they were doing ED i

2

N.

so frOln fear of their accusers; and they took the

part of the heresy, till at length they were left by them-

selves. For, whereas the supporters of the Acacians lay

under suspicion and were very few, but the others were

the majority, therefore the Acacians, acting with the bold-

ness of desperation, altogether denied the Nicene formula,

and censured the Nicene Council, while the others, who were

the majority, accepted the whole proceedings of the great

Council, except that they complained of the word, "Con-

substantial," as obscure and open to suspicion. "\Vhen

then time passed there, and the accusers pressed, and the

accused put in pleas, and thereby were led on further by

their impiety and blasphemed the Lord, thereupon the

majority of Bishops became indignant, and deposed

Acacius, Patrophilus, Uranius, Eudoxius, and George

the contractor,! and others from Asia, Leontius and Theo-

dosius, Evagrius and Theodulus, and excomlTIunicated

Asterius, Eusebius, Augarus, Basilicus, Phæbus, Fidelius,

Eutychius, and l\tlagnus. And this the Bishops did on

their non-appearance, when summoned to defend them-

selves on charges which numbers preferred against them.

And they decreed that so they should remain, until they

made their defence and cleared themselves of the charges

brought against them. And after despatching the sen-

tence pronounced against them to the diocese of each,

they proceeded to Constantius, that most impious Augustus,

to report to him their proceedings, as they haù been

ordered. And this was the termination of the Council in

Seleucia.

16. vVho then but must approve of the conscientious

conduct of the Bishops who met at ArinlÌnum? who

endured such fatigue of journey and perils of sea, that

by a sacred and canonical resolution they might depose

I Pork contractor to the troops. Rist. Arian. 75, Naz. Orat. 21, 16.


.


80


EPISTLE OF ATHAN Asrus, ON THE


CHAP. II. the Arians, and guard inviolate the dehnltJOllH

of the Fathers. For each of them felt that, if

they undid the acts of their predecessors, they were afford-

ing a pretext to their successors to undo what they themselyes

then were enacting. And who but must condemn such

sleight of hand as exercised by the party of Eudoxius and

Acacius, who sacrifice the honour due to their own fathers

to partisanship and patronage of the Ario-maniacs? for what

confidence can be placed in their own acts, if the acts of

their fathers be undone? or how call they them Fathers

and themselves their successors, if they set about impeach-

ing their judgment? and especially what can Acacius say

of his own master, Eusebius, 2 who not only gave his

subscription in the Nicene Council, but even in a letter

signified to his flock, that that was true faith, which the

Council had declared? for, even if he eXplained himself

in that letter in his own way, yet he did not contradict

the Council's terms, but even charged it upon the Arians,

that their statement that the Son was not before His

generation was not even consistent with His being before

Mary.

17. What then will they now teach the people who have

received their past teaching fron} them? that the Fathers

have made a slip? and how are they then1selves to be

trusted by those whom they now teach not to follow their

own Teachers? and with what faces too will they look

npQn the sepulchres of the Fathers whom they now name

heretics? And why do they abuse the Valentinians,

Phrygians, and Manichees, yet give the name of saint to

those whom they themselves think probably to have made

parallel statements? or how can they any longer be

Bishops, if they were ordained by persons whom they now

accn8ß of heresy? But jf these were heterodox and their

definitions misled the world, then let their lnclaory perish

:l Vid. Bupr. pp. 15 and 55.


COUNCILS HELD .AT ARBIINU:U AND SELEUCIA. 81

altoo.ether. and while Y OU are castin g out their En. BEN.

o ,



 13-14.

books, go and cast out their relics too frOlll the -

cemeteries, so that one and all may know that they are

seducers, and that you are parricides. The blessed Apostle

approves of the Corinthians because, he says, ye remember me

Ù

 all tl

Ùl[IS and keep the traditions as I delivered them to

you; but they, as entertaining such thoughts of their prede-

cessors, will have the daring to say to their flocks just the

reverse: "'Ve praise you, not .for 'l'enlembering' your

fathers, but rather we make nluch of you, when you do

not 'hold their traditions.'" And let the In go on to cast a

slur on their own ignoble birth, and say, " We are sprung,

not of religious men but of heretics." For such language,

as I said before, is consistent in those who barter the good

name of their Fathers and their own salvation for Arianisln,

and fear not the words of the divine proverb, There is a

generation that curseth their father, and the threat lying iu

the Law against such.

18. They then, from zeal for the heresy, are of this

obstinate temper: you, however, be not troubled at it, nor

take their audacity for truth. For they dissent frOln each

other, and, whereas they have revolted from the Fathers,

are of no one opinion, but float about with various and

contrary changes. 3 And, as quarrelling with the Council

of Nicæa, they have in consequence themselves held many

Councils, anù have published a faith in each of them, but

have stood to Ilone,-nay, they will never act otherwise,

for, seeking perversely, they will never find that vVisdonl

which in truth they hate. I have accordingly subjoined

portions both of Arius's writings, and of whatever else

I could collect, of their publications in different Oouncils ;

whereby you will learn and wonder how it is that they

ean stand out against an Ecumenical Council and their

own Fathers, without being overwhelmed by the effort.

3 Vid. Append. Ari(ln leaders, Chameleons, &c.


G


.


82


EPISTLE OF ATIIANASIUS, OX THE


CHAPTER III.

CHAP. III. 19. ...L\.RIUS and his friends thought and pro



fessed thus: "God made the Son out of nothing,

and called Him His Son;" "The VV ord of God is one of the

creatures;" and" Once He was not;" and "He is alterable;

capable, when it is His will, of altering." Accordingly

they were expelled from the Church by Alexander of blessed

lllemory. However, Arius after his expulsion, when he was

living near the party of Eusebius, drew up his heresy upon

paper, and imitating, in the character of his music, as if

on a festive occa

Úon, no grave writer, but the Egyptian

Sotades, he writes at great length, for instance as follows:-


20. Blasphe1nies of Arius.

God Himself then, in His own nature, is ineffable by all

men.

Equal or like Himself He alone has none, nor one In

glory.

And Ingenerate we can HÜn, because of Him who lb

generate by nature.

We praise Him as U noriginate because of HiIn who has

an orIgIn.

And adore Him as everlastin o ' because of IIim who was

b'

born in time.

fhe Unoriginate made the Son an origin of things that

were brought into being;

A.nd advanced Him as a Son to Himself, begetting Him

to be such.

He has nothing proper to God in His proper subsistence;

For He is not equal, no, nor consubstantial with Him.

'Vise is God, for lIe is the teacher of Wisdom.

There is fun proof that God is invisible to all beings,

Both to things which are through the SOIl, and to the

Son is He illvisiLle


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINtnr AND SELEUCIA. 83


I win say it expressly, how by the Son is seen ED. BEN.


 15.

the Invisible;

By that power by which God sees, and in His own

measure,

Doth the Son endure to see the Father, as is lawful.

Thus there is a Triad, not in equal glories.

Not intermingling with each other are their subsistences.

One more glorious than the other in their glories unto

immensity.

Foreign to the Son in substance is the Father, for lIe is

U noriginate.

Understand that the Monad was; but the Dyad was not,

before it was in existence.

It follows at once that, when the Son was not, the Father is

already God.

Hence the Son, not being, (for He existed at the will of

the Father,)

Is God Only-begotten, and each is foreign from either.

Wisdom existed as "\Visdom by the will of the Wise

God.

Hence He is conceived in numberless conceptions.

Spirit, Power, Wisdom, God's glory, Truth, Image, and

Word.

Understand that He is conceived to be Radiance and

Light.

One equal to the Son, the Supreme is able to generate.

But more excellent, or superior, or greater, He is not able.

At God's will the Son is what and whatsoever He is.

And when and since He was, from that tiIne He has

subsisted from God.

lIe, being a strong God, praises in His degree the

Supreme.

To speak in brief, God is ineffable to His Son.

For He is to Himself what He is, that is, unspeakable.

So that nothing which relates to comprehension


G2


84


EPISTLJ;

 OF ATJlANASIUS, ON TilE


CHAP. Ill. Does the Son understand to speak about; for it is

hnpossible for lliIll

To investigate the Father who is by Himself.

For the Son Himself does not know IIis own substance,

For, being Son, He reaHy existed at the will of the

Father.

How can it reasonably be, that lIe who is from the Father

Rhould know llis own Parent by cmnprehension ?

For it is plainly impo

sible that what hath an origin

Should conceive how the U noriginate is,

Or should grasp the idea of Him.

21. And what they wrote by letter to Alexander of

blessed Illel110ry, the Bishop, runs as follows :-


To our Blessed Pope 4 and Bishop, Alexander, the Prresby-

ters and Deacons send health in the Lord.


Our faith from our forefathers, which also we have

learned from thee, Blessed Pope, is this:- We acknowledge

one God, alone In generate, alone Everlasting, alone Un-

originate, alone True, alone having Immortality, alone

Wise, alone Good, alone Sovereign ; Judge, Governor, and

Providence of all, unalterable and unchangeable, just and

good, God La wand Prophets and New Testament;

who generated an Only-begotten Son before eternal times,

through'whom He has made both the ages and the universe;

and generated Him, not in seeming, but in truth; and that

He made Him subsist at His own will, unalterable and


4, 7rå7rçt. Alexander is also so

called, Theod. Hist. i. 4, p. 749.

Athanatius, Hieron. contr. Joan.

4. Heraclas, also of Alexandria,

by Dionysius apud Euseb. Hist.

vii. 7. Epiphanius of Cyprus,

Hieron. Ep. 57, 2. John of Jeru-

salem, Hier. contr. Joan. 4. Cy.

prian of Carthage, Ep. ap. Cypr.


31. Augu

tine of Hippo, Hier.

Ep. 141 init. Lupus, Pragmatius,

Leontius, Theoplastus, Eutropius,

&c. of Gaul, by Sidon. Apoll. Epp.

vii. 5, &c. Eutyches, Archiman-

drite, Aùraham Abbot, are called

by the same name, in the acts

of Chalcedon.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMIXUM AND SELEUCIA. 85


unchan g eable. P erfect creature of God but not as ED. BEN.

" ,

 15-16.

one of the creatures; offspring, but not as one of

things brought into being; nor, as Valentinus pronounced, is

the offspring of the Father an issue; nor, as l\ianichæus

taught, is the -offspring a consubstantial portion of the

Father; nor is He as Sabellius said, dividing the One, a

Son-and- Father; 5 nor as Hieracas speaks of one torch from

another, or as a lamp divided into two; nor was He who

was before, afterwards generated or new-created into a

Son, a notion which, when advanced, thou too thyself,

Blessed Pope, in the midst of the Church and in Session

hast often condemned; but, as we say, at the will of God,

created before times and before ages, and possessing

life and being from the Father, who gave subsistence to

His glories together with Himself. For the Father did not,

in giving to Him the inheritance of all things, deprive

HimseU of what He has ingenerately in Himself j for He

is the fountain of all things.

"Thus there are Three Subsistences. And God, being

the cause of all things, is U noriginate and altogether

Sole; but the Son, being generated apart from time by

the Father, and being created and established before

ages, was not before His generation, but being generated

apart from time before all things, He alone subsisted

by the act of the Father. For He is not eternal or

co-eternal or co-ingenerate with the Father, nor has He

His being together with the Father, as some speak of re-

lations,6 introducing two in generate origins, but God is

before all things as being a One and an Origin of all.

vVherefore also He is before the Son; as we have learned


5 Vid. Append. 7rpoßoÀi/, vio-

7raTWp, &c.

(; The phrase Tà 7rpóç TL Bull

well explains to refer to the

Catholic truth that the Father or


OIl beiIlg named, the Other is


therein implied witho\lt naming.

Defens. F. N. iii. 9,

 4. lIenee

Arius, in his Letter to Eusebius,

complains that Alexander says,

åfÌ Ò OfÒ!;, åfÌ ò vióç. lip-a 7raTf/p,

üJ.La vióç. Theod. Hist. i. 4.


86


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. III. also from thy preaching in the midst of the Church.

So far then as from God He has His being, and His

glories, and His life, and all things are delivered unto Hin),

in such sense is God His origin, for He is above Him, as

being His God and before Him. But if the terms from

Him and from the womb, and I come forth from the Father,

and I am come, be understood by some to mean as if a

consubstantial part of Him, or as an issue, then the Father

is according to them compounded and divisible and

alterable and material, and, as far as their belief goes, has

the circumstances of a body, who is the Incorporeal God."

This is a part of what the Arians vomited from their

heretical hearts.

22. And before the Nicene Council took place, sinlÍlaI

statements were made by Eusebius's party, Narcissus, Pa-

trophilus, 1\iaris, Paulinus, Theodotus, and Athanasius of

Nazarba. And Eusebius of Nicomedia wrote over and

above to Arius, to this effect, "Since your views are right,

pray that all may adopt them; for it is plain to anyone, that

what has been made was not before its generation; but

what came to be, has an origin of being." And Eusebius of

Cæsarea in Palestine, in a letter to Euphration the Bishop,

did not scruple to say plainly that Christ was not true

God. And Athanasius of N azarba uncloaked the heresy

still further, saying that the Son of God was one of the

hundred sheep. For, writing to Alexander the Bishop, he

had the extreme audacity to say: ., 'Vhy complain of the

Arian party, for saying, The Son of God is made as a

creature out of nothing, and one among others? For, all

that are made being represented in parable by the hundred

sheep, the Son is one of them. If then the hundred

are not created and brought into existence, or if there

be beings beside that hundred, then may the Son be not a

creature nor one among others; but if those hundred are

all brought into being, and there is nothing besides the


COUNCILS HELD AT ARnUNUl\l AXD SELEUCIA. 87


hundred save God alone, what extravag-ance do the

D. BEN.

LJ 'Ii 16-18.

Arians utter, when, as comprehending and reckon-

ing Christ in the hundred, they say that He is one among

others?" And George who now is in IJaodicea, aud then

was presbyter of Alexandria, and was staying at Antioch,

wrote to Alexander the Bishop, "Do not complain of the

Arians, for saying, 'Once the Son of God was not,' for

Esaias came to be Son of Amos, and, whereas Amos

was before Esaias came into being, Esaias was not before,

but came into being afterwards." And he wrote to the

Arians, "Why complain of Alexander your Father, say-

ing, that the Son is from the Father? for you too need not

fear to say that the Son was from God. For if the

Apostle wrote, All things are from God, and it is plain

that all things are made of nothing, therefore, though

the Son too is a creature and one of things made, still He

may be said to be from God in that sense in which aU

things are said to be from God." From him then the

Arians learned to be hypocrites, professing indeed the

phrase from God, but not in a right sense. 1 And George

himself was deposed by Alexander for certain reasons,

and among theIn for manifest impiety; for he was himself

a presbyter, as has been said before.

23. In a word, then, such were their statements, as if

they all were in dispute and rivalry with each other

which should nlake the heresy more impious, and display

it in a more naked fornl. And as for their letters, I have

them not at hand, to despatch them to you; else I would

have sent you copies; but, if the Lord will, this too I will

do, when I get possession of them. And one Asterius

from Cappadocia, a many-headed 8 Sophist, one of the 4#

Eusebians, whom they could not advance into the Clergy,

as having sacrificed in the fornler persecution in the time


7 Viet supr. p. 36, and Euse-

bins, ibid. 51, 52.


8 Viz. like the hydra.


"


88


EPISTLE OF ATHAK ASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. III. of Constantius's grandfather, writes, with the coun..

tenance of the Eusebians, a sort of a treatise, which

was on a par with the crime of his sacrifice, but answered

their purpose; for in it, after placing the locust and the cater-

pillar with or rather before Christ, and saying that Wisdom

in God was other than Christ, and was the Framer as well

of Christ as of the world, he went round the Churches in

Syria and elsewhere, with introductions from the Euse-

bians, that, as he had once been at pains to deny the truth

so now he might make free with it. This audacious man

intruded himself into forbidden places, and seating

himself in the place set apart for Olerks, 9 he read publicly

this treatise of his, in spite of the general indignation.

It includes many matters at great length, but portions of

it are as follows :-


Passage from the A'rian Asterius.

"For the Blessed Paul said not that he preached Ohrist,

His, that is, God's 'own power' or ' 'fisdom,' but

without the article, a power of God and a TVisdom of God,

thus preaching that the proper power of God Himself,

which is connatural and co-existent with Him ingenerately,

is something distinct, generative indeed of Christ, creative

of the whole world, concerning which he teaches in his

Epistle to the Romans, thus, The invisible things of Him

from the creation of the VJorld are clearly seen, being under-

stood by the things which are made, even His eternal Power

and Godhead. For as no one would say that the Godhead

there mentioned was Christ, instead of the Father HÜnself,


'Oft


9 None but the Clergy might

enter the Chancel, i.e. in Service

time. Hence Tbeodosius was

made to retire by St. Ambrose.

Theod. v. 17. 'fhe Council of

I,aoclicea, said to be held A. D. 372,

forbids an;r but persons in orders,


f.( rrrucoì, to enter the Chancel and

then communicate. CaD. 19, vi(l.

also 44, Cone. t. 1, p. 788, 789.

It is doubtful what orders the

word ifpaTLlCoì is intended to in-

clude. Vid. Bingham Antiq.

viii. 6,

 7. .


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 8g


so, as I think, His eternal power is also not the ED



8

N.

Only-begotten God, but the Father who begat Him. -

And he tells us of another Power and 1Visdoln of God,

nan1ely, that which is manifested through Christ, and made

known through the works themselves of His Ministry."

And again :-


Another Passage.

"Although His eternal Power and Wisdom, which the

reasonings of Truth determine to be U noriginate and In-

generate, would appear certainly to be one and the same,

yet many are those powers which are one by one created

by Him, of which Christ is the First-born and Only-

begotten. All, however, equally depend upon their

Possessor, and all His powers are rightly called His, who

has created and uses them; for instance, the Prophet says

that the locust, which became a divine punishment of

human sins, was called by God Himself, not only the

power of God, but the great power. And the blessed

Dayid, too, in many of the Psalms, invites, not Angels

alone, but Powers also to praise God. And while he

invites them all to the hymn of praise, he presents before

us their multitude, and is not unwilling to call them

ministers of God, and teaches that they do His will."

24. These bold words against the Saviour did not

content him, but he went further in his blasphemies, as

follows :-


Another Passage.

"The Son is one among others; for He is first of things

made, and singular among intellectual natures; and as in

things visible the sun is one among such as show them-

selves, and it shines upon the whole world according to the

command of its

raker, so the Son, being one alnong

intellectual natures, also enlightens and shines upon all

t pat are in the intellectual wor1d

"


90


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


And again he says, Once He was not, writing

thus :-" And before the Son's generation, the

Father had pre-existing knowledge how to generate; since a

physician, too, before he cured, had the science of curing."

And he says again: "The Son was created by God's earnest

beneficence; and the Father made Him by the super-

abundance of His Power." And again: "If the will of

God has pervaded all the works in succession, certainly

the Son too, being a work, has at His will come into

bei ng and been made." Now though Àsterius was the

only person to write all this, the Eusebians felt the like in

common with him.

25. These are the doctrines for which they are contend-

ing; for these they assail the Ancient Council, because its

members did not propound the like, but anathematised the

Arian heresy instead, which these men were so eager to

recommend. On this accoultt. they put forward, as an

ad vocate of their impiety, Asterius who had sacrificed, a

sophist too, that he might not spare whether to speak

against the Lord, or by a show of reason to mislead the

simple. And they were ignorant, the shallow men, that

they were doing harm to their own cause. For the ill

savour of their advocate's idolatrous sacrifice, betrayed stil1

more plainly that the heresy is Christ's foe. And now

again, the general agitations and troubles which they are

exciting, are in conseqnence of their belief, that if they

commit enough murders, and hold synods enough month

after month, at length they will succeed in repealing the

sentence which has been passed against the Arian heresy.

But here, too, they seem ignorant, or to pretend ignorance,

that even before Nicæa that heresy was held in abomina-

tion when ÀrteInas 10 was laying its foundations, and before


CHAP. III.


10 Artemas or Artemon was one

of the chiefs of a school of heresy

at Rome at the end of the second


century. Theodotus was another,

and the more eminent. They

founded separate sects. Their


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SEIJEUCIA. 91


him at the time of Caia p has's assembl y and that ED. BEN.


 19-20.

of the Pharisees his contemporaries. And at all

times is this workshop of Christ's foes abominable, and will

not cease to be hateful, while the Lord 's Name inspiræ

love, and the whole creation bows the knee, and confesses

that Jesus Ohrist is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.


CHAPTER IV.


26. YET so it is, they have convened successive Councils 1

against that Ecumenical One, and are not yet tired. 2 After


main tenet is what would now be

called Unitarianism, or that our

Lord was a mere man. Artemas

seems to have been more known

in the East; at least is more fre-

quently mentioned in controversy

with the Arians, e.g. by Alex-

ander, Theod. Rist. i. 3, p. 739.

I The enumeration of Councils

and Creeds after the N icene,

which follows, brings before us

very clearly the point in contro-

versy between Catholics and Eu-

sebians. It was not the question

of our Lord's divinity; this had

not req uired settling even at

N icæa in 325. The assem bled

Bishops at once reprobated the

heresies of Arius. but they found

that, whereas the heretics in fact

and in heart denied Him to be

more than the first of creatures.

they could hide their tenet in such

ambiguous phrases, and recom-

mend it by such pretentious con-

cessions and embellishments, and

throw it back into such implicit

forms, as to need, if it was to be

excluded from the Church, some

new. special, discriminating test

in the professions of faith

which the Church enforced.

Such, and such alone, was the

Homoüsion; both parties acknow-


ledged this; in this they joined

issue. The aim then of the Eu-

sebians in these successive Councils

was to delude the Eishops of East

or W e

t into giving up this test,

(which the Nicene Fathers had in-

serted into the Creed,) maintain-

ing for that purpose that it was

not necessary, and nothing but the

destruction of that happy peace

which at length after the trials

of three centuries Christians had

won, and that Athanasi us was the

arch-enemy of the Church's wel-

fare, and must be summarily put

down.

2 It will be observed that the

Euse bian or court party from 34.1

to 358, contained in it two ele

ments, the more religious or Semi.

arian which tended to Catholicity,

and ultimately coalesced with it,

the other the proper Arian or

Anomæan, which was essentially

heretical. During the period

mentioned, it wore for the most

part the Semi-arian profession.

Athanasius as well as Hilary does

justice to the real Semi-arians; but

Athanasius does not seem to have

known or estimated the quarrel

between tbem and the Arians as

fully as Hilary. Accordingly,

while the former is bent in this


92


EPl

TLE OF ATHA

ÅSIUS, O

 TIlE

CHAP. IV. the Nicene, the Eusebians had been deposed; how-

ever, in course of time they intruded themselves

without shame upon the Churches, and began to plot against

the Bishops who withstood them, and to place in the sees men

of their own heresy instead. Thus they thought to be able

to hold Oouncils at their pleasure, as having those who con-

curred with them, and whom they had ordained on purpose for

this very object. Accordingly, they assemble at Jerusalem,3

and there they write thus :-

"The IIoly Council assembled in Jerusalem by the grace

of God, to the Church of God which is in Alexandria, and

to all throughout Egypt, Thebais, Libya, and Pentapolis,

also to the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons throughout the

world, health in the Lord.

"To all of us who have come together into one place

from different provinces, to the great celebration, which we

have held at the consecration of the Saviour's l\Iartyry,4


treatise in bringing out the great

fact of the variations of the here-

tical party, Hilary, wishing to

commend the hopeful Semi-arians

to the Gallic Church, makes

excuses for them, on the ground

of the necesbity of explanations of

the Nicene formulary, "necessi-

tatem hanc furor hereticus im-

ponit. H HiI. de Syn. 63, vid. also

G2 and

8. At the same time,

Ath. (as will be seen infr. ch. vi.)

treats individual Semi-arians with

most considerate forbearance, and

Hilary him:-:f'If bears witness quite

as strongly as Athan. to the mise-

rable variations of the heretical

party, as Nazianzen in his well-

known declaration against Coun-

cils, " Never saw I Council brought

to a useful issue, nor remedying,

but rather increasing existing

evils." Ep. 130.

3 J'þis Council at .T erusalem


was a continuation of one held at

Tyre at which Athan. was con-

demned. It, was very numerously

attended; by Bishops (as Euse-

bius says, Vito ConsL. iv. 43), from

Macedonia, Pannonia, Tbrace,

Asia l\1inor, Syria, Arabia, Egypt,

and Libya. One account speaks

of the number as being above 200.

Eus. says that an "innumerable

multitude from all provinces

accompanied them." It was the

second great Council in .Constan-

tine's reign, and is compared by

Eusebius (invidiously) to the

Nicene, c. 47. At this Council

Arius was solemnly received, as

the Synodal Letter goes on to say.

4 This Church, called the l\Iar-

tyry or Testimony, was built Over

the spot made sacred by our

Lord's death, burial, and resur-

rection, in commemoration of the

di

covery of the Holy Cross, and


COUNCILS HELD AT ARUIINUM AND SELEUCIA. 93


built in honour of God the ICing of all, and of ED. BEN.


21.

Hi') Christ, by the zeal of the most religious

Enlperor Oonstantine, the grace of Christ provided an increase

of gratification, in the conduct of that Inost religious Emperor

hinlself, who, by letters of his own, to the banishing from

the Church of God of all jealousy, and driving far away an

slander, which has caused division among the melubers of

Ohrist for a long season, urged us,_ what was our duty, with

open and peaceable mind to receive Arius and his friends, WhOlll

for a while jealousy which bates virtue had contrived to expel

frOll1 the Church. And the most religious EUlperor bore testi-

mony in their behalf by his letter to the exactness of their

faith, which, after inquiry of them, and personal communi-

cation with them by word of mouth, he acknowledged and

made known to us, subjoining to his own letters their ortho.

dox teaching in writing,6 which we all confess to be sound

and ecclesiastical. And he reasonably recOlnmended that

they should be received and united to the Church of God,

as you will know yourselves from the transcript of the same

Epistle, which we have transmitted to your reverences.

"\Ve believe that yourselves also, as if recovering the very


has been described from Eusebius

in the preface to the

rranslation

of S. Cyril's Catechetical Lectures,

p. xxiv. It was begun A.D. 326,

and dedicated at this date, A.D.

335, on Saturday, the 13th of

September. The 14th, however, is

the feast of the Exaltatio S. Crucis

both in East and West.

ð This is supposed to be the

Confession which is preserved by

Socr. i. 26, and Soz. ii. 27, and

was presented to Constantine by

Arius in 330. It says no more

than "And in the Lord Jesus

Christ His Son, who was begotten

from Him before all the ages God

and Word, through whom all

things were made, both in the


heavens and upon earth;" after-

ward:s it professes to have "re



ceived the faith from the holy

Evangelists," and to believe "as

all the Catholic Church and as

the Scriptures teach." The Syno-

dal Letter in the text adds ' , a pos-

tolical tradition and teaching.'"

Arius might safely appeal to

Scripture and the Church for a

creed which did not specify the

point in controversy. In his letter

to Eusebius of Nicomedia before

the Nicene Council, where he does

state the distinctive articles of his

heresy, he appeals to him as a

fellow pupil in the School of

Lucian, not to tradition. Theod.

Hist. i. 4.


D4


EPISTLE OF ATHANAS IUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. members of your own body, win experience great

joy and gladness, in acknowledging and recoverjng

your own bowels, your own brethren and fathers; since not

only the Presbyters who are friends of Arius are given back

to you, but also the whole Ohristian people and the entire

multitude, which on occasion of the aforesaid men have a

long time been in dissension among you. Moreover it were

fitting, now that you know for certain what has passed,

and that the men have con1municated with us and have

been received by so Holy a Council, that you s

lould with

aU readiness hail this your coalition and peace with your

own members, specially seeing that the articles of the faith

which they have published preserve indisputable the uni-

versally confessed apostolical tradition and teaching."

27. This was the first of their Councils, and in it they

were prompt in divulging their purpose, and could not

conceal it. For when, after the expulsion of Athanasius,

Bishop of Alexandria, they said they had banished aU

jealousy, and went on to recommend the reception of

Arius and his friends, they showed that their measures,

whether against Athanasius himself then, or against all

the other protesting Bishops before, had for their object

to restore the Arians, and to introduce the heresy into the

Church. However, although they had sanctioned in thìs

Council all Arius's malignity, and had given their directions

to receive his party into communion, of which they had

set the example, yet feeling that even now they had not

done enough for their purpose, they assembled a Council at

Antioch under colour of the so-called Dedication; 6 and,


6 i.e. the dedication of the

Dominicum Aureum, which had

been ten years in building. Vid.

the description of it in Eu

eb.

Vito Cons!". iii. 50. This Council

is one of great importance in the

history, though it was not attended


by more than 90 Bishops accord-

ing to Ath. infr., or 97 according

to Hilary de Syn. 28. The Euse-

bians had written to the Roman

see against At han., and eventually

called on it to summon a Council.

Accordingly. Julius propo:::;ed a


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIl\IINUM AND S]n

EUCIA. 95


since they were in general and lasting odiunl for

their heresy, they published divers letters, smne of

this sort and smne of that; and this is what they

one of them :-


ED. BEN.


 21-22.


wrote in


First Confession, at Antioch.

" We have not been followers of Arius,-how, Bishops

as we are, could we follow a Presbyter ?-nor did we

receive any other faith beside that which has been handed

down fron1 the beginning. 7 But after taking on ourselves

to examine and to verify his faith, we have admitted hinl

rather than follow him; as you will understand from

our present avowals.

"For we have been taught from the first, to believe in

one God, the God of the Universe, the Fralner and Provi-

dence of all things. both intellectual and sensible.

"And in One Son of God, Only-begotten, existing

before all ages, and being with the Father who begat

Him, by whom all things were made, both visible and

invisible, who in the last days according to the good

pleasure of the Father came down, and took flesh of the

Virgin, and fulfilled all His Father's will; and suffered

and rose again, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on

the right hand of the Father, and cometh agaIn to judge


Council at Rome; they refused to

come, and instead held this meet-

ing at Antioch. Twenty-five

Canons are attributed to this

Council, which have been received

into the Code of the Catholic

Church, though not as from this

Council, which took at least some

of them from more ancient sources.

It is remarkable that S. Hilary

calls this Council an assembly of

Saints, de Syn. 32, but it is his

course throughout to look at these

Councils on their hopeful side.


Vide note '.

7 The Council might safely ap-

peal to antiquity, since, with

Arius in the Confession noticed

supr. note 5, they did not touch

on the point in dispute. The

number of their formularies, three

or four, shows that they had a

great difficulty in taking any view

which would meet the wishes and

express the sentiments of one and

all. The one that follows, which

is their first, is as meagre as

Arius's, quoted note 5.


6


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. TV. quick and dead, and l'mnaineth King and God

unto all ages.


'And we believe also in the IIoly Ghost; and if it be

necessary to add, we believe the doctrine of the resurrection

of the flesh, and the life everlasting."

28. Here follows what they puhlished next at the same

Dedication in another Epistle, being dis

mtisfied with the

first, and devising sOluething newer and fuller:-


Second Confession,s at Antioch.

" "\Ve believe, conformably to the evangelical and apos-

tolical tradition, in One God, the Father Almighty, the

Framer, and Maker, and Providence of the Universe, frOln

whom are all things.

"And in One Lord Jesus Christ, His Son, the Only-be-

gotten God, through whom are all things: who was begotten

before all ages from the Father, God from God, whole

from whole,9 sole from sole, perfect froln perfect, I\:ing


8 This formulary is that known

as the Formulary of the Dedica-

tion. It is quoted as such by

Socr. ii. 39, 40. Soz. iv. 15. and

infr.

 29. Sozomen says that the

Eusebians attributed it to Lucian,

alleging that they had found a

copy written by his own hand;

but he decides neither for or

against it himself. Rist. iii. 5.

And the Auctor de Trinitate (in

rrheodoret's works, t. 5), allows

that it is Lucian's, but interpo-

lated. Dial. iii. init. vid. Routh,

Reliq. Sa cr. vol. iii. p. 294-6,

who is in favour of its genuine-

ness; as are Bull, Cave, and S.

Basnage. Tillemont and Cou-

stant take the contrary side; the

latter observing (ad Rilar. de

Synod. 28) that Athanasius,

speaks of parts of it as


Acacius's, and that Acacius attri-

butes its language to A:-;terius.

The Creed is of a much higher

cast of doctrine than the two

former, containing some of the

phrases which in the fourth

century became badges of Semi-

arianism.

9 These strong words ano. those

which follow, whether Lucian's or

not, mark the great difference be-

tween this confession and the fore4

going. It would seem as if the

Eusebians had at first tried the

assembled Bishops with a nega 4

tive confession, and finding that

they would not accept it, had been

forced upon one of a more ortho-

dox character. It is observahle

too that even the Council of Jeru-

salem but indirectly received the

Confession on which they re-ad-


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUl\'l AND SELEUCIA. 97

from King, Lord from Lord, Living Word, Living ED. BEN.


 23.

Wisdom, true Light, 'Vay, Truth, Resurrection,

Shepherd, Door, both unalterable and unchangeable, unvary-

ing 1 Image of the Godhead, Substance, Will, Power, and

Glory of the Father; the First-born of every creature, who

was in the beginning with God, God the "\V ord, as it is

written in the Gospel, Ând the Word was God; by whom

all things were made, and in whom all things consist; who

in the last days descended from above, and was born of a

Virgin according to

he Scriptures, and was made Man,

Mediator between God and man, and Apostle of our faith,

and Prince of life, as He says, I came down from heaven,

not to do JIine own will, but the will of Him that sent life;

who suffered for us and rose again on the third day, and

ascended into heaven, and sat down on the right hand of

the Father, and is coming again with glory and power, to

j ndge quick and dead.

"And in the IIoly Ghost, who is given to those who

believe, for comfort, and sanctification, and perfection, as

also our Lord Jesus Christ enjoined His disciples, saying,

Go ye, teach all nations, baptising them in the Name of the

Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; of Father as

being truly Father, and of Son as being truly Son, and of

the Holy Ghost as being truly Holy Ghost, the names not

being given without meaning or effect, but denoting

accurately the peculiar subsistence, rank, and glory of each

that is named, so that they are three in subsistence, and

in agreement one. 2


mitted Arius, though they gave

it a real sanction. The words

"unalterable and unchangeable"

are formal Anti-arian symbols, as

the Tpf.7rTÒV or alterable was one

of the most characteristic parts

of Arius's creed.

1 Vid. á:rrapáÀÀw'TO

.


2 This phrase, which is of a

more Arian character than any

other part of the Confession, is

justified by S. Hilary on the

ground. that when the Spirit is

mentioned, agreement is the Lest

symbol of unit.y, de Syn. 32 It

is protested agajnst in the Sardi-

can Confession. Theod. Rist. ii.


H


.


98


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. " Holding then this faith, and holding it in the

presence of God and Christ, from beginning to

end, we anathematise every heretical heterodoxy.3 And if

any teaches, beside the sound and right faith of the Scrip-

tures, that time, or season, or age,4 either is or has taken

place before the generation of the Son, be he anathema. Or

if anyone says, that the Son is a creature, as one of the

creatures, or an offspring as one of the offsprings, or a

work as one of the works, and does not hold the afore-

said articles one after another, as. the divine Scriptures

have delivered,6 or if he teaches or preaches beside what

we have received, be he anathema. For all that has been

delivered in the divine Scriptures, whether by Prophets or

Apostles, do we truly and conscientiously both believe and

follow."

29. And one Theophronius,6 Bishop of Tyana, put forth

in their presence the following statement of his personal

faith. And they subscribed it, accepting the faith of this

man :-


6, p. 846. A similar passage

occurs in Origen, contr. Cels. viii.

12, with which Huet. Origen, ii. 2,

n. 3, compares Novatian, de Trin.

2

. The Arians insisted on the

"oneness in agreement" as a ful-

filment of such texts as "I and

My Father are one;" but this

subject will come before us, infr.

n. 54, and in Disc. ch. 26.

Ii The whole of these anathemas

are an Eusebian addition. The

Council anathematises " every

heretical heterodoxy; " 'nQt, as

Athanasius observes, supr. Arim.

9, the Arian.

4 The introduction of these

words, "time," "age," &c., allows

them still to hold the Arian for-

mula "once He was not;" for our

Lord WitS, as they held, before


time, but still created. Vide also

infr. note 3, p. 103.

ð rrhis emphatic mention of

Scripture is also virtually an

Arian evasion; to hold certain

truths, " as Scri pture has de-

livered," might either mean be-

cause and as in fact, or so far as,

or in the sense of

cripture, and

admitted of a silent reference

to themselves, as interpreters of

Scri pture.

6 Nothing is known of Theo-

phronius; his confession is in

great measure a relapse into

Arianism proper: that is, as far

as the absence of characteristic

symbols is a proof of a wish to

introduce the heresy. For the

phrase" perfect God" vid. Append.

TÉÀUO!:.


COUNCIT1S HELD AT ARHUNU1\1 ANn SELEUCIA. 99


Third Confession, at Antioch.


'God knows, whom I call as a witness U p on ED. BEN.


 23-25.

my soul, that so I believe :-in God the Father -----

Almighty, the Creator and Maker of the Universe, from

whom are all things:

" And in His Son, the Only-begotten God, Word,

Power, and 1Visdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, through

whom are all things; who was begotten from the Fa.ther

before the ages, perfect God from perfect God, who was

with God in subsistence, and in the -last days descended,

and was born of the Virgin according to the Scriptures,

and was made man, and suffered, and rose again fronl the

dead, and ascended into the heavens, and sat down on the

right hand of His Father, and cometh again with glory and

power to judge quick and dead, and remaineth for ever:

"And in the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, the Spirit of

Truth, which also God promised by his Prophet to pOIU'

out upon His Servants, and the Lord prmnised to send to

Jris disciples: which also lIe sent, as the Acts of the

Apostles witness.

"But if anyone teaches, or holds in his mind, aught

beside this faith, be he anathmna; or holds with

Iarcellup,

of Ancyra, or Sabellius, or Paul of Samosata, be he anathema,

both himself and those who communicate with hinl."

30. Ninety Bishops met at the Dedication under the

Consulate of Marcellinus and Probinus, in the 14th of the

Indiction,7 Constantius the nlost irreligious being present.

Ilaving thus conducted Inatters at Antioch at the Dedi-

cation, thinking that their composition was deficient still,


7 rrhe commencement and the

origin of this mode of dating are

unknown. It seems to have been

introd uced between A. D. 313 and

315. The Indiction was a cycle


of 15 years, and began with the

month of September. St. Atha-

nasius is the fir:;t ecclesiastical

author who adopts it.


n2


100


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE

CHAP. IV. and not altogether clear as to their own VIew of

the doctrine, again they dra w up afresh another

formulary, after a few months, professedly concerning th



faith, and despatch Narcissus, Maris, Theodorus, and l\:lark

into Gaul. 8 And they, as being sent from the Council,

deliver the following document to Constans Augustus 9 of

blessed memory, and to all who were there :-


Fourth Confession,! at Antioch.

"'Ve believe in One God, the :Father Alnlighty, Creator


8 This deputation had it in pur-

pose to gain the Emperor Con-

stans to the Eusebian pnrty. They

composed a new Confession with

this object. Theodore of Hera-

clea (who made commentaries on

Scripture and is said to have been

an elegant writer), Maris and Nar-

cissus, were all Eusebians; but

l\Iark was a Semi-arian. As yet

the Eusebian party were making

use of the Semi-arians, but their

professed Creed had already much

degenerated from Lucian's at the

Dedication.

9 Constans had lately become

master of two-thirds of the Em-

pire by the death of his elder

brother Constantine, who had

made war upon him and fallen in

an engagement. He was at this

time only 22 years of age. His

enemies represent his character

in no favourable light, but, for

whatever reason, he sided with

the Catholics; and S. Athanasius,

who had been honourably treated

by him in Gaul, speaks of him in

the language of grati tude. In his

Apology to Constantius, he says,

"thy brother of blessed memory

filled the churches with offerings,"

and he speaks of the "grace given

him through baptism,"

 7. Con-

stans was murdered by Magnen-


tius in A.D. 350, and one of the

calumnies against Athan. was

that he had sent letters to the

murderer.

I The 4th, 5th, and 6th Con.

fessions are the same, and with

these agrees the (Arian) Creed of

PhilippopoJis (A.D. 347, or 344

according to :Mansi). These ex-

tend over a period of nine years

A.D. 342--351 (01" 15 or 16 ac-

cording to Baronius and Mansi,

who place the 6th Confession. i. e.

the 1st Sirmian, at 357, 358

respectively), and form the sta-

tionary period of Arianism. The

two parties of which the heretical

body was composed were kept

together, not only by the court,

but by the rise of the Sabellian-

ism of Marcellus (A.D. 335) and

Photinus (about 342). This too

would increase their strength

n

the Church, and is the excuse,

which Hilary himself urges, t.')r

their frequent Councils. Still they

do not seem to be able to escape

from the argument of Athana-

sius, that, whereas new Councils

are for new heresies, if only one

new heresy had riSf11, only one

new Council was nece

sary. If

these four Confessions say the same

thing, three of them must be super-

fluous, vid. infr. n. 37, p. 122.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 101


and J\tIaker of an things; frolll whom all fatherhood ED. BEN.


 25.

in heaven and on earth is nanled.

"And in His Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,

who before all ages was begotten frOlll the Father, God

from God, Light from Light, through whom all things

were made in the heavens and on the earth, visible and

invisible, being Word, and Wisdom, and Power, and Life,

9.nd True Light; who in the last days was made man for

us, and was born of the Holy Virgin; who was crucified,

and dead, and buried, and who rose again from the dead

the third day, and was taken up into heaven, and sat down

on the right hand of the Father; and is coming at the

end of the world, to judge quick and dead, and to render

to everyone according to his works; whose T\:ingdonl

endures indissolubly into infinite ages; for He shall be

jeated on the right hand of the Father, not only in this

world but. in that which is to come.

.,

"And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the Paraclete; whom,

having promised to the A posUes, He sent forth after His

ascension into heaven, to teach them and to remind them of

all things; through whom also shall be sanctified the souls

of those who sincerely believe in Him.

"But those who say, that the Son was from nothing, or

from other subsistence and not from God, and, there was

time when lIe was not, the Catholic Church regards as

aliens." 2


However, in spite of the identity

of their Creed, the difference in

their Anathemas is very great,

as we shall see.

2 S. Hilary, vid. Theo!. Tracts,

p. 81, by implication calls this the

Nicene Anathema; and so it is in

the respects in which he speaks

of it; but it omits many of the

Nicene clauses, and with them the

condemnation of many of the

Arian articles. The especial point


which it evades is our Lord's

eternal existence, substituting fOJ

"once He was not," "there was

time when He was not," and

leaving out "before His gene-

ration He was not," "created,"

"alterable," and "mutable." It

seems to have been considered

sufficient for Gaul, as worded here;

for Italy, as in the 5th Confession

or Macrostich; and for Africa, as

in the Creed of Philippopolis.


.


102


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


31. As if dissati

fied with this, they hold their

mecting again aftcr three years, and dispatch Eu-

doxius, l\Iartyrius, and Macedonius of Cilicia, and some others

with them, to the parts of Italy, to carry with them a faith

written at great length, with nUlnerous additions over and

above those which had gone before. They went abroad with

these, as if they had discovered something new.


CHAP. IV.


Fifth Confession or lrfacrostich.

" 'Ve believe in one God the Father Almighty, the

Creator and Maker of all things, from whom all fathcr-

hood in heaven and on earth is named.

"And in His Only-begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ,

who before all ages was begotten from the Father, God

from God, Light from Light, by whom all things wel

e

Inade, in heaven and on the earth, visible and invisible,

being Word, and Wisdom, and Power, and Life, and True

Light, who in the last days was made man for us, and was

borll of the 110]y Virgin, crucified and dead and buried,

and who rose again from the dead the third day, and was

taken up into heaven, and sat down on the right hand of

the Father, and is coming at the end of the world to judge

quick and dead, and to render to everyone according to

his works, whose Kingdom endures unceasingly unto in-

finite ages; for He sitteth on the right hand of the Father

not only in this age, but also in that which is to conlee

"And we believe in the Holy Ghost, that is, the Para-

clete, whom, having promised to the Apostles, He sent

forth after the ascension into heaven, to tcach them and to

remind theln of all things: through whOln also shall be

sanctified the souls of those who sincerely believe in Ifim.

"But those who say, (1) that the Son was frmn nothing,

or frOl11 other subsistence and not from God; (2) and that

there was a time or age when He was not, the Catholic


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 103

and Holy Church regards as aliens. Likewise those ED. BEN.


 26.

who say, (3) that there are three Gods; (4) or that

Christ is not God; (5) or that before the ages lIe was neither

Christ nor Son of God; (6) or that Father and Son, or Holy

Ghost, are the same; (7) or that the Son is Ingenerate;

(8) or that the Father generated the Son, not by choice

or will; the Holy and Catholic Church anathematises.

"(1.) For it is not safe to say either that the Son is

from nothing, (since this is nowhere spoken of Him in

divinely inspired Scripture,) or again of any other subsist-

ence before existing beside the Father, but from God alone

do we define Him genuinely to be generated. For the

divine Word teaches that the Ingenerate and Unoriginate,

the Father of Christ, is One. 3

"(2.) Nor may we, adopting the hazardous position,


 There was once when He was not,' from unscriptural

sources, imagine any interval of time prior to IIim, but

only that God generated IIim apart from time; for

through Him both times and ages came into being. Yet

we must not consider the Son to be co-unoriginate and

co-in generate with the Father; for no one can be properly

called father or son of one who is co-unoriginate and

co-ingenerate with him. 4 But we acknowledge that the

Father, who alone is Unoriginate and Ingenerate, hath

generated inconceivably and incomprehensibly; and that

the Son hath been generated before ages, and in no WIse


S It is observable that here and

in the next paragraph the only

reasons they give against using

the only two Arian formulas which

they condemn is that they are not

found in

cripture, which leaves

the question of their truth un-

touched. Here, in their explana-

tion of the È

 OVIe ÓVTWV, or from

nothing, they do but deny it with

Eusebius's evasion; that nothing

can be from nothing, and every


thing must he from God. Vid.

Append. Eusebius.

4 They argue, after the usual

Arian manner, that the term

" Son" essentially implies begin-

ning, and excludes the title "co-

unoriginate ; " whereas the Catho-

lics contended (supr. p. 85, note ß),

that the word Father implied

a continuity of nature, that is,

a co-eternal existence with the

Father.


104


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. is ingenerate IIimself like the Father, but had as

His origin the Father who generated H Í1n; for the

Head of Christ is God.

" (3.) Nor again, in confessing three fj realities and three

Persons of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost

according to the Scriptures, do we therefore make Gods

three; since we acknowledge the Self-cOInplete and In-

generate and Unoriginate and Invisible God to be one

only, the God and Father of the Only-begotten, which

Father alone hath being from Himself, and alone vouch-

safes this to all others bountifully.

"(4.) Nor again in saying that the Father of our Lord

Jesus Christ is one only God, the only lngenerate; do we

therefore deny that Christ also is God before ages: as the

disciples of Paul of Samosata, who say that after the incar-

nation He was by advance 6 made God, from being by

nature a mere man. For we acknowledge, that though lIe

be subordinate to His Father and God, yet, being before

ages begotten of God, He is God according tó nature

perfect and true, and not first man and then God, but first

God and then becoming man for us, yet never having

ceased to be God. 7

"(5.) We abhor besides and anathematise those who

make a pretence of saying that He is but the mere 1V ord

of God and non-existent, having His being in another,-

now as if pronounced, as SOIne speak, now as mental,8-hold-


5 1rpåyp.aTa lCaì 1rpóuw7ra.

ß llC 7rpOIC07rijÇ, supr. p. 25, note I.

7 These strong words OEÒV lCaTà

ØVULV TÉÀELOV /Cui åÀ'1}Oij are of a

different character from any which

have occurred in the Arian Con-

fessions. They can only be ex-

plained away by considering them

used in contrast to the Samosa-

tene doctrine; Paul saying that

that dignity which the Arians

ascribed to our Lord before His


birth in the flesh, was bestowed

on Him after it. Thus" perfect

according to nature" and "true,"

will not be directly connected

with "God" so much as opposed

to, "by advance," by "adoption,"

&c. And it may be eXplained that

the gift of grace is a new and

divine nature.

8 Vid. IvòLáOEToç, 7rporþopttcÓt;,

Append:


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 105


ing that II e was not CJlrist or Son of God or l\Iedia- EI

.

6

N.

tor or lInage of God Lef ore ages; but that lIe first

becanlc Christ and Son of God when lIe took our flesh from

the Virgin, not four hundred years since. For they will have

it that then Christ began His l{illgdom, and that it will have

an end after the consummation of all and the judgment. 9

Such are the disciples of Marcellus and Scotinus 1 of Gala-

tian Ancyra, who, equally with Jews, negative Christ's

existence before ages, and His Godhead, and unending

ICingdom, upon pretence of supporting the divine l\ionarchy.

We, on the contrary, regard lIim not as simply God's

pronounced or Inental word, but as Living God and Word,

existing in Himself, and Son of God and Christ; being

and abiding with His Father before ages, and that not in

foreknowledge only, and ministering to Him for the

entire framing whether of things visible or invisible. For

He it is to whom the Father said, Let us make 'fIUln ,in

Our image, after Our likeness, who also was seen in 1 [is

own Person 2 by the patriarchs, gave the law, spoke by the


9 This passage seems taken from

Eusebius, and partly from Mar-

cellus's own words, vid. Append.

S. Cyril speaks of his doctrine in

like terms. . Catech. xv. 27.

1 i.e. Photinus of Sirmium, the

pupil of Marcellus, is meant, who

published his heresy about 343.

A similar play upon words is

found in the case of other names;

though Lucifer seems to think

that his name was really Scotinus

and that his friends changed it,

de non parco pp. 203, 2:W, 226.

'fhus Noetus is called ÙVÓr]TOÇ;.

Epiph. Hær. 57, 2 fin. and 8, and

E udoxi us, áõó

toç;. Lucifer. pro

Athan. i. p. 65. Moriend. p. 258.

Eunomians among the Latins (ùy

a confusion with Anomæan),

Ü.VOp,ut, or sÏ1UJ lege, Coù. Can.


Ixi. 1, ap. Leon. Op. t. 3, p. 443.

Vigilantius dormitantius, Jerom.

contI'. Vigil. init. Aerius ùÉptoV

7rvEvfla tl1XEV. Epiph. Hær. 75,

6 fin. Of Arius, NApeç;, åPUE, vid.

Append. ArÙts. Gregory, Ò VVl1-

Tá

wv, Anast. Hod. 10, p. 186.

2 aVT07rpoCJW7rWÇ; and so Cyril.

Hier. Catech. xv. 14 and 17. He

means, "not in personation; " and

Philo too contrasting divine ap-

pearances with those of Angels.;

Leg. Alleg. iii. 62. On the other

hand, Theophilus on the text, "The

voice of the Lord God walking in

the garden," speaks of the Wore!,

"assuming the person, '1T'póaw7rov,

of the :Father," and '" in the person

of God," ad Autol. ii. 22, the word

hardly having then its theologi-

cal sense.


106


EPISTJ.JE OF ATHAN Asrus, ON THE


CUAP. IV. Prophets, and at last, becallle Ulan, and manifested

-- His own Father to all men, and reigns to never-

ending ages. For Christ has taken no recent dignity, but

we have believed Him to be perfect from the first, and like

in all things to the Father. 3

"(6.) And those who say that the Father and Son and

Holy Ghost are the same, and impiously understand the

Three Names of one and the same Reality and Person, we

justly forbid the Church, because they suppose the illimit-

able and impassible Father to be limitable withal and

passible through His becoming man: for such are they

whom the Latins call the Patropassians, and we Sabellians.

For we acknowledge that the Father who sent, remained

in His own state of unchangeable Godhead, and that

Christ who was sent fulfilled the economy of the Incar-

nation.

" (7.) And at the same time those who irreverently say

that the Son was generated, not by choice or will, thus

encompassing God with a necessity which excludes choice

and purpose, so that He begat the Son unwillingly, we

account as most impious and alien to the Church; ill that

they have dared to define such things concerning God,

against the commonly received notions concerning Him,

nay, beside the pm'port of divinely inspired Scripture.

For we, knowing that God is absolute and sovereign over

llimself, have a religious understanding that He gene-

rated the Son voluntarily and freely; yet, as we ha ve a

reverent belief in the Son's words concerning Himself,

Tlte Lord hath created Jle a beginning of His ways for His

works, we do not understand THm to be generated, like

the creatures or works which through -Him came into


3 ÜpOtDV lCaTå 7i"áVTa. Here again

we have a strong Semi-arian or

almost Catholic formula introduced

by-the-ùye, marking the prescence


of what may be called the new

Semi-arian school. Of course it

admitted of evasion. but in its

fulness it included "f'uLstance."


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA. 107


bein g . For it is im p ious and alien to the ecclesias- ED. BEN.


 26.

tical faith to compare the Creator with handiworks

created by Him, and to think that He has the same manner

of birth with the rest. For divine Scripture teaches us

reaUy and truly that the Only-begotten Son was generated

sole and solely.4

"(8.) Yét,5 in saying that the Son is in IIimself, and both

lives and exists, like the Father, we do not on that !1ccount

separate Him from the Father, iInagining place and interval

between their union in the way qf bodies: For we believe

that they are united with each other without any inter-

Inediate or interval, and that they exist inseparably; all

the Father embosoming the Son, and all the Son adhering

and clinging to the Father, and alone resting on the Father's

breast continually. Believing then in the all-perfect Triad)

the most IIoly, that is, in the Father, and in the Son, and

in the Holy Ghost, and calling the Father God, and the

Son God, yet we confess in them, not two Gods, but one

dignity of Godhead, aud one exact harrl10ny of dominion,

the only Father being Head over the whole universe

wholly and oyer the Sou IIimself; and the Son subordi



nated to the Father, but, exceptiug Him, ruling over all

things after IIim which through Himself have come to be,


4 The Confession does not here

comment on the clause against

our Lord's being Ingenerate, hav-

ing already noticed it under para-

graph (2). It will be remarked

that it still insists upon the un-

scripturalness of the Catholic posi-

tions. The main subject of this

paragraph, the (}f.Ài]C1H yevvf}(}Év,

which forms great part of the

Arian question and controversy,

is reserved for Orat. iii.

 59, &c.

(infr. pp. 191 -204), in which Atha-

nasi us formally treats of it. He

treats of the text Provo viii. 22, in

Orat. i. and. ii.(infr. pp. 220-313).


The doctrine of the p.ovoyelJft;

has already partially come before

us, supr. pp. 20-22. Móvw

, not

as the creatures.

ð This last paragraph is the

most curious of the instances of

the presence of this new and

nameless influence, which seems

at this time to have been spring-

ing up among the Eusebians, and

showed itself by acts before it has

a place in history. It is in its

very form an interpolation, and

adding the 7rf.ptXWP7JC1t

, was vir-

tually an admission of the ùp.oov-

C1LOV.


108


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE

CHAP. IV. and bestowing the grace of the Holy Ghost bounti-

- - fully to the holy at the Father's wil1. For that

such is the account of the Divine Monarchy relatively

towards Christ, the sacred oracles have delivered to us.

"Thus Il1uch, in addition to the faith before published

in epitome, we have been compelled to draw forth at

greater length, not in any officious display, but to clear

away all hostile suspicion concerning our opinions, among

those who are ignorant of what we rean y hold: and that

all in the West lnay know, both the audacity of the slan-

ders of the heterodox, and as to the Orientals, their

Christian and ecclesiastical spirit, to which the divinely

inspired Scriptures readily bear witness, when readers are

not perverse."

32. However, they did not stand even to this; for again

at Sirmium 6 they met together 7 against Photinus,8 and


(J Sirmi urn was a city of lower

Pannonia, not far from the

Danube, and it was the great

Lulwark of the Illyrian provinces

of the Empire. There Vetranio

assumed the purple; and there

Constantius was born. The fron-

tier war caused it to be from time

to time the Imperial residence.

We hAar of Constantius at Sir-

mium in the summer of 357.

Ammian. xvi. 10. He also passed

there the ensuing winter, ibid.

xvii. 12. In October, 358, after

the Sarmatian war, he entered

Sirmium in triumph, and passed

the winter there, xvii. 13 fin., and

with a short absence in the spring,

remained there till the end of

May, 359.

7 For the chronology, &c., of the

various Confessions of Sirmium,

Petavius must be consulted, who

has thrown more light on the


subject than anyone else. In

351, the Semi-arian party was

still stronger than in 345. The

leading person in this Council

was Basil of Ancyra, who is gene-

rally considered their head. Basil

held a disputation with Photinus.

Silvanus too of Tarsus now ap-

pears for the first time; while,

according to Socrates, Mark of

Arethusa, who was more con-

nected with the Eusebians than

any other of his party, drew up

the Anathemas; the Confession

used was the same as that sent to

Constans, that of the Council of

Philippopolis, and the Macrostich.

8 There had been no important

Oriental Council held since that

of the Dedication ten years before,

till this of Sirmium (unless indeed

that of Philippopolis requires to

be mentioned, which was a se-

cession from the Council of


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM A

D SELEUCIA. 109


there composed a Faith .again, not drawn out into


6


r..

such length, nor so diffuse; but, subtracting the --

greater part and adding something else, as if they listened

to the suggestions of others, they wrote as follows ;-


Sixth Confession at SiTlnium, (first 8iTmian).

" 'Ve believe in One God, the Father Almighty, the

Creator and

raker of all things, from whonz the whole father-

hood in heaven and earth is næmed.

"And in His Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus the

Christ, who before all the ages was begotten from the

Father, God from God, Light from Light, by whom all

things were made, in heaven and on the earth, visible and

invisible, being "\V ord and 'Visdom, and True Light and

Life, who in the last days was made man for us, and was


Sardica): S. Hilary treats its creed

as a Catho1ic composition, de Syn.

39-63. Philastrius and Vigi-

lius call the Council a meeting

of " holy bishops" and a "Catho-

lic Council," de Hær. 65, and in

Eutych. v. init. What gave a

character and weight to this

Council; which belonged to no

other Eusebian meeting, was, that

it met to set right a real evil, and

was not a mere pretence with

Arian objects. Photinus had now

been eight or nine years in the

open ayowal of his heresy, yet in

possession of his see. As to the

Bishops present at this Sirmian

Council, we have them described

in Sulpitius: "Part of the Bishops

followed Arius, and welcomed the

desired condemnation of Athana-

sius; part, brought together by

fear and faction, yield ell to a party

slJirit; a few, to whom faith was

dear and tl'uth precious, rejected

the unj ust judgment." Rist. ii.

52: be instances Paulinus of


Treves, whose resistance, however,

took place at l\'Iilan some years

later. Sozomen gives us a similar

account, speaking of a date a few

years before the Sirmian Council.

" The East, ,. he says, "in spite of

its being in faction after the

Antiochene Council" of the De-

dication, "and thenceforth openly

dissenting from the Nicene faith,

in reality, I think, concurred in

the sentiment of the majority, and

with them confessed the Son to

be of the Father's substance; but,

from contentiousness certain of

them fought against the term

, Consubstantial;' some, as 1

conjecture, having originally ob-

jected to the word-others from

habit-others, aware that the

resistance was unsuitable, leaned

to this side or that to gratify

parties; and many thought it

weak to waste themselves in sllch

strife of words, and peaceaùly held

to the Nicene decision..' Hist.

iii. 13.


110


EPISTJ.lE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. born of the Holy Virgin, and crucified and dead

and buried, and rose again from the dead the

third day, and was taken up into heaven, and sat down on

the right hand of the Father, and is coming at the end of

the world, to judge quick and dead, and to render to eyery

one according to his works; whose Kingdom ceases not,

but endures unto the infinite ages; for He shall sit on the

right hand of the Father, not only in this age, but also in

that which is to come.

"And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the Paraclete; whom

having promised to the Apostles to send forth after His

ascension into heaven, to teach and to remind them of all

things, He did send; through whom also are sanctified the

souls of those who sincerely believe in Him.

"(1.) But those who say that the Son was from nothing,

or from other subsistence and not from God, and that there

was time or age when He was not, the Holy and Cf.tholic

Church regards as aliens.

"(2.) Again we say, 'Vhosoever says that the Father

and the Son are two Gods, be he anathema. 9

"(3.) And whosoever, saying that Christ is Goel,

before ages Son of God, does not confess that He sub-

served the Father for the framing of the universe, be he

anathema.!


9 This Anathema, which has

occurred in substance in the

l\Iacrostich, and again infr.

Anath. 18 and 23, is a disclai mer

on the part of the Eusebian party

of the charge witþ reason brought

against them by the Catho-

lics, of their in fact holding a

supreme and a secondary God.

In the Macrostich it is dis-

claimed upon a Rimple Arian

habis. '1'he Semi-arians were

more ol'('n to this imputation;

Eusebius distinctly calling oux


Lord a second and another God,

vid. Append. EUðebius. It wiU

be observed that this Anathema

contradicts the one which imme-

diately follows, and the 11th, in

which Christ is called God;

except on the one hand the

Father and Son are one God,

which was the Catholic doctrine,

or, on the other, the Son is God

in name only, which was the

pure Aria.n or AnomæaD.

I Vid. lYinistration.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARDtINU1\1 AND SELBUCIA. 111


" (4.) Whosoever presumes to say that the In- ED. BEN.


 27.

generate, or a part of Him, was born of Mary, be

he anathema.

" (5.) 1Vhosoever says that according to foreknowledge

the Son is before !Iary, and not that, generated from the

Father before ages, He was with God, and that through

IEm all things were brought into being, be he anathema.

"(6.) Whosoever shall pretend that the substance of God

was enlarged or contracted, be he anathema.

"(7.) vVhosoever shall say that the substance of God

being enlarged made the Son, or shall name the enlarge-

ment of His substance the Son, be he anathema.

" (8.) Whosoever calls the Son of God the mental or

pronounced Word, 2 be he anathema.

"(9.) Whosoever says that the Son from Mary is man

only, be he anathema.

"(10.) Whosoever, speaking of Him who is from ThIary God

arId man, thereby means God the Ingenerate, 3 be he anathema.

"(11.) Whosoever shall understand judaioolly as a

denial of the Only-begotten, before ages God, the words 1

am the First and I am the Last and besides .Jfe there is no

God, which are said for the denial of idols and of gods

that are not, be he anathema. 4

"(12.) 1Vhosoever, because it is said The TVord was made

flesh, shall consider that the Word was changed into flesh,

or shall say that He underwent an alteration in taking

flesh, be he anathema. 4


2 Vid. ÈvõLáef.TO

.

3 Vid. àyiVV1]TOV.

4 The 12th and 13th Anathemas

are intended to meet the charge

which is referred to infr. p. 116,

note 2, vid. Append. Sabellius,

that Arianism involved the

doctrine that our Lord's divine

nature suffered. Athanfl.sius

brings this accusation against

them distinctly in his Vlork


against Apollinaris, "Idle then

is the fiction of the Arians,

who suppose that the Saviour

took flesh only, impiously

imputing the notion of sufftring

to the impassible godhead."

Contr. Appollin. i. 15, vid. also

Ambros. de _Fide, iii. 31. Salig

ill his de Eutychianismo ante

Eutychen takes notil'ü of uune of

the passages in the text.


112


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


"(13.) "\Vhosoever, as hearing the Only-begotten

Son of God was crucified, shall say that His God-

head underwent corruption, or passion, or alteration, or

diminution, or destruction, be he anathema.

"(14.) Whosoever shall say that Let Us make man was

not said by the Father to the Son, but by God to Himself,

be he anathema. 5

"(15.) Whosoever shall say that Abraham saw, not the

Son, but the Ingenerate God or part of Him, be he

anathema.

"(16.) Whosoever shall say that with Jacob, not the Son

as man, but the Ingenerate God or part of Him, did

wrestle, be he anathema.

'

(17.) Whosoever shall explain, The Lord rained fire from

the Lord, not of the Father and the Son, and says that He

rained from Himself, be he anathema. For the Son who

is Lord rained from the Father who is J Jord.

"(18.) Whosoever hearing that the Father is Lord and

the Son Lord and the Father and Son Lord, for there is

Lord frOlll Lord, says there are two Gods, be he anathema.

For we do not rank the Son with the Father, but we consider

Him as subordinate to the Pather; for He did not descend

upon Sodom without the Father's will, nor did He rain

from IIimself, but frOlll the Lord, that is, the Father

authorising it. Nor is He of HiInself set down on the

right hand, but He_ hears the Father saying, Sit Thou on

.illy right hand.

"(19.) Whosoever says that the Father and the Son and

the Holy Ghost are one Person, be he anathema.


CHAP. IV.


ð This anathema is directed

against the Sabellians, especially

Marcellus, who held the very

opinion which it denounces, that

the Almighty God spake with

Himself. Euseb. Eccles. Theo!.

ii. 15. The Jews said that Al-


mighty God spokE\ to the Angels.

Basil. Hexaem. fin. Others that

the plural was used as authorities

on earth use it in way of dignity.

Theod. in Gen. 19. Vid. App.

Ministration.


COUNCII.JS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND 8ELEUCIA. 113


"(:20.) Who

oever, speaking of the Holy Ghost ED. BI!.N.


 27.

a

 Paraclete, shall speak of the Ingenerate God,

be he anathema.

"(21.) Whosoever shall deny, what the Lord taught us,

that the Paraclete is other than the Son, for He hath said,

And another Paraclele

hall the Father send to y()U whom ]

'Will ask, be he anathema.

"(22.) Whosoever shall say that the 110ly Ghost is part

of the Father or of the Son, be he anathema.

"(23.) 1Vhosoever shall say that the Father and the Son

aud the Holy Ghost be three Gods, be he anåthema.

"(24.) 1Vhosoever shall say that the Son of God at the

will F)f God came into being, as one of the things made, be he

anatnema.

"(25.) Whosoever shall say that the Son was generated,

the }-'ather not willing 6 it, be he anathema. For not by

cOll1pulsion, forced by physical necessity, did the Father,

as unwilling, generate the Son, but He both willed,

and, after generating Him from Jlimself apart from time

and any affection, manifested Him.

"(26.) Whosoever shall say that the Son is ingenerate

and unoriginate, as if speaking of two unoriginate and

two ingellerate, and making two Gods, be he anathema.

For the Son is the I-Iead, that is, the origin of all: and

God is the Head, that is, the origin of Christ; for thus to

one unoriginate origin of the universe do we religiously

refer all things through the Son.

"(27.) And in accurate delineation of the idea of Chris-

tianity we say this again: Whosoever shall not confess

that Christ is God, Son of God, and before ages, and

that He subserved the Father in the framing of the

Universe, but shall say that from the time that He was

born of M

ry, from thence He was called Christ and

Sou, and took an origin of being God, be he anathema."

(J Vid. infr. Disc. ch. 9, p. 193, &c.


I


"


114


CHAP. IV.


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIU

 ON THE


33. Casting aside the whole of this, as if they

had discovered something better, they propuund

another Faith, and wI'ite at Sirmium in I.4atill what is here

translated into Greek. 1


Seventh Confession, at Sirmium, (second Sirmian).

"'Vhereas it has seemed good that there should be

sonle consideration concerning faith, all points have been

carefully investigated and discussed at Sirmium in the

presence of Valens, and Ursacius, and Gern1Ìnius, and

the rest.

"It is held for certain that there is one God, the

Father Almighty, as also is preached ill all the world.

"And His one Only-begotten Son our Lord Jesus

Christ, generated from Him before the ages; and that we

may not speak of two Gods, since the Lord HÍ1nself has

said, I go to },f y Father and YOU'l' Father, and i1I y God and

your God. On this account He is God of all, as also the

Apostle has taught: Is He God of the Jews only, is He

not also of the Gentiles? yes of the Gentiles also:

ince there

is one God wlw shall justify the circumcision from faith, and

the uncircumcision th'l'ough faith; and everything else

agrees and has no ambiguity.

"But since many persons are disturbed by questions

concerning what is called in. Latin ' Substantia,' but

in Greek 'Usia,' that is, to make it understood more

exactly, as to .' Consubstantial,' or what is called, 'Like


1 The Creed which follows was

not put forth by a Council, but

at 8 meeting of a few Arian

Bishops, and the author was

Potamius, Bishop of Lisbon. It

is important as marking the open

separation of the Eusebians or

Acacians from the Semi-arians,

and their adoption of Anomæan

tenets. Hilary, who defends the

Eusebian Councils up to this


date, calls this a U blasphemia,"

and upon it followed the Semi-

arian Council by wa.y of protest

at Ancyra. St. Hilary tells us

that it was the Confession which

Hosius was imprisoned and tor-

tured into signing. There is no

proof that it is the one which Pope

Liberius signed; but according

to Athanasius, he signed an Arian

Confession about this time.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIl\HNU)f AND SEIJEUCIA. 11 !)


in substance,' 8 there ought to be no lTIPntion of BD i 2


N.

any of these at all, nor exposition of thmn in the --

Church, for this reason and for this consideration, that in

divine Scripture nothing is written about theIn, and that they

are above men's knowledge and above men's understand-

ing; and because no one can declare the Son's generation,

as it is written, fVho shall declare His generation? for it is

plain that the Father only knows how He generated the

Son, and again the Son how He has been generated by

the Father. And to none can it be a question that the

Father is greater: for no one can doubt that the Father

is greater in honour and dignity and Godhead, and in

the very name of the Father, the Son HiInself testifying,

The Father that sent file is greater than I. And no one is

ignorant that it is a Catholic doctrine, that there are two

Persons 9 of Father and Son, and that the Father is greater,

and the Son subordinated to the Father together with all

things which the Father subordinated to the Son, and that

the Father has no origin, and is invisible, and imInortal,

and impassible; but that the Son has been generated from

the Father, God from God, Light from Light, and that

His generation, as aforesaid, no one knows, but the Father

only. And that the Son HÎInself and our Lord and Goù,

took fle

h, that is, a body, that is, from Mary the Virgill,

as the Angel heralded beforehand; and as all the Scrip-

tures teach, and especially the Apostle hinlself, the doctor

of the Gentiles, Christ took manhood! of Mary the Virgin,

through which He suffered. And the whole faith is

summed up, and secured in this, that a Triad should ever

be preserved, as we read in the Gospel, Go ye and baptise-

all the nations in the Name of the Faiher and of the Son and of

the Holy Ghost. And entire and perfect is the nUInber of

the Triad; but the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, sent forth


8 OfLoovtrLOV and ÓP.OLOvtrLOV.

9 7rpótrW7ra.


I ãv()pw7rov.


12


116


EPISTLE OF ATHANAS IUS, ON THE


CHAP IV. through the Son came according to the prOInise,

that He might teach and sanctify the Apostles and

all believers." 2

34. After drawing up this, and then becoming dissatis-

fied, they composed the faith which to their shame they

paraded with " thë Consulate." And, as is their wont,

condemning this also, they caused Martinian the notary to

seize it frOIn the parties who had the copies of it. sAnd

having got the Emperor Constant.ius to put forth an edict

against it, (hey form another dogma afresh, and with the

addition of certain expressions, after their way, they

write thus in Isauria.

Ninth 00 nfession, at SeleWJia (vid. supr. p. 71).

'Ve refuse not to publish the authentic Fa.ith published


2 It will be observed that this

Confession; 1. by denying "two

Gods," and declaring that the One

God is the God of Christ, implies

that our Lord is not God. 2. It

says that the word "substance,"

and its compounds, ought not to

be used, as being unscriptural,

mysterious, and leading to dis-

turbance; 3. it holds that the

Father is greater than the Son

"in honour, dignity, and God-

head;" 4. that the Son is sub-

ordinate to the Father, together

with all other things; 5. that it is

the Father's characteristic to be in-

visible and impassible. On the

last head, vid. supr. p. 111, note 4,

and Sabelliu,s. They also say that

our Lord, hominem suscepisse per

quem compass'zts est, a word which

Phæbadius condemns in his re-

marks in this Confession. It may

be observed a]so that Phæbadius

at the same time uses the word

"spiritus" in the sense of Hilary

and the Ante-Nicene Fathers, in

a connection which at once ex-

plains the oLscure words of the

BUJJposititious Sardican Confession,


and turns them into another evi-

dence of this additional heresy

involved in Arianism. " Impassi-

bilis Deus," says Phæbadius,

,; quia Deus Spirit,its . . . nOll

ergo passibilis Dei Spiritus, Heet

in homine suo passus. U That is,

the nature of a soul is passibilis,

and therefore the Divine Word,

which is impassibilis, cannot take

the place of a soul in the Person

of Emmanuel. N ow the Sardican

Confession is thought ignorant, as

well as unauthoritative (e.g. by

Natalis. Alex. Sæc. 4, Diss. 29),

because it imputes to Valens and

Ursacius the following belief,

which he supposes to be Patripas-

sianism, but which exactly answers

to this aspect and representation

of Arianism: 3rt Ò

óyo!: lCai ört rò

7rVEv}la lCaì lGTavpw()q lCaì f.Glþáyq

lCai å-rrÉØavEv lCaì åVÉGTq. Theod.

Hist. ii. 6, p. 844.

S Some critics suppose that the

transaction really belongs to the

second instead of the third Con-

fession of Sirmium. Socrates con..

nects it with the second. IIi st. ii.

30. Vid. supr., pp. 70, 71.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARUUNUM AND SELEUCIA. 117


at the Dedication at Antioch; 4 though certainly ED



9

N.

our Fathers at the time met together for a par- ---

ticular subject under investigation. But since One-in-sub-

stance, and Like-in-substance, have troubled many persons

in times past and up to this day, and since moreover some

are said recently to have devised the Son's UnJikeness to

the Father, on their account we reject "One-in-substance"

and ",Like-in-substance," as alien to the Scriptures, but

" Unlike" we anathematise, and account all who profess

it as aliens from the Church. But the "Likeness" of the

Son to the Father, we distinctly confess according to the

Apostle, who says of the Son, Who is the Image of the

Invisible God.

And we confess and beJieve in one God, the Father

Almighty, the maker of heaven and earth, of all things

visible and invisible.

And we believe also in our liord .J esus Christ, His Son,

generated from Him impassibly before all the ages, God the

Word, God from God, Only-begotten, Light, Life, Truth,

Wisdom, Power, through whom all things were made, in

the heavens and on the earth, whether visible or invisible.

He, as we believe, at the end of the world, for the abo-

lition of sin, took flesh of the Holy Virgin, and was made

man, and suffered for our sins, and rose again, and was

taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of

the Father, and is coming again in glory, to judge quick

and dead.


4 The Semi-arian majority in

the Council had just before been

confirming the Creed of the Dedi-

fation; hence this beginning,

vid. supr. p. 77, note 7. 1'hey

had first of all offered to the

Council the third I:-iirmian. or

"Conf('

sion with a Date," supr.

p. 71, which their coadjutors offered

at Ariminum, Soz. iv.


, and at


the end of the present they pro-

fess that the two are substantially

the same. They seem to mean

that they are both Homæan or

Scriptural Creeds; they differ in

that the latter, as if to propitiate

the Semi-arian majority, adds au

anathema upon Anomæan as weB

as on the Homoiision and Homæu.

Slon.


.


118


OHAP. IV.


EPI

TLE OF ATHANASIU8, ON THE


'Ve believe also in the IIoJy Ghost, which our

Saviour and Lord named Paraclete, having pro-

mised to send Him to the disciples after IIis own departure,

as He did send; through whom He sanctÏfieth all in the

Church who believe and are baptised in the name of

Father and Son and Holy Ghost.

But those who preach aught besides this Faith the

Catholic Church regards as aliens. And that this faith

is the equivalent of that which was published lately at

Sirminm, under sanction of his religiousness the Emperor,

is plain to all who read it.

35. Having written thus in Isauria, they went up to

Constantinople,6 and there, as if dissatisfied, they changed

it, as is their wont, and, with certain additions against


II These two sections seem to

have been inserted by Athan.

after his letter was finished, and

contain later occurrences in the

history of Ariminum than were

contemplated when he wrote

supr. ch. ii. 15, 16, vid. note 7,

p. 77. In this place Athan. dis-

tinctly says, that the following

Confession, which the Acacians

from Seleucia adopted at Con-

stantinople, was transmitted to

Ariminum, and there forced upon

the assembled Fathers. This is

not inconsistent with what seems

to be the fact, that the Confession

was drawn up at a Council held

at Nice in Thrace near Adrianople

in Oct., 359, whither the deputies

from Ariminum had been sum-

moned by Constantius, vid. Hilar.

Fragm. viii. 5. There the depu-

ties signed it, and thence they

took it hack to Ariminum. In

the beginning of the folluwing

Jear 360 it was confirmed by a

Council at Constantino}Jle, after

tho terminatiun of that of Arimi-


num, and to this confirmation

Athanasi us refers. Socrates says,

Rist. ii. 37 fin., that they chose

Nice in order to deceive the igno-

rant with the notion that it was

Nicæa, and their creed the Nicene

fai th, and the place is actually

called Nicæa, in the Acts of Arimi-

num preserved by Hilary, p. 1346.

Such a measure, whether or not

adopted in matter of fact, might

easily have had success, consider-

ing the existing state of the West.

St. Hilary de Syn. 91, and ad

Const. ii. 7, had not heard the

Nicene Creed till he came into

Asia Minor, A.D. 356, and he says

of his Gallic and British brethren

"0 ble:-;sed ye in the Lord and

glorious, who hold the perfect and

apostolic faith in the profession

of your cOllscience, and up to this

time know not creeds in writing,"

de Syn. 63. It should Le added

that at this Council Ulphilas the

Apostle of the Goths, who had

hitherto followed tho Council of

Nicæa, conformed, and thus


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMTNUM AND SELEUCIA. ] 19


using even" Subsistence" of Father, Son, and Holy


.9


:

G host, they transmitted it to the Council at

Ariminnnl, and compelled even the Bishops in those parts

to subscribe it, and those who contradicted them they got

banished by Constantius. And it runs thus :-




Tenth Confession at Nice and Constantinople.

" 'Ve believe in One God the Father Almighty, from

whom are all things;

"And in the Only-begotten Son of God, begotten from

God before all ages, and before all origin, through whom

all things were made, visible and invisible, and begotten

as Only-begotten, only fronl the Father only,6 God from

God, like to the Father that bcgat Him according to the

Scriptures; whose generation no one knows, except the

Father alone who begat Him. He, as we acknowleùge,

the Only-begotten Son of God, the Father sending Him,

came hither from the heavens, as it is written, for the un-

doing of sin and death, and was born from the Holy

Ghost, of 1\iary the Virgin according to the flesh, as it is

written, and lived with His disciples, and having fulfilled

the whole economy according to the Father's will, was


became the means of spreading

through his countrymen the Creed

of Ariminum.

6 p.óvoç ilC p.óvov. Though this

is an Homæan or Acacian, not an

Anomæan Creed, this phrase may

be considered a symptom of

Anomæan influence; póvoç 7raplÌ,

or trrrò, p.óvov being one special

formula adopted by Eunomiu8,

explanatory of p.ovoYf.v"Ý]t;;, in ac-

cordance with the original Arian

theory, mentioned de Deer. n. 12,

supra, p. 20. that the

on was

the one in:strument of creation.

Eunornlus

aid that He alone was


created by the Father alone; all

other things being created by the

Father, not alone, but through

Him whom alone He had first

created, vid. Cyril. Thesaur. 25,

p. 239. St. Basil observes that

if this be a true sense of p.ovo-

Yf.V

t;;, then no man is sllch, e.g.

Isaac, as being born of two,

contr. Eunom. ii. 21. Acacius

has recourse to Gnosticism, and

illustrates the Arian sense by the

cuntrast of the 7rpoßoÀiJ of tho

.,lEons, which was ilC 7roÀÀwv, 11.1'.

Epiph. Hær. 72, 7, p. 83f).


.


120


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. crucified and dead and buried and descended to

the parts below the earth; at whom hell itself

shuddered: who also rose from the dead on the third day,

and remained with the disciples, and, forty days being ful-

filled, was taken up into the hea vens, and sitteth on the

right hand of the

ather, to come in the last day of the

resurrection in the Father's glory, that He may render to

every man according to his works.

"And in the Holy Ghost, whom the Only-begotten Son

of God Himself, Christ, our Lord and God, promised to

send to the race of man, as Paraclete, as it is written, the

Spirit of Truth, which He sent unto them when He had

ascended into the heavens.

"But the name of 'Substance,' which was set down by

the Fathers in sin1pJicity, and being unknown by the

people, caused offence, because the Scriptures contain it

not, it has seemed good to take away, and for the future to

make no mention of it at all; since the divine Scriptures

have made no mention of the Substance of Father and

Son. For neither ought Subsistence to be named con-

cerning Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But we say that

the Son is Like-the-Father, as the divine Scriptures say

and teach; and all the heresies, both those which have

been afore condemned already, and whatever are of

modern date, being contrary to this published statement,

be they anatheIna." 7


7 Here as before, instead of

speaking of Arianism. the Con-

fession anathematises all heresies

vid. supr. p. 98, note s. It will

be observed that for "Like in

all things." which was contained

in the Confession (third Sirmian)

first suLmitted to the Ariminian

Fathers, is substituted simply

" Like. " Moreover, they include

hypostasis or subsistence, though

R 8('ri pture term, in the list of


proscribed symbol

, vid. also ad

Afros. 4. The object of suppres-

sing iJ7rót1rat1u;, seems to have

been that, since the Creed, which

was written in Latin, was to go

to Ariminum, the 'Vest might be

forced to deny the Latin version

or equivalent of ÒP.OOVt1LOV, unius

substantiæ, or hypostasis, as well

as the Greek original. This cir-

cumstance might Le addf'cl to

those in the Translator's "Tracts


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUM AND SELEUCIA c 121


36. However, the y did not stand even to this; ED. BEN.


 30-31.

for con1Ïng down fronl Constantinople to Antioch,

they were dissatisfied that they had written at all that the Son

was "Like-the-Father, as the Scriptures say;" and putting

their ideas upon paper, they set about reverting to their

first doctrines, and said that the Son is altogether

Unlike-the-Father, and that the Son is in no manner

Like-the- Father, and so much did they change, as to

admit those who spoke the Arian doctrine nakedly, and

to make over to them the Churches, with licence to bring

forward the words of blasphemy with impunity.8 Because

then of the extreme shamelessness of their blasphemy

they were called Anomæans by all, having also the name

of Exucontian, 9 and the heretical Constalltius for the

patron of their impiety, who persisting up to the end in

impiety, and on the point of death, 1 thought good to be


Theol." pp. 78, &c., to show that in

the Nicene formulary substance

and subsistence are synonymous.

8 Acacius, Eudoxius, and the

rest, after ratifying at Constan-

tinople the Creed framed at Nice

and subscribed at Ariminum,

appear next at Antioch a year

and a half later, when they throw

off the mask, and avowing the

Anomæan Creed, U revert, " as

St. Athanasius says, "to their

first doctrines," i. e. those with

which Arius started. The Ano-

mæan doctrine, it may be ob-

served, is directly oppofoied rather

to the Homæusian than to the

Homoüsion, as indeed the very

symbols show; "unlike in sub-

stance," being the contrary to

"like in substance." It doubtless

frjghtened the Semi-arians, and

hastened their return to the

Catholic doctrine.

II From É

 vine ÓVTWV. "out of


nothing," one of the original

Arian positions concerning the

Son, supr. Enc. p. 4, note I, Theo-

doret says, that they were also

called Exacionitæ, from the

name of their place of meeting,

Hær. iv. 3, and Du Cange con-

firms it so far as to show that

there was a place or quarter of

Constantinople called Exocionium

or Exacionium.

I Nothing is more instructive

in the whole of this eventful

history than the complication of

hopefulness and deterioration in

the Oriental party, and the ap-

parent decline yet advance of the

truth. Principles, good and bad,

were developing on both sides

with energy. The fall of Hosius

and .Liberius, and the disastrous

event of Ariminum, are close

before the ruin of the Eusebian

power. At this critical moment

Constantius died, when the cau1SO


122


EPISTLE OJ' ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. IV. baptised; not however by religious men, but by

Eu.zoius, who for his Arianisln had been deposed,

not once, but often, both when he was a deacon, and when

he was in the see of Antioch.

37. The forementioned parties then had proceeded thus

far, when they were stopped and deposed. But well I

know, not even under these circumstances will they stop,

as many have already played the hypocrite,2 but they win

always be making parties against the truth, until 3 they

return to themselves and say, "Let us rise and go to our

fathers, and say unto them, We anathematise the Arian

heresy, and we acknowledge the Nicene Council;" for

against this is their quarrel. Who then, with ever so

little understanding, will bear them any longer? who on

witnessing in every Council some things taken away and

others added, does not comprehend the deep and festering

treachery of their hearts in regard of Christ? who on

seeing them stretching out to so great a length both their


of truth was only not in the

lowest state of degradation,

because a party was in authority

and vigour who could reduce it

to a lower still; the Latins com-

mitted to an Anti-Catholic Creed,

the Pope deluded, Hosius fallen

and dead; Athanasius wander-

ing in the deserts, Ariana in the

sees of Christendom, and their

doctrine growing in blasphemy,

and their profession of it in

boldness, every day. The Em-

peror had come to the throne

almost when a boy, and at this

time was but 44 years old.

In the ordinary course of thinQ."s

he might have reigned till,

humanly speaking, orthodoxy was

extinct. This passage shows

that Athanasius did not insert

those sections till two years after

the composition of the worl,


itself; for Constantius died A.D.

361.

2 Vid. Hypocrisy.

S He is here anticirating the

return into the Church of those

whom he thus censures. In this

sense, though with far more

severity in its language, the

writer of a Tract, imputed to

Athan. against the Catholicising

Semi-arians of 363, entitles it

"On the hypocrisy of Meletius

and Eusebius of Samosata." It

is remarkable that what Athan.

here predicts was fulfilled to the

letter, even of the worst of these

"hypocrites." For Acacius him-

self, who in 361 signed the

Anomæan Confession ahove re-

corded, was one of those very men

who accepted the Romoiision with

an explanation in 363.


COUNCI1Æ JUaÆ A'r AlUMINUM AND SEJÆUCJA. 123


professions of faith, and their own exculpation, ED



2

N.

but sees that they are giving sentence against

themselves,4 and studiously making professions of faith,

which by an officious display and an abundance of words

are likely to seduce the simple, and hide what they really are

in point of heresy? But as the heathen, as the Lord said,

using vain words in their prayers, are nothing profited, so

they too, after all their words were spent, have failed to annul

the general condemnation of the Arian heresy, but were con-

victed and deposed instead,-and rightly; for which of

their formularies is to be accepted by the hearer? or with

what confidence shall they undertake to be catechists to

those who have recourse to them? for if an these creeds

have one and the same meaning, what is the need of many?

But if need has arisen of so many, it follows that each by

itself is deficient, not complete; and they establish this

point against themselves with more effect than we can, by

their innovating on all their own documents and re-making

them. 5 And the number of their Councils, and the dis-

cordance of their statements, is a proof that those who were

present at thenl had much hORtility to the Nicene Council,

but little strength against Nicene Truth.


CHAPTER V. 6

38. BUT since they are thus minded both towards each other


4 Virl. supr. note 2, p. 15.

li Considering that Athanasius

had now been for several years

among the monasteries of the

desert'), in close concealment (un-

less we suppose he really had

issued thence and was present at

Beleucia), this is a remarka1Jle

instance of accurate knowledge of

the state of feeling in the heretical

party, and of foresight. From his

apparent want of knowledge of


the Anomæans, and his unhesi-

tatingly classing them with the

Arians, his foresight would seem

in a great measure to arise from

intimate comprehension of the

doctrine itself in dispute, and of

its bearings. There had Leen

at that time no para]}el of a

great aLerration :turl its iSR1H:'.

G The sul)ject uf chaptl'l's v.

and vi. naturally ri:;es out of what

has gone before. Athan. has


124


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. v. and towards their predecessors, let us ask them at

once and ascertain what extravagance they have

seen, or what phrases they complain of, that they should

thus disobey their fathers, and contend against an Ecumenical

Council? They will answer, "The phrases' Of the substance'

and 'Consubstantial' do not please us, for they are a

scandal to some and a trouble to many." 7 This is what

they have said in writing; and the reply is obvious. If

really there was aught in these phrases of a nature to

scandalise or trouble, not merely some would be scandalised

and many troubled, but all men, we and everyone else,

would feel the effect of them. But there has been nothing

of the kind; on the contrary, I can affirm that these

phrases content all men; no common ,men were the origi-

nal authors of them; Bishops gathered together from all

parts of the world adopted them, and just now above

400 at Ariminum are furnishing an additional testimony to

their exceHence. Does not this plainly prove against them

that not the Nicene Fathers are in fault, but the perverseness

of those who misinterpret them? How many there are


traced out the course of Arianism

to what seemed to be its result,

the resolution of it into a better

element or a worse,-the precipi-

tation of what was really unbe-

lieving in it into its Anomæan

form, and the gradual purification

of that Semi-arianism which pre-

vailed in the Eastern Sees, vide

supr. p. 91, note 2. The Anomæan

creed was hopeless; but with the

Semi-arians all that remained was

the adjustment of phraseg. They

had to reconcile their minds to

terms which the Church had

taken from philosophy and

adopted as her own. Accord-

ingly, Athan. goes on to propose

such e.'t'planations as might clear

tho wa.y for a re-union of Chris-


tendom. What remains of his

work then is chiefly devoted to the

consideration of the" Consubstan-

tial" or "one-in-substance" (as

contrasted. with " Like-in-sub-

stance") which had confessedly

great difficulties in it.

7 This is only stating what the

above Confessions have said again

and again. The objections made

to it were: 1. that it was not in

Scripture; 2. that it had been

di:,owned by the Antiochene

Council against Paul of Samo-

sata; 3. that it was of a material

nature, and belonged to the

Manichees ; 4. that. it was of a

Sabellian tendency; 5. that it

implied that the divine suLstance

was distinct from God.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARBlINUM AND SELEUCIA. 125


who misunderstand Scri p ture, and in conse q uence ED. BEN.


 33-55.

quarrel with its holy authors I-as the Jews

of old,

who rejected our Lord, or the l\ianichees now, who blaspheme

the Law,-yet without Scripture being in fault, but its

evil-minded critics. 8 If thep. you can point out what is

wrong in these phrases, do so by all means; let us see your

proof; but drop the pretence of offence created by then1,

lest you come into the condition of the Pharisees of old, to

whom, on their pretending offence at the Lord's teaching,

He answered, Every plant, which ltIy Heavenly Father hath

not planted, shall be rooted up. By which He showed that,

not the words of the Father as planted by Him were really

an offence to them, but that they misinterpreted good words

and were their own stumbling block. And in like manner

they who at that time blamed the Epistles of the Apostle,

impeached not Paul, but their own deficient learning and

distorted minds.

39. For answer me, what is much to the purpose, Who

are they whom you pretend to be scandalised and troubled

at these ternlS? those who are religious towards Christ?

not one; they on the contrary make much of these tenns

and maintain them. But if they are Arians who thus feel,

what wonder they should be distressed at words which

destroy their heresy? for it is not the terms which are a

scandal to them, but the placarding of their iInpiety which

is their trouble. Therefore let us have no more mlU'111Uring

against the Fathers, nor any pretence of this kind; or

you will be making complaints next of the Lord's Cross,

that it is to Jews an offence and to Gentiles foolishness, as said

the Ap03tle. But as the Cross is not faulty, for to us who

believe it is Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God,

though Jews ra ve, so neither are the terms of the Fathers

faulty, but profitable to those who rightly read, and sub-

versive of all impiety, though the Arians so often burst

II Vid. infr. Disc. ch. 3, init.


126


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. v. with rage as being by them condemned. The plea

of scandal then win not stand: especially since you

yourselves have distinctly written, "From the "Father is

generated the Son?" I a

k then of you, when you speak of

"the Father," as being "God," do you mean the divine

Substance, "Essence," "Being," "Qui est"? or do you view

fIbn apart from, short of, not to say inferior to Him, I mean,

to His substance? If the latter, which I do not like to

suppose, you should not have pronounced the Son to be from

the Father, but from what invests the Father or belongs to

Him, and then you would have avoided saying that God

is in any true sense a Father by making Him composite

and material, 1 that is, by starting a new blasphemy with

a view of a "Son," who is not a substance, but only a name,

(for such He will be to you,) and by thus substituting for

things which are, imaginations which are not.

40. Nor is this all. If God, when viewed as Father,

be not identical with the Divine Being or Substance, then

I am led to ask, whether He be such when viewed as

Creator? Do you not open the door to Greek atheism,

to a creation by chance or by atoms? 'Vhat is the

Divine Substance but that One Being who- Loth generates

and creates? Hence in Scripture we read, "God is I am,"

"God creates," "God is one," "God is a Father," "God

is almighty," without discriminating between Father and

Creator. Both are predicated of One and the Same; both

imply acts of Him, acts of that simple and blessed aud

incomprehensible Reality or Substance which is He; and,

if you have gone only just so far as to confess that the

Son is "from God," you have really, with the Nicene


1 Vid. supr. pp. 40, 41, and App.

7rE.ptßoX'Ij. If God the Supreme

Being is not identical with the

Divine Essence or SuLstance, then


the idea of Him resolves itself

into what modern astronomy would

call a nebula.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIllINUM AND SELEUCIA. 127


Fathers, confessed that lIe is fr01n God's substance. ED. BEN.


 33-55.

Perhaps you will ask ns, "If this be so plain, if it

be all the SaIne to speak of the Divine Being or Substance

as to speak absolutely of God, why are you not satisfied

with 'from God'? why do you insist on 'from the Sub-

stance' " ? For this reason: because "from God" bears

two senses. Thus, when we speak of God as a Creator,

we say that all things are "from Him;" and so again,

the Son is "from HÏIn," but not as a creation; for as a

Creator, God brings all things out of nothing, but, as a

Father, He has brought the Son out of Himse1f, and He

gives His whole Being to His 1V ord, or Son, without ceas-

ing to be what He is.

41. The Council, then, comprehending this, and aware

of the different senses of the phrase, that none should

suppose that the Son was said to be from God as the

creation is, wrote with greater explicitness that the Son was

"frOlll the substance." 2 For this determines the genuine

relation of the Son towards the Father; whereas, in its

being said simply" from God," only the will of the Creator

concerning the framing of all things is signified. If then

these critics meant distinctly "offspring," when they wrote

that the 1V ord was "from the Father," they had nothing to

complain of in the Council's decision; but if, on the con-

trary, by "from God," they meant, in the instance of the

'V ord, what it means as used of the creation, then they

should not call the Word "Son," or they will be mingling

what is blasphemous with what is pious with a manifest

inconsistency. For if He is a Son, He is not a creature;

but if a creature, then not a Son. Since these are their

notions, perhap

 they will be denying Holy Baptism,

because it is administered into Father and Son; and llot

into Creator and creature, as they account Him.


2 Supr. pp. 37- 41


128


EPISTLE OF A'rHANASIUS, ON THE


42. "But," they say, "this is not written, and

we reject these words as unscriptural." But this,

again, in their mouths, is an audacious argument. For if

they think everything must be rejected which is not written,

wherefore, when the Arian party invent such a heap of

phrases, not from Scripture, such as "Out of nothing,"

and "the Son was not before His generation," and "Once

lIe was not," and "He is alterable," and "the Father is

ineffable and invisible to the Son," and "the Son knows

not even His own Substance," and all that Arius has

vomited in his absurd and impious Thalia, why do not

they speak against these, but rather battle for them; and

on that account are at war with their own Fathers? And,

in what place of Scripture did they on their part find ''In-

generate," and the very name of "substance," and "there

are three subsistences," and "Christ is not very God," and

" He is one of the hundred sheep," and "God's 1VisdOln is in-

generate and unoriginate, but the created powers are many,

of which Christ is one"? Or how, when at the so-called

Dedication, the party of Acacius and Eusebius used ex..

pressions not in Scripture, and said that "the First-Lorn

of the creation" was "the exact Image" of the divine

sub

tance, and power, and will of God, how can they com-

plain of the Fathers, for introducing un scriptural expressions,

and especia1Jy " substance"? For they ought either to

complain of theInselves, or to find no fault with the

Fathers.

43. Now, if certain others made the Council's phrases

their excuse, it might perhaps have been set down either

to ignorance or to reverence. There is no question, for

instance, about George of Cappadocia,3 who was expelled

from Alexandria,-a man, without character in years past,

nor a Christian in any respect; but only pretending to


CHAP. v.


8 Vide Arian leaders.


COUNOILS HELD AT ARI1\IINUl\I AND SELEUCIA. 129


the name to suit the times, and thinking religion is


.3


:

a trade. And therefore reason is there none for

complaining of his Inaking mistakes about the faith, con-

sidering he knows neither what he says nor whereof he affirms;

but, according to the text, as a bird mrtkpth haste to the snære.

But when Acacius and Eudoxius, and Patrophilus say this,

do not they deserve extreme reprobation? for while they

use words which are not in Scripture themselves, and have

accepted many times the term "substance" as suitable,

especially on the ground of the letter of Eusebius, they

now blalne their predecessors for using terms of the same

kind. Nay, though they say themselves, that the Son is

"God frOln God," and "Living Word," "exact Image of

the Father's substance," they accuse the Nicene Bishop



of saying, that He who was begotten is "of the substance

of Him who begat Him," and "consubstantial" with Him.

But what marvel is this conflict with their predecessors and

own Fathers, when they are inconsistent with themselves,

and faU foul of each other? For after publishing, at the

Dedication so-called at Antioch, that the Son is "exact

IIIlage" of the Father's substance, and swearing that so

they held, and allathematisillg those who held otherwise,

nay, in Isauria, writing down, "'V e do not decline the

authentic faith published at the Dedication at Antioch,"

where the ternl "sub;tance" was introduced, still, shortly

after, in the Hallle [sauria, as if forgetting all this, they put

into writing the very contrary, saying, "vV e reject the

words 'Consubstantial' and 'Like-in-substance,' as alien

to the Scriptures, and put away from us 'substance,' as not

contained therein."

44. What sort of faith then have they who stand neither

to their word nor writing, hut alter and change everything

according to the f;ca,Ron? For if, 0 Aeacius and EllIloxinf',

you "do 1Iot decline the faith pnhliHhed at the neùieatioll,"


K


130


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. V and in it is written that the Son is " exact 4 Image

of substance," why is it ye write in Isauria, "We

reject 'the Like-in-substance"'? for if the Son is not like

the Father in respect of substance, how is He "exact Image

of the substance"? But if you are dissatisfied at having

written "exact Image of the substance," how is it that

ye "anathematise those who say that the Son is Unlike" ?

for if He be not according to substance like, He is alto-

gether unlike: and the U lllike cannot be an Image.

And if so, then it does not hold that he that !tath seen the

Son, hath seen the Father, there being then the greatest

difference possible between Them, or rather the One beiug

wholly Unlike the Other. And Unlike cannot possihly

be called Like. ð By what artifice then do ye call Un-

like like, and consider Like to be unlike, and thus are

hypocrites enough to say that the Son is the Father's

Image ? for if the Son be not like the Father in substance,

sOlnething is wanting to the Image, and it is not a

complete lInage, nor a perfect Radiance. How then read

ye, In Hirn dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily?

and, from His fulness have all we received? llow is it that

ye expel the Arian ...tletiu.." 6 as a heretic, though ye say

the SaIne with hÜn? for thy cOlnpanion is he, 0 Acacius,

and he became Eudoxius's master to the extrCll1e of

such impiety; which was the reason why Leontius the

Bishop Inade him deacon, that using the name of the

diaconate as a sheep's clothing, he might be able with

impunity to vomit forth the words of blasphen1Y. What

then has persuaded you to contradict each other, and to

earn for yourselves so gTeat a disgrace? You cannot

give any good account of it; this supposition only


4. Vid. à7rupá"''''\(1KTOr;.

5 Hence the Auomæans (whose

symbol was the Unlike) were

directly opposed, not to the


ot't hodox Homoi.isians, but to the

Homæans and Homæusians. the

Acacians and Semi-arians.

6 Vid. Ariun leaders.


OOUKCILS HELD AT ARll\IINU.M AND SELEUCIA. 131


r(1

flains, that all you do is but outward profes-

1

3


:

sion and pretence, in order to secure the counten-

ance of Constantius and the gain frOln thence accruing.

And ye make nothing of accusing the Fathers, and ye COlll-

plain outright of their language as being un scriptural ; and,

as it is written, have prostituted yourselves to everyone tltat

'iJassed by; so as to change as often as they wish, in whose

pay and keep you are.

45. Yet, though a n1an use terms not in Scripture, this

is no serious matter, provided that his meaning is right. 7

But, on the other hand, the heretic, even. though he use

scriptural terlns, yet as being not the less an object of

suspicion and unsound within, shall be asked by the

Spirit, 1Vhy dost thou preach J1ly laws, and takest lily

(Jovenant in thy rnouth? Thus, whereas the devil, though

speaking from the Scriptures, was silenced by the Saviour,

the blessed Paul, though he speaks even from profane

writers, The Cretans are always liar,y, and, For we al'e His

offspring, and, Evil communications corrupt good manners,

yet, having a religious meaning, as being himself holy, he is

doctor of the nations, in faith and verity, as having the mind

of Cltrisl, and what he speaks comes to us with a religious

sound. But what is there to approve in the Ariall terms,

in which the caterpillar aud the locust are put before the

Saviour, and lIe is reviled with "Once Thou wast not,"

and" Thou wast created," and" Thou art foreign to God in


7 Vid. supr. p. 36. And so S.

Gregory in a well-known passage:

"Why art thou such a slave to

the letter, and takest up with

Jewish wisdom, and pursuest

syllables to the loss of thint!:s?

For if thou wert to say 'twice

five,' or 'twice seven,' and r COD-

cluded · ten' or 'fourteen' from

your words, or from 'a. reasonaLle

mortal animal' T concluded' man,'


should I seem to you absurd?

how so, if I did but give your

meaning? for words helong as

much to him who demands them

as to him who utters." Orat. 31,24.

Vid. also Hil. contr. Constant.

16 August. Ep. 238, n. 4 -6.

Cyril. Dj}!l. i. p. 301. Pet}!vius

refers to otile!' pabsages, de 'l'ri n.

i v. 5,

 6.


K2


132


EPISTLE OF ATIU.NASIUS, ON THE


OHAP. v. substance," and, in a word, no insult is spared

against Him? On the other hand, what good

word have the Fathers of the Council omitted ? yea, rather

have they not a lofty view and a Ohrist-Ioving piety? And

yet these Acacians have written down, " We reject their

words;" at the saIne time that they endm'e the insults of

the Arians towards the Lord, and Inake it clear to all men

that for no other cause do they resist that Great Oouncil

than because it condemned the Arian heresy. For it is on

this account again that they misinterpret and are hostile to

the term Oonsubstantial. If their faith was orthodox, and

they confessed the :Fatbcr aR truly }"ather, and helieved the

Son to be genuine Son, and by nature true 'V on1 and 'VÜ;-

dom of the Father, and if, in saying that the Son is from God,

they applied those words to HÜn, not in the sense in which

they use them of thell1selves, but understood Hinl to be the

proper Offspring of the Father's substance, as the radiance

is from light, they would not anyone of them have

found fault with the Nicene Fathers, but would have been

confident that the Council wrote suitably; and that this is

the orthodox faith concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.

46. "But," say they, "the sense of such expressions

is obscure to us;" for this is another of their pretences.

" We reject them," say they, " because we cannot

D1Hster their meaning." But if they were true in this

l)rofession, instead of saying, "W c reject theIn," they

should ask instruction frOll1 those who know; else ought

they to reject whatever they cannot understand in divine

Scripture, and to find fault with the writers. But this would

be the crime of heretics rather than of us Christians;

for what we do not understand in the sacred oracles, in-

stead of rejecting, we inquire about frOIn persons to whOln

the Lord has revealed it, and from then1 we ask for

im

truction. IT owever, if they would make this pretellec

of obscurity avail, let then1 at least confess what is annexed


COUNCIIÆ HELD AT AlUMINUM AND SELEUOIA. 133


to the Creed and allüthematise those who hold ED. BEN.

,

 33-55.

that "the Son is frOin nothing," and "fIe was

not before IIis generation;" al

o that " the Word of God is

a creature and work," and "He is alterable by nature,"

and "from another subsistence;" and in a word let them

anathematise the Arian heresy, which has origina

ed such

impiety. N or let them say any Illore, ""'tV e reject the terms,"

but that "we do not yet understand them;" if they must

find some reason for declining them. But well know I, and

am sure, and they know it too, that if they could disavow

these propositions and anathematise the Arian heresy,

they would have no difficulty about those terms of the

Council. For on this account it was that the Fathers,

after declaring that the Son was begotten from the

Father's substance, and consubstantial with I-lim, there-

upon added, "But those who say 'The Son is from nothing,'

&c., &c., and so on, we anathematise ;" on this account, I

mean, in order to show that the statelnents are parallel to

each other, and that the ternlS in the Creed Ünply the dis-

claÌlners subjoined, and that all who confess the tel'm

,

will certainly understand the disclaimers. But those who

both dissent frmn the aUí1thelnas and impugn the definition,

such Ine11 are proved on every side to be foes of Christ.


CHAPTER VI.


47. THOSE who deny the Council altogether, are suffi-

ciently exposed by these brief renlarks; but there are men

to whom the above docs not quite apply, I mean men

who would not shrink from the anathema, though

they have difficulties about the definition. To speak

frankly then, those who accept everything else that


134


EPISTLE OF ATHAXASIUS, O

 TIlE


CHAP. VI. was settled at Nicæa, and quarrel only about the

" Consubstantial," must not be regarded as

enemies; nor do we here attack them as Ario-maniacs, nor

as opponents of the Synodal Fathers, but we discuss the

matter with them as brothers with brothers, who mean

what we mean, and dispute only about the word. For,

confessing that the Son is fronl the substance of the Father,

and not fronl other subsi

tence, and that He is not a creature

nor work, but IIis genuine and natural offspring, and that

lIe is eternally with the Father, as being His Word and

Wisdom, they are not very far from accepting even the

phrase "One in substance;" of whom is Basil 8 of Ancyra,

in what he has written concerning the faith. For only to

sa.y "Like-according-to-substance," does not quite expres



" Of the substance," by which phrase rather, as the)'

have themselves allowed, the genuine relation of the Son to

the Father is signified. Thus tin is only "like" to silver,

an elm to a beech, and gilt brass to the true nletal; but tin

iE not "frOln" silver, nor could an elm be accounted the

seedling of a bcech. 9 But since they say that He is "Of-

the-substance" and " Like-in-substance," what do they

signify by these but "One-in-substance"? 1 For, while

to say only " Like-in-substance" does not necessarily

convey" Of-the-substance," on the contrary, to say "One-

in-substance," or " Consubstantial," is to signify the

meaning of both terms, "Like-in-substance," and "Of-the-

substance." And accordingly they themselves in contro-

versy with those who maintain that the Word is not a


8 Vid. Arian leaders.

9 Viel. Hypoc. ,Mel. and Hilar.

de Syn.

 89. The principle in-

volved is this,-Things that are

like, are not the same, and therefore

iJf'.novlJwv is not ÓfLOOVULOV. Vid.

ðuni- arianisln.


I Socr. iii. 25) Una substantia

religiosè prædicabitur, quæ ex

nativitatis proprietate, et ex

naturæ similitud.ine, ita indif-

ferens sit, ut una d.icatur. Hi!. de

Syn. G7.


COI;XCII..tS UEI..tD A1 ARntrxuM A

]) RELEUCIA.. 135


real Son, but a creature, have 2 before now taken ED. BEN.


 SS -55.

their proofs against them frOln human illustrations

of son and father, with this e'\:ception, thai God is not a8

man, nor the generation of the Son as an offspring of n1an,

but as an act which n1ay befittingly b

 ascribed to God, and

which it becomes us to imagine. Thus they have callcd the

Father the Fuunt of 'rl

c101n and Life, and the Son the

Radiance of the Eternal Light, and the Offspring fron1

the Fountain, as lIe

ys, I ant the Life, and I lJriwlom

dwell wit}" Prudence. But the Radiance fron1 the

Light, and Offspring from the Fountain, and Son frOl11

Father, how can these be so suitably expre:s

ed as by

" Consu bstantial " ?

48. I say, they them!=:elves have dwelt upon the force of

the "ord "Son" as applied to the Lord, as contained in

its earthly sense: and yet these very Blen are afraid, on

account of its earthly sense, of the word" consubstantial."

But is there in truth any canse of fear, le:-:ti, because the

off;.;pring from men are cOTl!'ubstantia], the Son, by being

called One-in-substance, should be I fimself considered as

a human off

pring too? perish the thought! not so; but

the explanation is easy.

"or the Son is the Father's

"ord and 'Yisdom; whence we are reminded of the

impassibility and indivisibility of such a generation from

the Father. For not even IMU'S word is part of hin1,

nor proceeds from hÜn according to passion; llluch less

God's 'V ord, whom the Father has also declared to be His

own Son, only lest, on the other hand, if we merely heard of

the "\Y 01'<1," we should suppose Him, such as is the worù


2 Here at last Athan. alludes

to the Ancyrene

ynodal Letter,

vid. Epiph. Hær. 37, 5 and 7,

about which he has kept a pointed

silence above, when tracing the

('ourse of the Arian confessions.

That is, he treats the Semi-arians


8."1 tenderly as S. Hilary, sparing

their personal delinquencies, till

he can slJeak kindly of them.

The Ancyrene Council of 358

was a protest aga.inst the "ùlas-

phemia," or secuud Sirmian Cun-

fc

sion, which Hosius sigued.


136


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP VI. of lnan, non-subsistent; but that, hearing that He

is Son, we may acknowledge HÜn to be a living

'V ord anù a substantive Wisdon1. Accordingly, as in saying

"offspring," we have no human thoughts, and, though we

know God to be a Father, we entertain no material ideas

concerning IIim, but while we listen to these illustrations

and terms, we think suitably of God, for He is not as n1an,

so in like manuel', when we hear of" Consubstantial," we

ought to transcend all sense, and, according to the

Proverb, understand by the understanding what is set

brfo're us; so as to know that not by mere will, but in truth,

is He genuine from the Father, as Life from Fountain, and

Radiance from Light. Else, why should we understand

" Offspring" and "Son" in a sense not corporeal, while

we conceive of "Consubstantial" as after the manner of

bodies? especially since these terms are not here used

respectively about different subjects, but both of them,

"Offspring" and "Consubstantial," about one and the same.

And it is but consistent to attach the SaIne sense to both

expressions, when they are applied to the Saviour, and not

to interpret "Offspring" as it should be, and "Consub-

stantial" as it should not; nay, if you are minded thus

to act, then, in speaking of the Son as 1V ord and 1Visdmn of

the Father, you ought to take an opposite view of these

two terms also, and understand in the one sense Word and

in the other sense \Visdmn. But as this would be extrava-

gant, (for the Son is the Father's 1V ord and 1Visdom, and the

Offspring from the Father is one and proper to His sub-

stance,) so the sense of "offspring" and "consubstantial"

is one, and whoso considers tIle Son an offspring, rightly

considers Him also as "consubstantial."

49. This is sufficient to show that the term "consub-

stantial" is not foreign nor far fr0111 the meaning of these

much-loved persons. But their difficulty seen1S to them to

have w

ight for another reaSOll. They allege, (for I have


COUNCHÆ HELD AT ARJl\IINUM AND SELEUCIA. 137


not nlyself the Epistle in question,) that the Bishops ED. BEN.


 33-55.

who condemned Smllosatenc 3 at Antioch have laid

down ill writing that the Son is not consubstantial with the

Father; accordingly, frOlll reverence and honour due to those

Bishops at Antioch, they have not the best of dispositions

towards the Nicene term. I think it well respectfully to

offer SOll1e remarks OIl this Ünportallt point. Certainly it is

unbec01ning to make the one assembly conflict with the

other; for all of them are Fathers of the Church; nor is it

religious to settle, that these have spoken welJ, and those

ill; for all of them have gone to sleep in Christ. N'or ib

it right to be disputatious, and to conlpare the respective

nunlbers of those who met in the Councils, lest the thre



hundred at Nicæa may seem to throw the lesser into the

shade; nor on the other hand to cOlnpare the date

, lest

those who preceded seem to eclipse those that came

after. For all, I repeat, are Fathers; and, anyhow, the

three hundred laid down as doctrine nothing new, nor

was it in any self-confidence that they became chmnpiolls

of words not in Scripture, but they started fronl their

Fathers, as the others did, and they used their Fathers'

words. For there were two Bishops of the llan1e of

Dionysius, much older than the seventy who deposed

Smnosatene, of whom one was of Rome, and the other of

Alexandria; and a charge had been laid by some persons

against the Bishop of Alexandria, before the Bishop of

Rome, as if he had said that the Son was made, and not

consubstantial with the Father. This had given great pain

to the members of the Roman Council; and the Bishop of

R01ne ex!)ressed their united sentiments in a letter to his


3 There were three Councils

held against Paul of

amosa.ta, of

the dates of 264, 2ôÐ, and an

intermediate year. The third is


spoken of in the text, which,

contrary to the opinion of Pagi,

S. .Basnage, and Tillemont, Pear-

son fixes at 265 or 2GG.


138


EPISTLE OF ATHANASltJS, ON THE


CHAP. VI. namesake. This led to the latter's writing an ex-

planation which he calls the Book of Refutation

and Apology; and his words run thus :-


The Bishop of Alexandria to the Bishop of Rome.

50. "And I have written in another Letter, a refutatIon of

the false charge which they bring against me that I deny

that Christ is consubstantial with God. For though I say that

I have not found or read this term anywhere in holy Scripture,

yet my remarks which follow, and which they have passed

over, are not inconsistent with nlY holding it. For I instanced

a human issue, which is evidently hOll1ogeneous, and I

observed that undeniably fathers differed from their children

only in not being identical as individuals; otherwise there

could be neither parents nor children. And my Letter, as I

said before, owing to present circumstances, I am unable to

produce, or I would have sent you the very words I used,

or rather a copy of it all; which, if I have an opportunity, I

will do still. But I am sure frOln recollection, that I adduced

nlany parallels of things kindred with each other, for instance,

that a plant grown from seed or from root, was other than that

fronl which it sprang, and yet altogether one in nature with

it; and that a stream flowing from a fountain, changed its

appearance and its I1aIne, for that neither the fountain was

called strean1, nor the stream fountain, yet both existed, and

that the fountain was as it were father, and the stream was

what was generated frOln the fountain."


51. Thus the Bishop. If then anyone finds fault with

the Fathers at Nicæa, as if they contradicted the decisions

of their predecessors, he may reasonably find fault also

with the seventy, because they did not keep to the state-

ments of their own predecessors; for such were the two

Dionysii and the Bishops assembled on that occasion at

Rome. But neither these nor those is it religious to

blame; for all were ambassadors of the things of Christ,

and all used diligence against the heretics, and while the

one party condenlned Samosatene, the other conden1ned

the Arian heresy. Anù rightly did both these and those


COUNCTLS RETJD AT ARnrrNUM AND RELEUCIA. ] 39


define and suitahl y to the Inatter in hand. And as ED 3 " BEN.


 3-Ðá.

the blessed Apostle, writing to the Ronlans, sa.id, The ---

Law is spiritu'rtl, the Law is Itoly, and the commandlnpnt holy

and just and good; yet soon after, JVhat the Law could not do,

in that it 'u){ts weak, and wrote to the Hebrews, The Law

made no one perfect; and to the Galatians, By the Law no

one is þt:'5t{/iNl,o yet to Tilnothy, The Lam i8 good if a man

use it lawfully

. and no one would accuse the Saint of

incowÜstency and variation in writing, but rather would

admire how suitably he wrote to each, in order to warn the

Romans and the others to turn from the letter to the

spirit, but to instruct the Hebrews and Galatians to place

their hopes not in the Law, but in the Lord who gave the

Law;-80, if the Fathers of the two Councils made

different mention of the Consubstantial, we ought not ill

any respect to differ fronl them, but to investigate their

meaning, and this. will fully show us the concordant

sentiment of both the Councils. For they who deposed

Samosateue took Commbstantial in a bodily sense because

Paul had attempted sophistry and said, "Unless Christ

has of man become God, it follows that He is consub-

stantial with the Father; and if so, of necessity there are

three substances, one the previous substance, and the other

two frOlll it;" and therefore guarding against this they

said with good reason, that Christ was not consubstantial,4

for the Son is not related to the Father as Paul iInagined.

Rut the Bishops who anathematised the Arian heresy,


4. This is in fact the objection

which Arius urges against the

One-in-substance, supr. p. 85,

when he calls it the doctrine of

J\Ianichæus and Hieracá.s; Vid.

Append. Hieracas. The same

objection is protested against

by St. Basil, contr. Eunom.

i. 19. IIilar. de 'frin. iv. 4.


Yet. while S. Basil agrees with

Athan. in his account of the

reason of the Council's rejection

of the word. St. Hilary on the

contrary reports that Paul himself

accepted it, i.e., in a Sabellian

sense, and therefore the Council

rejected it. But vie!. Append.

Homo-üsion.


140


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


OHAP. VI. understanding Paul's craft, and reflecting that the

word "Consubstalltial" has not this meaning when

used of things immaterial, and especially of God, and acknow-

ledging that the Word was not a creature, but an offspring

from the substance, and that the Father's substance was

the origin, and root, and fountain of the Son, and that He

was of very truth His Father's Likeness, and not of

different nature, as we are, and separate from the Father,

but that as being from Him, He exists as Son indivisible,

as Radiance is with respect of Light, and knowing too the

illustration used in Dionysius's case, the " fountain," and

the defence thereby of the word "Consubstantial," and

before this the Saviour's saying, indicative of unity, I and

the Father ære one, and He that hath seen

fe hath seen the

Father, on these grounds they reasonably asserted on their

part, that the Son was consubstantial. And as, according

to a former remark, no one would blaIne the Apostle, if he

wrote to the Romans about the Law in one way, and to the

Hebrews in another; in like manner, neither would the

present Bishops find fault with the fornler, in regard to

their interpretation of the term, nor would the former

blame those who came after them, on the score of their

opposite interpretation and the call there was thus to speak

of the Lord.

52. Yes surely, each Council had a sufficient reason for

its own language; for since Samosatene held that the Son

was not before ßlary, but received from her the origin of

IIis being, therefore the Fathers at Antioch depo

ed him

and pronounced him heretic; but concerning the Son's

Godhead, writing in simplicity, they were not perfectly

accurate in their treatment of the term Consubstantial,

but, as they understood it, so spoke they about it. For

they directed all their thoughts to destroy the device of

Samosatene, and to show that the Son was before all things,

and that, instead of becoming God after having been a


COUNCILS HELD AT ARIMINUl\I AND SELEUCIA. 141


man, God had put on a servant's form, and the ED. BE

.


 33-55.

".,. ord had become flesh, ar; John says. This is how

they dealt with the blasphmnies of Paul; but wh

n the

party of Eusebius and Arius began to teach that, though the

Son was before time, yet was lIe made and one of the

creatures, and as to the phrase "from God," they did not

believe it in the sense of His being genuine Son from Father,

but lnaintained it as it is Raid of creatures and a Creator, and

as to the oneness of likeness between Son and Father, they

did not confess that the Son is like the Father according to

substance, or according to nature, but because of His agree-

HlCnt with l-IÌ1n in doctrines and in teaching; nay, when they

drew a line and Inade the Son's sunstance absolutely foreign

from the Father, and degrading lIinl to the creatures, on

this account the Bishops assembled at Nicæa, with a view

to the craft of the parties so holding, and as bringing to-


ether the sense from the Scriptures, cleared up the point,

by affirming the "Consubstantial;" that both the true

genuineness of the Son might thereby be known, and that

things which were made might have nothing ascribed to

them in common with HiIn. For the preciseness of this

phrase detects their pretence, whenever they would use

"from God," and gets rid of all the subtleties with which

they seduce the simple. For whereas they contrive to

put a sophistical construction on all other words at their

will, this phrase only, as detecting their heresy, do they

dread, which the Fathers did set down as a bulwark

against their impiou

 speculations one and all.

53. And here th

 parallel case of the terni " Ingenerate,"

as a title of the Supreme Being, supplies us with an

illustration in point. This, too, is a word not found in

ScripLure, but taken from the philosophical schools, and,

like "Consubstantial," has various senses. I understand

that. it is SOllletÏlnes w

ed for what exists without origin

or canse; sOIlletinlCS for uncreate. Now in the first of


142


EPl

TLR OF ATHANASIUH, ON THE


CHAP. VI. these senses a man might rightly say that the

-- Word is not ingenerate,. only the Father, plainly

because He is a Son; but in the second he might rightly

ay

that He was in generate, because He was not a creature.

And in consequence holy writers of times past seem to con-

tradict each other by using it in these two senses respectively.

For instance, Ignatius, who was appointed Bishop in

Antioch after the Apostles, and became a martyr of Christ,

writes concerning the Lord thus: "There is one physician,

fleshly and spiritual, g

nerate and in generate, God in man,

true life in death, both from Mary and from God ; "-here

he says that the Lord is ingenerate, meaning that He is

nncreate; but some teachers who follow Ignatius, write in

their turn, 5 "One is the Ingenerate, the Father, and one

the genuine Son fronl Him, true Offspring, Word and

\Visdom of the Father," implying that the Son is not

ingenerate, that is, because, in their sense, to be ingene-

eate is to be without Father as well as without Creator.

If, therefore, we are unfavourably disposed towards these

writers, then have we right to quarrel with the Councils;

but if, knowing their faith in Christ, we are persuaded

that the blessed Ignatius was orthodox in writing that

Christ was generate on account of the flesh, (for He ,vas

made flesh,) yet ingenerate, because He is not in the

number of things Inade and generated, but SOil frOlll

Father, and are aware too that the parties who have said

that the Ingenerate is One, Ineaning the Father, had no

intention of pronouncing that the \V ord was generated


!; The writer is not lmown. The

President of J\Iagdalen, Dr. Routh,

has pointed out to the Tran

lator

the following similar passage in St.

Clement: fV pf:V TÙ a:yÉv'IJ/TUV, ò


7rClVTOICp!rT(dr eeò!:, Ëv ð

 #cai TÒ

7rPOYU / lf 1 /OÈV Ôt' oi1 TÚ 7råJITU iyÉVETO,

#caì 'Xwf'ì

. aVTov ÈyÉVETO ov(5È ïJ/.

HtrOlll. vi. 7, p. 76

.


COUNCILS HELD AT A.RIMINUM AXD SELEUCIA. 143


and made, but that the Father has no canse, but

Di3


:

rather is Him

elf Father of 1Visdom, and in 1Visdom

hath made all things that have been brought into being,

why do we not cOlllbine in one religious belief all our

Fathers, those who deposed San10satene as well as those who

proscribed the Arian heresy, instead of making distinctions

between them and refusing to entertain a right opinion of

them? I repeat, that these, looking towards the sophis-

tical explanation of Sml1osatene, wrote, "He is not consub-

stantial," and those, with an excellent llleaning, said that

He was. For n1yself, my respectful feeling towards those

good Fathers at Antioch has led me in their behalf thus

to write, however briefly; but could I come by the letter

which they are alleged to have written, I consider we should

find some further grounds for the aforesaid proceeding

of those sainted meu. For it is right and meet thus to

feel, and to maintain a good understanding with our

Fathers, if we be not spurious children, but have re-

ceived our tradition from them, and our lessons of

religion at their hands. Such then being, as we believe

and maintain, the sense of the Fathers at Antioch, let us

proceed, as with them before us, to inquire once again,

cahnly and with a good intent, whether the llishopB

congregated at Nicæa did not also really exercise an

excellent judgment upon it.

54. For consider; it was their duty to protect the

cardinal truth that our Lord was really the Son of

God, which a deadly heresy had denied. How were they

to exclude the evasions to which the Arians had re-

course ? They proceeded thus: a son, they said, IS an

offspring, but, in order to be such, he must spring

from that of which he is the offspring; nor does he so

spring, unless he is from what that original is,-thaL IS,

in other words, from its substance, as the derivation of


144


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON THE


CHAP. VI. the word "substance" shows. t Thus, to be the

--.---.- Son of God, if He is God's offspring or true Son,

is to be "of" or "one with" God's substance,-that is, to

be "consu bstantial" with Him. Such was the conclusion

of the Fathers at Nicæa; they determined that con-

substantiality was bound up with the idea of Sonship,

that nothing shorti of this word adequately expr

ssed

their doctrine of the Son's relation to the Father, and

that it was a denial of any true Sonship to deny the

con substantiality. Such is the force of I and the

Father are One, and He that hath seen life hath seen the

Father. What can they mean, but the Son is One with

the One God? As to oneness of tea0hing, oncness of

sentiment and affection, or participation of the Divine

fulness, both saints and, still more, angels and arch-

angels, have such unity with God. If this were

enough, each of them might say, "I and the Father

are One." But, if such a thought be monstrous, as it

truly is, nothing is left but to conceive Son's and

Father's Oneness in the way of substance. He says,

All thirtgs that the Father hath are Jline, and All .J.

[ine

are Thine and Thine are 111 ine. Thus, as being the

exact Image of the Father, as SOfie of you confess, He

has all divine attributes, (except indeed as being Father,)

and is His Father's equal.

55. Thi8 is a thought to enlarge upon. There are

those, I say, who allow that the Son is the lInage

of the Father, yet will not allow that He is One with

the Father. See how plainly Scripture speaks about

that likeness, for it will lead us to an important con-

clusion. For instance, the name God; for the Word was

God ;-Ahnighty, Thu8 saith He that i8, and that 'Was,

and that is to come, the Alm

f}hty i-the he\n

 Li 6 ht,


t O{J(

íll, oV(1a, Òp,OOV(1Wt;.


COUNCILS HEJJD AT ARDIINU1\[ A

n SELEUCIA. 145

T am I-Ie sa y s the Li g ht .-the Creative Cause ED. BEN.

,." ,

 33-55.

All things were made by Him, and, JVhatsoever I see

the Father do I do a7 so ;- lIis Eternity, His eternal power

and Godhead, and, In tlte beginning was the Word, and,

He was the true Ligld, which l2"ghteth every man that cometh

into the world ;-IIis being Lord, for, TIM Lord 'rained

fire and brimstone from the Lord, and while the Father

says, J am the Lord, and, Thus saith the Lord, the Almighty

God, of the Son Paul speaks thus, One LO'J'd Jesus Christ,

through whmn all things. And to the Father Angels

Ininister, and again too the Son is worshipped by thenl,

A/zd let all the Angels of God wO?'ship HÙn; and He is said

to be Lord of the Angels, for, the Altgels 'Jninistered unto

Him, and the Son of 11lan shall send His Angels. The

being honoured as the Father, for that they may honour

the Son, He 8ays, as they honour the Father ;-being equal

to God, He thought it not 'robbery to be {'qual with God;-

the being Truth frOln the True, and Life from the Living,

as being truly frol11 the Fountain of the Father ;-the

quickening and raising the dead as the Father, for so we

read in the Gospel. And of the Father it is written, The

Lord thy God is One Lord, and the God of gods, the Lord,

hath spoken, and hath called the earth; and of the Son,

'Phe LO?'d God hath shilled upon us, and, The God of gods

shall be seen in Sion. And again of God, Esaias says,

JVho is a God like unto thee, taking away iniquities alld

lJassiJlg O'lJer unrighteousness f and thus the Son said to whom

He would, Thy sins be forgiven thee; for instance, when

on the Jews lnurmuring, He manifested that remission by

His act, saying to the paralytic, Rise, take up thy bed and

go unto thy house. And of God Paul says, To the KÙ1.Q

eternal

. and again of the Son, Da vid in the Psalm, Lift

-up your heads, 0 ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye eve'J'lastÙlg

dOOTS, and the King of glory shall corne Ù'ì. And Daniel

heard it said, His Killgdom is an everlasting ICingdom, and

L


146


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ON TIlE


CHAP. V I. IIis Kin.qdmn shall not be destroyed. And in a

word, all that you find said of the Father, so

much will you find said of the Son, all but His being

Father, as has been said.

56. Can then, a man in his senses fancy that this

equality in attributes conles from any origin but the

Father Himself? Surely it is but a rea

onable inference

that no substance other than the Father's admits of such

attributes, and that all that is the Father's is the Son's,

because the Son, as being such, is the very Reflection of

the Father, His Image and Figure. How can He have

the Father's attributes without having that substance to

which those attributes belong? Let us take reverential

heed, lest transferring what is proper to the Father to

some being unlike Him in substance, we introduce another

substance foreign to Him, yet capable of the properties

of Him, the first substance, though He Himself silences

the thought in His own words, Jfy glory I will not give to

anothfff. The Father and Son, therefore, are One in

substance, and the term "consubstalltiality" is the safe-

guard and token of this unity. We shall be professing

two Gods, unless we hold that, by the divine generation,

the substance in the Father is made over to the Son.

The Son is equal to the Father, simply because He is one

with Him.

57. Here we see the contrast between the "One-in-

substance" of Father and Son and the mere parti?ipa-

tion 1 in the Divine Fulness which, in various measures, is

given to IIis creatures. The Son is the Father's Word

and Wisdom, and thereby His illunlinating and deifying

power,-not alien; but one in substance with Him, for

by partaking of Him we partake of the Father to whom

He belongs. Wherefore, if He, too, Himself were from

participation and not from the Father, His substantial

1 '

id. App. /LfTOVGW.


COUNOILS t!F.TJD AT AtUl\tINU1\t ANn SI

LgUCJA. 147


Godhead and In1age, Ife could not deify, as nef'd- E


3 B


.

ing deification HiIn

e1f. For, as to one who

possesses only frOTl1 participation, even what he has Íß not his

own, but the giver's, and what he has received is barely the

grace sufficient for himself.

58. You tell me of an objection urged by some against

the "One-in-substance," to the effect that to speak of one

substance implies three, one pre-existing, and then those

are not Father and Son, but two brothers. But this is a

Greek explication, and what Greeks say have no claim

upon us; or rather let me say that these matters are

above the human intellect. God gave birth from His

own substance to His Son; but He also created all things

out of nothing. Is creation comprehensible ? We must

not measure divine actions by earthly experience. Even

what is earthly we do not understand, much less do we

understand heavenly. We must beware of giving a

corporeal sense to the Divine substance and to its com-

munication to the Son, when we ought to recede from

things generate, and, casting away human images, nay, all

things sensible, to ascend to the Father, lest, in our

ignorance we rob Him of the Son, and rank the Son

among His own creatures.

59. If, then, not two substances, nor three, are implicd

in our holding a Father and a Son; if we maintain that

the Father in generating a Son from Hi

self is simply

beyond Oill' intellect, as when He creates out of nothing,

there is no fear of our holding, with Marcion or Valentin UR,

two Gods and two Origins, independent, alien, al\d unlike

each other. But, if we acknowledge that the :Father's

Godhead is one and sole, and that of IIÜn the Sou is thc

"\V ord and Wisdom, and that thereby the likeness between

Them consists, not as the heretics say in the likeness

merely of Their teaching, but in truth of 811 h;tance, a

 the

Light is one and the Radiance one, yet they arc not two,

JJ 2


1-1-8


EPISTLE OJ

 ATItANASIUS, O

 T1t




CHAP. VI. how do we not follow the holy Prophets who

say, The JVord of the Lord c{l'lne to 1JW, yet still,

as recognising the }-'ather who was beheld and revealed in

Hin1 were bold to say, "The God of our .Fathers hath ap-

peared to me." This being so, if He be the illun1Ïnating

and creative Power, specially proper to the Father, without

whom He neither frames nor is known, why should we

decline the phrase expressing it? Why do we not pro-

nounce the Son, IIomoÜsion, One-in-substance with

the Father?

60. When we urge this, we are met by the person

 I

have in view with the word "HOlnoæsion," or "Like-

in-substance," as if preferable to One-in-substance."

But do not they see that the mention of "Like" implies

the existence of at least two substances? And, if the

two are like, they are equal; and this implies in the case

before us two Gods. " Like-in-substance" is then not

an advisable word, when we would be exact. Nor is this

all; strictly speaking, we cannot use the word "like" of

substances, but only of the fashion or the quality of a

thing. Thus two men compared together are not of like

nature but of the same nature; whereas when we speak

of their being like each other, we meau in character, or

attributes, or circumstances. On the other hand we should

not say that a man is unlike a dog, but other than a dog.

And as qualities are participated in more or less by

different subjects, likeness is a 111atter of degree, but

there are no degrees of sameness and of identity. Thus

whereas God is all perfect, but we imperfect, in consc-

quence St. John says, """Vhen He shall be Inade lllauifest,

we shall be like IIÌIn." It is not enough then, if the

"

ord is God, to say with you that He is "Like-in-sub..

stance" to the Father, for that is only to be I110re or less

divine, but He is One-in-substance or Consubstantia1.

I repeat, in speaking of Like-in-substance, we mean like


COUNCILS HELD AT ARnUNUM AND SELE1;CIA. 149


by participation; and this is pro p er to creatures, for ED. BEN.


 33-55.

they, by partaking, are made like to God. When He

shall appear, we shall be like Him

. that is, we shall be like

the Son in our degree; not in substance but in sonship, which

we shall partake from Him. If then you speak of the Son

I-limself as being merely by participation, then indeed

call Him Like-in-substance; but thus spoken of, He is

not " Truth," nor "Light" at all, nor in nature God.

But He is, not merely by participation, but in nature and

truth, Son, Light, 'Visdom, God; and being all this by

nature, not by sharing, therefore He is properly called,

not Like-in-substance, but One-in-substance. This justifies

the Nicene Fathers in having laid down, what it was

beconling to express, that the Son, begotten from the

Father's substance, is One-in-substance or Consubstantial

with Him. And if we have been taught as those

Bishops were, let us not fight with shadows, especially as

knowing that they who have so defined have made

this confession of faith, not to misrepresent the truth,

but as vindicating it and piety towards Christ, and

further as destroying the blasphemies against Him of the

Ario-maniacs For this must be considered and noted

carefully, that, in using Unlike-in-substance, and Other-

in-su bstance, we signify not the true" Son, but some one of

the creatures, and a supposititious and adopted Son, which

pleases the heretics; but when we speak uncontroversially

of the One-in-substance, we signify a genuine Son born of

the J!'ather; though at this Christ's enmnies often burst

with rage.

61. What then I have learned myself, and have heard

Inen of judgment say in their discussions, I have written

in few words; but ye, remaining on the foundation of the

A postles, and holding fast the traditions of the Fathers,

pray that now at length all strife and rivalry may cease,

and the futile questions of the heretics may be condemned.


130


EPISTLE OF ATIIANASIUS, ON THE


C HAP VI. and all logomachy; and the guilty and murderous

heresy of the Arians may disappear, and the Truth

may shine again ill the hearts of all, so that all everywhere

may say the sanle thing, and think the same thing; and that

no Ariau contumelies remaining, there may be said and con-

fessed in every Church, One Lm"d, one faith, one baptism, in

Christ Jesus our Lord, through whOln to the Father be the

g10ry and the strength, unto ages of ages. AmOll.


POSTSCRIPT.

After I had written my account of the Counûils, I had

information that that n10st impious Constantius had sent

Letters to the Bishops staying in Arin1Ínum; and I took

pains to get copies of them from true brethren, and to send

theJn to you, and also what the Bishops answereù; that

you may know the in1pious unscrupulousness of the

EUlperor, and the Bi

hops' firm and unswerving hold of

the Truth.


Translation of his Letter. 6

"Constantius, conquering and triunlphant, Augustus,

to all Bishops who are assmnbled at ArÌIninum.

"That the divine and adorable J

aw is our chief care, yonr

Rxcellencies arc not the nlen to be ignorant; but as yct

we have been unable to receive the twenty Bishops sent


G These two Letters are in Soer. Rist. ii. 15, in a di

erent version

íi. 37. And the latter in Thcod. from the Latin.


COUNCILS HELD AT ARBIINUM AND SELEUOIA. 151


by your wisdom, and charged with the legation from ED. BEN.


 33-511.

you, as being pressed by a necessary expedition against

the barbarians; and, as you know, it beseems to have the soul

clear from every care, when one handles the matters of the

Divine Law. Therefore we have ordered the Bishops to

await at Adrianople our. return, that, when all public

affairs are well arranged, then at length we may hear and

weigh their suggestions. Let it not then be grievous to

your patience to await their return, that, '-vhen they come

back with our answer to you, you may be able to bring

matters to a close which so deeply affect the well-being of

the Catholic Church."

This was what the Bishops received at tne hands of

three messengers.


Copy of the Bishops' Reply.


"The Ijetter of your humanity we have received, most

\'eligious Lord Emperor, stating that, on account of stress

of public affairs, as yet you have been unable to see our

legates, and bidding us to await their return, until your

piety shall be advised by them of what we have defined

conformably to our ancestors. However, we now profess

and aver at once by these presents, that we shall not

recede from our purpose, as we also instructed our legates.

We claim then that you will with serene countenance

cominand these letters of our mediocrity to be read before

you; as well as that you will favourably receive those

with which we charge our legates. This, however, in

your graciousness you cOInprehend as well as we, that

great grief and sadness at present prevails, from the cir-

CUlnstance that, in these your most happy days, so many

Churches are without their Bishops. And next, we request

of your humanity, most religious Lord Emperor, that if it


.


152


EPISTLE OF ATHANASIUS, ETC.


CHAP. VI. please your piety, you would bid us, before the

severe winter weather sets in, to return to our

Ohurches, that so we may be able to offer with om' people to

the Omnipotent God and to our Lord and Saviour Christ, His

Only-begotten Son, the full measure of our wonted prayers,

in behalf of your inlperial sway, as indeed we have ever

made them, and as we nl:l,ke thelu at this pre.')ent."


TI-IREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS

AGAI


T AHIANISl\L


PREFATORY NOTICE.


THE following Three Discourses against Arianism, the grcatest

work of their Author, are written on a definite plan, though

not without some want of method and order in the execution.

They consist mainly of a doctrinal comment, both controver-

sial and didactic, upon cardinal passages of Scripture, which the

Arians urged as inconsistent with the Catholic dogma of our

Lord's proper divinity. Twelve texts, or groups of texts, are

examined in this aspect and their real meaning determined,

nine of them giving occasion for enlarging on IIis Divine

Nature and His Economical Office, and three 011 the circmn-

stances and results of His Incarnation.

To this extended comment, which is the rich staple of the

work, is prefixed a series of answers to certain elementary

fonnulæ and à prior'i assulnptions of Arianism, such as have

heen more or less already dealt with in the two preceding

Bpistles, and which 1I1Oreover, from their close connexion with

each other and the here8Y itself, naturally present themselves

once more in various places of the exposition of Scripture

passages, as in the three chapters introductory of the comment OIl

Provo viii. 22. Such iInpprfection in logical arrangcnlcnt was,

in so large a suhject and in the instauce of a writer with so little

lei

ure, unavoidable: a more noticeable blemish is the dislo-

cation of the chapter answering the Arian question

 whether


he .qenncsis was

ll act oK the Divine 'VIlI; which, iU8teau (if


154 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS.


fonning one of the subjects of the introductory argumentation,

prior to the comments on texts of Scripture, has been thrown

to the end of the work, as if a Postscript or Appendix, very

much as the chapter on the" Illgenerate" occurs in the de

Decretis, snpr. p. 49. I have ventured in this Translation to

transpose this chapter to what seems its more natural place.

Vide infr. pp. 191-204.

In cutting off the so-called fourth OrRtion or Discourse

frOIn the Three which precede it in Montiaùcon's Edition, as if

not belonging to Athanasius's work against Arianism, I am

exercising the saIne liberty as the learned Benedictine himself

takes as regards these Discourses, in reducing Photius's Five, or

Pentabiblus, to Four by cutting off the first of them. 1\1:y

reasons are given in "Theological Tracts," Dissert. i.

As I have mentioned Photius's name, it may be well to

cite here the judgment of that great literary authority on

St. Athanasius's Pentabiblus, of which these Three Discourses

form the substance.

"In his writings Athanasius is ever perspicuous, never

wordy, never involved. He is keen, deep, nervous in his

mode of arguing, and marvellously fertile. His argumentation

has nothing poor or puerile in it (as Imppens in the case of

the young or half-educated), but is philosophical and magni-

ficent, full of thought aud with broad views, fortified by

testimonies of Scripture and weighty proofs. Especially such

is he in his treatises 'against the Greeks,' and 'on the

Incarnation; , and in his Pentabiblus against Arius, which is a

triumphant defeat of every heresy, and eminently of Arianism.

And if we were to say that Gregory Theologus and the divine

Basil, as if drawing from a well, derived from tl1Ís Treatise

their beautiful and IUlninous argnments against the heresy, I

consider we should not be far from the mark."


THREE DISCOURSES OF

Arr'-HANASIUS,

&0.


CHAPTER J.


1. ALL heresies have in them an eleinent of mad ED. ERN.

Orat. i. 1.

impiety, which, when at length they have gone out

from us, is recognised by all, as it was of old time. Indeed,

the very fact of that departure is in itself an evidence, as

blessed John has written, that, whatever be their doctrine,

it does not breathe nor has breathed a Christian spirit.

Hence our Saviour says, that they who gather not with us,

scatter with the Evil One, and then, while n1en are slun1ber-

ing, watch their opportunity for sowing the field of the

Ohurch with poisonous seed, that in death they may have

companions. One heresy, ho,vever, there is, the latest that

has gone from us, the Arian, as it is called, which, in its

craft and unscrupulousness, is a very forerunner of Anti-

christ. This heresy, in order to avoid the proscription

which is the sure destiny of the whole falnily of error,

affects, like its father in our Lord's Temptation, to array

itself in the words of Scripture.! By this contrivance it is

forcing its way into paradise, aud has seduced certain sonls

to think bitter sweet, and to take and eat, with Eve in

the beginning. Aud this is why I find it necessary, as you

I Vid. Append. Scripture.


156 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. I. exhort me. now to undertake its refutation,2 that

they who are far from its influence, may continue

firm in shunning it, and that those whom it has deceived

n1ay repent, abjuring their good opinion of it, and under-

standing that to call its adherents Ohristians, argues little

knowlcdge whether of Scripture, or of Ohristianity and its

faith.

2. For what resemblance to our holy faith have they

discovered in it, to n1ake them so wantonly Inailltain that

its supporters propound nothing evil? This in truth is to

call even Caiaphas a Christian, and to reckon the traitor

Judas still among the Apostles, and to say that they who

asked for Barabbas instead of the Saviour did no evil, and

to maintain Hymenæus and Alexander as right-minded, and

that the A postle slandered them. But neither would a

Ohristian bear to hear this, nor would he consider the man

who dared to say it of sane mind. For with them in place

of Ohrist is Arius, as with the

Ianichees Manichæus;

and for 1Ioses and the other saints they have made the

discovery of one Sotades, a n1an whom even Gentiles laugh

at, and of the daughter of I-Ierodias. For of the one has

Arius ÌInitated the dissolute and effClninate tone, in tho

Thalias which he has written; and the other he has rivalled

in her dance, reeling and frolicking in his blasphemies

against the Saviour; till tho victiIns of his heresy lose

their wits aHd go foolish, and change the N aIlle of the

Lord of Glory into the likeness uf the Ùnaf/e qf forr uptiblp

'man, and for Ohristians COlne to be called Ariaus, bearing

this baùge of their impiety.

3. Let them not atterllpt to ,'etort that on this score they

are on a par with us, because, as we call theIll Arialls, so


:! In these Orations he scarcely

makes mention of the Homoüsion,

his object apparently ùeing simply

to show the momentous issue of


the controvßl'sy itself, and the

sophifo;tries of the heretics. Vid.

Append.


ÂGAINS'f ARIANISM.


157


they in turn may name us froIll our t.eacners. 3 No, ED. BEN.

i.

 1

2.

never at any tinlC did Christian peuple take their _ _

title from the Bishops among theIll, but fronl the Lord, on

whom we rest our faith. Thu

, though the blessed Apostles

have become our teachers, and have n1Ïnistered the Saviuur's

Gospel, yet not from them have we our title, but from Christ

we are and are named Christians. But for those who derive

the faith which they profess from private IJer

ons, good

reaSon is it such IneH should bear the Baine of those whose

property they have become. Yes surely; while all of us are

and are called Christians after Christ, l\Iarcion broached a

heresy time since and was cast out; and those who continued

with the Bishop who ejected him rmnailled Christians; but

those who followed l-"Iarcion were called Christians no more,

but henceforth l\Iarcionites. Thus Valentinus also, and

Basilides, and :ßlanichæus, and Simon

Iagus, have inl-

parted their own name to their followers; and are accosted

as Valelltinialls, or as Basilidians, or as Manichees, or as

Sinlonians; and others, Cataphrygians from Phrygia, and

from N ovatus N ovatians. So too Meletius, when ejected

by Peter the Bishop and Martyr, caned his party no longer

Uhristialls but

Ieletialls; 4 and so in consequence when

Alexander of blessed mmllory had cast out Arius, those

who remained with Alexander remained Christians; but

those who went out with Arius left the Saviour's nanle tu

us who were with Alexander, and as to them they were

henceforward denon1Íllated Arians.

4. Behold then, after Alexander's death too, those who

communicate with his successor Athanasius, and those

with whOln the said Athanasius conllllunicates, are

instances of the saIne rule; none of them bear his


3 Oll the attempt, continual but

fruitless, to affix some name short

of "Catholic" or "Christian" on

the children of the Church, vid.


Assay on ])cv. Doctr. p. 25<J., and

App. Catlwlic.

4 Vid. .i11eletius.


158 THRg}41 nISCOURSES OF ATRANASIUS


CHAP. I name, nor is he llanwd fr01n theIn, but all in like

manner, and as is u

ual, are called Christians. For

though we have a succession of teachers and become

their disciples, still, because we are taught by them the

things of Christ, we both are, and are called, Christians

aU the same. But those who follow the heretics, though

they have innumerable successors in their heresy, yet for

certain bear the name of him who devised it. Thu

,

though Arius be dead, and many of his party have suc-

ceeded hiIn, yet those who think with him, as being known

from Arius, are called Arians. And, it is a remarkable

evidence of this, that those of the Greeks who even at this

time con1e into the Church, on giving up the superstition

of idols, take the name, not of their catechists, but of the

Saviour, and are henceforth for Greeks called Christians;

while those of them who go off to the heretics, and, again,

all who frOln the Church change to this heresy, abandon

Christ's nalne, and at once arc called Arialls, as no longer

holding Ohrist's faith, but having become heirs of the

Inania of Arius.

5. flow then can they be Christians, who for Ohristians

are Ario-maniacs? or how are they of the Catholic Church,

who have shaken off the Apostolical faith, and become

authors of what is new and evil? who, after abandoning

the oracles of divine Scripture, call Arius's Thalias a new

wisdom.? and with reason too, for a novelty that wisdOln

is. And hence a man Inay mar\rel that, whereas many have

written many treatises and abundant homilies upon the

Olù Testament and the New, yet in nOlle of them is a

Thalia found; nay nor among the more respectable of the

Greeks, but among those only who sing such strains over

their cups, amid cheers and jokes, when men are merry, that

the rest may laugh; till this lnarvellous Arius, who, taking

no grave pattern, and ignorant even of what is respectable,

while he stole largely from other heresies, would in the


AG AINST A RrANIS

I.


15




lndicron

 go nothillg short of Sotallps.5 For wlmt

J)i


f"

beseemed hin1 more, when he would dance forth

against the Saviour, than to throw his Ï1npious words into

dissolute and abandoned metres? that, while a mall, as

'Visdom says, is known from the utterance of his word, so

from those nUInbers should be seen the writer's effeminate

soul and corruption of thought. So much for his style of

writing; now let us inquire into the luaLter of which it is

the expresÛon.


OHAPTER II.

G. THUS he starts :-

., According to faith of God's elect, God's prudent ones,

Holy children, rightly dividing, God's Holy Spirit

receiving,

Have I learned this from the partakers of wisdom,

Accomplished, divinely taught, and wise in all things.

Along their track have I been walking, with like

opInIons,

I the very famous, the much suffering for God's glory;

And taught of God, I have acquired wisdOlll and

knowledge."

Then follow his blasphemies :-" God was not always a

Father;" but" once God was aloue and not yet a Father,

but afterwards He became a Father." ..." The Son was not

always ;" for,. whereas all things were made out of no-

thing, and aU things are creatures and works, so the

VV ord of God I-limself "was nutde out of nothing," and

"once was not," and "was not before His generation,"

but as others "had an origin of creatioIl." "For God

"

he says, "was alone, and the Word as yet was not, nor

the 'VisdOlfi. rrhell, wishing to fralne us, thereupon lIe


5 Via. Apprnd. .l?"ius.


160 THREE DISCOUR

ES OF ATHANA

lUS


CHAP. II . made a certain being, a.nd na.uled tIin1 Word and

\Visdolll and Son, that He n1Ïght fOl'lll us by Ineans

of Hilll." Accordingly he says that there are two vVisdOlns,

fir

t, the attribute co-existent with God, and next, that by

this 'Visdol11 the Son was generated, and was only named

\Visdom and 'V ord as partaking of it. "For vVisdoln,"

saith he, "at the will of the wise God, had its existence

by 'Visdom." In like Inanner, he says, that there is

another 'V ord in God besides the Son, and that the Son

again, as partaking of it, is nallled 'V ord and Son according

to grace. And this too is an idea proper to their heresy



as shown in other works of theirs, that there are Inany

powers, one of which is God's own by nature and eternal;

but that Ohrist, again, is not the true power of God: but,

as others, one of the so-called powers; one of which,

nanle]y, the locust and the caterpillar, is called in Scrip-

ture, not merely the power but the great power. The

others are many and are like the Son, and of thenl David

speaks in the Psahns, when he says the Lord of Hosts or

powers. And by nature, as all beings, so the 'V ord Hiln-

self is alterable, and rmnains good by His own free will,

while He chooseth; when, however, He wills, He can

alter as we can, as being of an al terablc nature. For

"therefore," saith he, "as' foreknowing that He would be

good, did God by anticipation bestow on IIÜn this glory,

which afterwarks, as nlan, He attained from virtue. rrhus

in consequence of His ,,yorks foreknown, did God bring

it to pass that He, being such, should come into being."

7. Moreover he has dared to say, that "the 'V ord is

not the true God; " that "though He is calJed God He is

not very God," but "by participation of grace, lIe, as

all the others, is God only in nalne." And, whereas all

beings are unlike and foreign to God in substance, so

too is "the ,y ord unlike and alien in all things to the

"Father's substance and essence," and belongs to thingß


AGAINST ARIANISM.


161


created, and is one of these. Afterwards, he says

D




:

that "even to the Son the Father is invisible,"

and "the Word cannot perfectly and exactly either see or

know His own Father;" but even what He knows and

what He sees, He knows and sees "ill proportion to His

own measure," as we also know according to our own

capacity. For the Son, too, he says, not only knows not

the Father exactly, for lie fails in comprehension, but" He

knows not even His own substance; "-and that "the sub-

stances of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,

are separate in nature, and apart, and disconnected, and

alien, and without participation of each other;" and, in

his own words, "utterly unlike to each other in sub-

stance and glory, infinitely so." Thus as to "likeness of

glory and substance," he says that the Word is entirely

foreign to both the Father and the Holy Ghost. In such ·

words hath the impious spoken; declaring that the Son is

distinct by Hhnself, and in no respect partaker of the

Father.

8. Who can bear all this without losing self-com-

mand? The heaven, as the Prophet says, was astonished,

and the earth shuddered at the transgression of the Law.

But the sun, with greater horror once, impatient of the

bodily contulnelies which the common Lord of us all

voluntarily encountered for us, turned away, and, with-

drawing his rays, made that day sunless. And shall not

all human kind at Aríus's blasphemies be struck speech-

less, and stop their ears, and shut their eyes, to escape

hearing them or seeing their author? Rather, will not

the Lord Himself have reason to denounce the unthank-

fulness, as well as the im piety, of such men, in the words

which He hath already uttered by the Prophet Hosea?

fVoe unto them, for they have fled from JIe; destruction upon

them because they have transgressed against iJIe

. thO'l

CJIt I

have redeemed them yet they have spoken lies against jf e.

M


..


162


THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. III. And soon after, They imagine mischief against J.Jfe;

they turn away to a nothing. For to turn away

from the 'V ord of God, which is, and to fashion to them-

selves one that is not, is to fall to what is nothing. For

this was why the Ecumenical Council, when Arius thus

spoke, cast him from the Church, and anathematised him,

as impatient of such impiety.6 And ever since has Arius's

error been reckoned for a heresy more than ordinary, he

being known as Christ's foe, and forerunner of Antichrist.

Though then so great a conden1nation of this impious

teaching be sufficient in a special way to make all men flee

from it, as I said above, yet since certain persons called

Christian, either in ignorance or in pretence, think it an

indifferent matter in relation to the Truth, and call its

professors Christians, proceed we to put some questions to

them, according to our powers, thereby to expose its

um;crupulous character. Perhaps, when thus encountered,

they will be silenced, and flee from it, as frOll1 the sight of

a serpent. 7


CHAPTER lIT.


The Son of God llJu'reate and from eVPrlasting.

9. If then they consider that the use of certain phrases

of divine Scripture changes the blasphemy of the Thalia into

}Jraise and blessing, then of course they ought simply to

disown Christ with the present Jews, when they see how

those ,Jews study the Law aHd the Prophets; perhaps too

they will deny the Law anù the Prophets like l\lanichees,

considering the latter read SOlne portions of the Gospels.

But what is the USe of appealing to the Scriptures, if it is an


n Vid. Append. ATi1t.'1.

7 "Etiamsi in ürroris eorum

rlestructionem nulli conderen-

tur libri, hoc ipsum solum, quo(l


hæretici Bunt pronuDciati, ortho-

doxorum securitati sufficeret. "

Vig. contr. Eutych. i. p. 4H-t.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


163


imperfect appeal? To believe in one doctrine avails ED. BEN.

i.

 8.

not, if you deny the rest. Arius then has lost his

all of faith, and betrays his ignorance of our whole creed,

and does but play the hypocrite when he denounces other

heresies. For how can he speak truth concerning the Father,

who denies the Son that reveals Him to us? or how can he

be orthodox concerning the Spirit, while he speaks profanely

of the Word from whom is Its supply? and who will trust

his teaching concerning the Resurrection, denying, as he

does, Christ, for our sakes the First-begotten from the dead t

and how shall he not err in respect to His incarnate

presence also, who is simply ignorant of the Son's genuine

and true generation from the Father? For thus, the old

Jews also, denying the \V ord, and saying, JVe have no 7ân.fJ

but CæsaT, were forthwith stripped of all they had, and

forfeited the light of the Lamp, the fragrance of ointment.



the knowledge of prophecy, and the Truth itself; till now

they l1nderstand nothing, but are walking as in darkness.

10. A great darkness surely this heresy! for who was

ever yet a hearer of such a doctrine? or whence or from

whom did its abettors and hirelings 9 gain it? who

thus expounded to them when they were at school? who

told them, "Abandon creature-worship and then draw

near and worship a creature and a work"? 1 But if they

theinselves own that now for the first time they haye heard

it, let them not deny that this heresy is foreign to

Christian

, and not from our fathers? But what is not

frOlll our fathers, but has been lighted on in this day,

how can it be but that of which the blessed Paul has fore-

told, that in the latter times some shall depart fTom the sound

faith, gi'ving heed to seducing spiTits and doctTines of devils,

in the hypocrisy of liars, cauterizpd in their own conscience,

and turning a'll'a!l frmn the tl"'ltll

? 2


I} Vid. Append. Aria.:ns.

1 Vid. Semi-arians.


2 Vid. supr. p. 7, 14:n('. ß. 5, anrl

Api-'. Ale.cander.


M2


.


164 THnEE DISCOURSES OF ÂTHANASIUS


CHAP. III. 11. For, behold, we take Divine Scripture, and

out of it discourse with freedom concerning the

holy Faith, and set it up as a light upon its candlestick,

and say :-" He is true Son of the Father, natural and

genuine, and proper to His substance, Wisdom Only-be-

gotten, True and only Word of God, not a creature, nor a

work, but an Offspring proper to the Father's substance.

And therefore it is that He is True God, because from the

True Father JIe exists con substantially. As to other beings,

to whom He has said, I said ye ære gods, only by participa-

tion of the 1V ord through the Spirit have they this grace;

but lIe is the Impress of the Father's Person, 3 and Light

from Light, and Power, and true Image of the Father's sub-

stance. For this too the Lord has said, He that hath seen

lrle, hath seen the Father. And He ever was and is, and

never was not. For the Father being everlasting, His Word

and His Wisdom Inust be everlasting also;" such is our

holy faith, but those champions of Arius, what have. they

to show us from the infalnous Thalia? What but this?

that "God was not always a Father, but became so after-

wards; the Son was not always, for He was not before His

generation; He is not from the Father, but He, as others,

has come into subsistence out of nothing; He is not proper

to the Father's substance, for IIe is a creature and work"?

And "Ohrist is not true God, but He, as others, was made

God by participation; the Son has not exact knowledge

of the Father, nor does the Word see the Father perfectly;

and neither exactly understands nor knows the }'ather.

He is not the true and only Word of the Father, but is in

name only called Word and \Visdoln, and is called by

grace Son and Power. He is not unalterable, as the

"Father is, but alterable in nature, as the creatures, and He

comes short of perfect knowledge of the Father reaching

to COIn prehension."


a V7rÓl1Tal1U;;.


AGAINST ARIANliM.


165


12. \V onderful this heresy, not plausible even,


'9

fo..

but Inaking speculations against IIÜn that is, that

lIe be not, and everywhere putting forward blasphemy

for blessing! Were anyone, after inquiring into both sides, to

be asked, whether of the two he would follow in faith, or

whether of the two spoke fitly of God,-nay, if these fosterers

of impiety thelnselves be asked, what ought they to answer?

For this is the cardinal question, "\Vas lIe, or was He not?

ever, or not before His generation? without beginning, or

from this and from them ? true Son, or by adoption and frOln

participation and as a conception? Is it right to call

Him one of God's works, or to unite Him to the Father;

to consider HÜn unlike the Father in substance, or like and

proper to Him; a creature, or Him through whom the

creatures came to be? shall we say that He is the Father's

Word, or that there is another Word beside Him, and that

by this other He was made, and by another Wisdom; and

that He is only named Wisdom and 1V ord, and is a partake!

of this Wisdom, and second to it ?

13. "\Yhich of these theologies, I say, in its language con-

cerning the Lord Jesus, is consonant with Scripture? 4

and, if there is only one answer to be made, why do you

not make it? For there is no middle path, and they

know this well; but in their craft, I say, they conceal it, not

having the courage to speak out, but uttering something

else. For should they speak, a condemnation would

follow; and should they be suspected, proofs from

Scripture will be cast at them from every side. V\There-

fore, in their craft, as children of this world, after feeding

their so-called lalnp from the wild olive, ànd fearing lest


4. Athan., it may be said,

always assumes the traditional or

ecclesiastical truth (which the

Arians granted) "Christ is Goel,"

and then he goes at once to


Rcripture to illustrate and explain

it. Which explanation, he asks,

ours or the Arian. best accords

with Scripture?


166 THRE1<

 DlSCOURSEts OF ATHANASIUS


CnAP. III. it should soon be quenched (for it is said, the light

of the 'Wicked shall be put out), they hide it under

the bushel of their hypocrisy, and make a different profession,

and boast of patronage of friends and authority of Con-

stantins, that what with their hypocrisy and their boasts,

those who come to them may be kept from seeing how

fonl their heresy .is.

14. Is it not detestable, again, on this very score, tbat it

dares not speak out, but is kept hid by its own friends, and

fostered as serpents are? for fron1 what sources ha.ve they

got together these words of theirs? or froIn whOln havt'

they received what they venture to say? Not anyone

nlan can they specify who has supplied it. For who is

there in all Inankind, Greek or Barbarian, who ventures

to rank aInong creatures Him whon1 he confesses the while

to be God, and says, that He was not till He was lllade?

or who is there, who to the God in whom he has put faith

refuses to give credit, when He says, This is J11y Beloved

Son, on the pretence that He is not a Son, but a creature ?

rather, such madness would rouse a universal indignation.

Nor, again, does Scripture afford thenl ùny þretext; for it

has been often shown, and it shall be shown now, that

what they teach is alien to the divine oracles. Therefore,

since all tbat remains is to say that from the de\Til CaIne

their mania, (for of such opinions he alone is sower,)

proceed we to resist him; for with hin1 is our real

conflict, and they are but instruments ;-that, the Lord

aiding us, and the enemy, as he is wont, being overconle

with argulllents, they lnay be put to shRIne, when they see

him without resource who sowed this heresy in theIn, and

Juay learn, though late, that, as bei ng Arians, they are not

Jhristians.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


167


CHAPTER IV.


Answer to intellectual objections to the doctrine.

15. AT his suggestion then ye have Inaintained, . ED. BEN.

1.

 10-11.

and ye think, that "there was once when the

Son was not;" this is the first cloak of your theory of

doctrine which has to be stripped off. Say then what was

once when the Son was not, 0 slanderous and inlpious

n1en ! 6 If ye say the Father, your blasphemy is but

greater; for it is Ï1npious to say that He was at one time,

or to signify Hinl in the word "once." For He is ever, and

is now, and as the Son is, so is He, and is Himself He

that is, and Father of the Son. But if ye say that the

Son was once, when lie HÍ1nself was not, the answer is

unmeaning. For how could He both be and not be? In

this difficulty, you can but answer, that there was a time

when the Word was not; for your very adverb "once"

naturally signifies this. And your other, "The Son was

not before His generation," is equivalent to saying, "There

was once when He was not," for both the one and the

other signify that there is a time before the Word.

16. Whence then this your discovery? for no passage of

Holy Scripture has used such language of the Saviour, but

rather "always" and "eternal" and " co-existent always

with the Father." For, In the begirtnÙ

g was the Word,


15 Athan. observes that this

formula of the Arians is a mere

evasion to escape using the word

" time," viel. also Cyril. Thesaur.

iv. pp. 19, 20. Else let them

explain,-" There was." what

"when the Son was not? " or

w/ud was before the Son P since

He Himself was before all times

d.ud ages, which He created.

Did they mean, however, that

it was the Father who "was"

before t!le Son P This was


true, if "before" was taken, not

to imply time, but origination

or beginning. And in this sense

the first verse of St. John's Gos-

pel may be interpreted, H In thE;

:Beginning," or Origin. i.e., in the

Father, "was the Word. " 1'h us

Athan. himself understands that

text., Orat. iv.

 1. Vid. also o rat.

iii.

 9. N yssen. pontI'. Eunom.

iii. p. lOG. Cyril. Thesaur. p.

312.


168 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. IV. and the Word was with God, and the Word was

---- God. And in the Apocalypse he says, Who is and

who was and who is to come. N ow who can rob "who is"

and "who was" of eternity? This too in confutation of

the Jews hath Paul written in his Epistle to the Romans,

Of whom as concerning the flesh is Christ, who is over all,

God blessed for .ever; and to shaine the Greeks, he has said,

The invisible things of Him from the creation of the 'l()orld are

clearly seen, being undøì"stood by the things that are made, even

His eternal Power and Godhead; but who the Power of God

is, he teaches us elsewhere hinlself, saying, Christ God's

Power and God's Wisdom. Surely in these words it is not

the Father whom he designates, as ye often have whispered

one to another, affirming that the Father is His eternal

power. This is not so; for he says not, "God Himself iB

the power," but "His is the power. " Very plain is it to

all that "His" is not "He;" yet not sOlnething alien

but rather something proper to Him.

17. Study too the context, and tU1.n to the Lord; to that

Lord WhOIl1 the Apostle elsewhere calls the Spirit, to that

Son, whom here he calls the Power of God. Then you

will see that it is the Son of whom he speaks. For afteI'

making mention of the creation, he fitly speaks of the

Framer's Power as seen in it, which Power, I say, is the

Word of God, by whom all things came to be. Oreation

is not sufficient of itself to make God known. You may

as well say it was sufficient to come into being of itself.

As it was through the Son that it was niade, so through

the Son it speaks of God. 6 As in Him all things consist, so


6 Athan. seems here to give

expression to a feeling not un-

common now; that when we

contemplate this beautiful visible

world, e.g., as its hidden life bursts

forth in spring, we recognise in

it a unity, power, intelligence,


harmony, sweetness, and joyous-

ness, which we may, if we choose,

call an anima mundi, but which

to an óp{)w!: {)f.WPWV is the Primo-

genitum Verbum Dei witnessing

to His Eternal Fa.ther. Vid. infr.

p. 355.


AGAINST ARIANIS1\f.


16




of neceRsity, a rightly ordered mind sees the franl- .ED. BEN.

I.

 11-12.

ing Word in it, and through Him begins to appre- __

hend the Father. Ànd if, as the Saviour also says, No one

knoweth the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son shall

Teveal Him, and if on Philip's asking, ðhow us the FatlM1", He

said not, "Behold the creation," but, He that hath seen

lIle, hath seen the Father, reasonably doth Paul, while accusing

the Greeks of contemplating the harn10ny ànd order of the

creation without reflecting on the Framing Word within

it, (for the creatures witness to their own FraIner,) and as

desirous that through the creatures they might apprehend

the true God, and abandon creature-worship, reasonably,

I say, doth He speak of His eternal Power and Godhead, in

order thereby to signify that tlu'ough the Son alone can

they interpret creation aright.

18. And when the sacred writere say Who exists before

the ages, and By whOln He made the ages, they thereby as

clearly preach the eternal and everlasting being of the

Son, even while they are designating God HÏ1nself. Thus,

if Esaias says, The Eve'rlasting God who has f

trnished the

ends of the earth; and Susanna, 0 EverlastÙlg God; and

Baruch wrote, I will cry unto the Everlasting in my days,

and shortly after, JIy hope is in the Everlasting, that He

will save you, and joy is come unto me from the Holy One;

yet forasmuch as the Apostle, writing to the Hebrews,

says, Who being the Reflection of IJis glory and the Impress

of His Person; and David, too, in the eighty-ninth Psahn,

And the Brightness of the Lord be upon us, and, In Thy

Light shall we see Light, who has so little sense as to doubt

of the eternity of the Son? for when did Inan see light

without the reflection of its radiance, that he may say of

the Son, "There was once when He was not," or

"Before IIis generation He was not."

19. And the words addressed to the Son in the hundred

and forty-fourth Psahn, Thy kingdom is a kingd(}m of tlte


170 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. IV. ages, forbid anyone to Ï1nagine any interval at all

in which the 'V ord did not exist. For if every

interval is measured in the ages, and of all the ages the W orcl

is King and Maker, therefore, whereas no interval at all exists

prior to lIim, it were madness to say, "There was once when

the Everlasting was not," and" FrOlll nothing is the Son."

20. And whereas the Lord HÌInself says, I am the Truth,

not "I becalne the Truth;" but always, I am,-I am the

SheplifJrd,-I am the L'i!Jht,-and again, Gall ye jJle not, the

Lord and the ii/aster? and ye call


IfJ 'Well, for so I am, who,

hearing snch language fronl God, frOIll the Wisdom and

'V ord of the Father, speaking of HiInself, will any longer

hesitate about its truth, and not forthwith believe that in

the phrase I arn, is signified that the Son is eternal and

unoriginate ?

21. It is plain then fron1 the a.bove that the Scriptures

decJare the Son's eternity; it is equally pJain ffOlD what

follows that the Arian phrases "He was not," and

"before" and "when," are in the same Scriptures pre-

dicated of creatures.

Ioses, for instance, in his account

of the generation of our system, says, And (Ivery plant of

the field, before it 'Was in the earth, and every herb of the field

before it grew; for the Lord God had not caused it to rain

upon tlte earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

And in DeuteronOJuy, When the llost High divided to the

nations. And the Lord said in His own Person, If ye

loved ilIe, ye would 'rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father,

for my Father is grfJater than I. And no'W I have told you

before it come to pass, that 'When it is come to pass, ye might

believe. And concerning the creation He says by 8010l11on,

Or ever the earth 'Was, 'When there were no dejJths, I was

brought forth; 'When there 'Were no fountains abounding 'With

'Water. Before the mountains 'Were settled, before the hills,

was I hrought fo'rth. And Before Abraham 'Was, I am.

And concerning- J eretllias He says, Before I formpd thee in


AGAINST ARIANISM.


171


the womb, I knew thee. And David in the Psalm En. BEN.

i.

 13-14.

says, Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever

the earth and the world were made, Thou art God from ever-

lasting and world without end. And in Daniel, Susanna c7"ied

out with a loud voice and said, 0 everlasting God, that knoUJest

the secrets, and knowest all things before they come to be.

22. Thus it appears that the phrases "once was not,"

and "before it came to be," and "when," and the like,

are fitly used - of creatures, which COlne out of nothing,

but are alien to the 'V ord. But if such terlns are used in

Scril)ture of things created, but, "ever" of the Word,

it foHows, that the Son did not COlne out of nothing, nor

. is in the nUln LeI' of such things at an, but is the Father's

lInage and W 01'<1 eternal, never having not been, but

Leing ever, as the eternal Reflection of a Light which is

eternal. Why iInagine then tinles before the SOil? or

wherefore blaspheme the Word as if He began later than

time began,-He by whom even the ages were made? for

how did tiIne or age subsist, when the "\V ord, as you say,

had not yet appeared, through whom all things were made,

and without whom was made not one thing? Or why, when

you do really mean tÌlne, do you not plainly say, "a tune

was when the Word was not?" but you hide the word

" tiIne" to deceive the silnple, but you do not at all con-

ceal your own spirit, nor, even if you did, could you escape

discovery. For you stiH sÌlnply mean tÜnes, when you

say, "There was when He was not

" and "He was nuL

Lefore IIis generation."


CHAPTER V.


Answer to intellectual obI'dionJ.

23. THE Son, then, according to Scripture, is eternal,

uncreate, and the creating principle of all things. \Vhen


.


112 fHREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. V. we thus speak, they make amnver, "If so, if He

eternally co-exists with the Father, call llim no

more the Father's Son, but His brother." 0 insensate and

contentious! For if we said only that He was eternally

with the Father, and not His Son, their pretended scruplE:

would have some plausibility; but if, while we say that He

is eternal, we also confess Him to be the Son from the

Father, how can He that is begotten be considered brother

of HiIn who begets? And if our faith conten1plates a

Father and a Son, what brotherhood is there between

theIn? and how can the 1V ord be called brother of HiIn

whose Word He is? This is not an objection of lnen

really ignorant, for they con1prehend how the truth lies;

but it is a Jewish pretence, and that of Inen who, in

Soloinon's words, through desire sepa'rate themselves from the

truth. For the Father and the Son were not generated

from some pre-existing origin, that we may account Them

brothers, but the Father is the origin of the Son and

begat Him; and the Father is Father, and not the Son of

any: and the Son is Son, and not brother.

24. Nor can any fault be found, as they would wish, in

speaking of an eternal offspring. So far from His not

being eternal because He is the Son, I will say that He

could not be the Son unless He. were eternal. For

consider; was the substance of the Father ever imperfect,

so that what belonged to it and was a con1plelnent neces-

sary for its perfection was added afterwards? Man is an

imperfect being, and soon grows into the maturity of his

powers; but God's offspring is eternal, because God's

nature is ever perfect. If then the 'V ord be not a real

Son of God, but a divine work brought out of nothing

and merely called a son, if they can prove this, by all

Ineans let them cry out, "Once He was not;" but, if He

is in truth Son, as the Father says and the Scriptures

proclaiIn, and a son is nothing else than what is generated


AGAINS

 ARIANISM.


173


from the father; so that in short the Son of God ED. BEN.

i.

 13-14.

is to be identified with His Word, and Wisdom,

and Radiance; what can we say but that, in maintaining

"Once the Son was not," they rob God of His Word, like

plunderers, and openly predicate of Him that He was once

without His proper Word and WisdOln,1 and that the Light

was once without Radiance, and the Fountain was once

Larren and dry ? 8 For though they pretend to shrink from

the .name of time, because of those who reproach thein with

it, and say that He was before tinles, yet whereas they assign

certain intervals, in which they Ílnagine He was not, they

are most impious still, as equally suggesting tin1es, and

imputing to God's nature an absence of His Word.

25. This reasoning they cannot meet, if they really hold

Him to be the Son of God; but in truth they do not hold

Him to be such. In name indeed they do, in order tQ

evade the condmnnation which they would otherwise incur,

but they use the word" Son" figuratively, and think that

we cannot use it in a literal and real, without using it in

a material sense. But is it not a grievous error in them,

to have material thoughts about what is iInmateriaI, and

because of the weakness of their own nature to deny

what is natural and proper to the Father? It comes to

this, that they ought to deny the Father also, because they

understand not how God is, or what the Father is, if,

in their folly, they measure by thelnselves the Offspring

of the Father. And men in such a state of n1Ín d as

to consider that there cannot be a Son of God, delnand

our pity; however, they must be interrogated and con-

futed, for the chance of even thus bringing them to their

senSES

26. .àloreover, if, as you say, "the Ron is from nothing,"

and "was not before His generation," He, of conrse, as well

as others, must be called Son and God, and "Visdom, not


T Vid. App. }'fVV1]UL!;.


8 Vid. App. rÉXHO!;.


174 THREE DISCOURSES -OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. v. in the full meaning of the words, but only as a

shadow and similitude of the True, that is, He is

Son by participation; for thus all other creatures consist,

and by sanctification are glorified. You have to tell us,

then, of what He is partaker. All other things partake the

Spirit, but He, according to you, of what is He partaker?

of the Spirit? Nay, rather the Spirit Himself takes from

the Son, as He Himself says; and it is not reasonable to

say that the latter is sanctified by the former. There!ore

it is the Father that the Son partakes; for this only re-

mains to say. N ow this, which is participated, what is it

or whence? If it be something external, provided by the

Father, He will not then be partaker of the Father, but of

v{ hat is external to Him; and no longer will He be even

second after the Father, since He has before Him this other;

nor can He be called Son of the Father, but of that, as

partaking which, He has been called Son and God. And

if this be extravagant and impious, when the Father says,

This is 1ny Beloved Son, and when the Son says that God

is His own Father, it follows that what is partaken is

not external, but from the substance of the Father. And

as to this again, if it be other than the substance of

the Son, an equal extravagance will meet us; there

being in that case son1cthing between thi

 that, is from

the Father and the substance of the Son, whatC\Ter

that be. 9

27. Therefore it is irrelevant and beside the Truth to

say that the Son's participation of the Father consists in

anything external to the Father; and if so, it Inl1st be of

the substance of the Father that He partakes; and if of

the substance, it must be a whole participation, for

portions and separations are foreign to the idea of things

spiritual, and it is all one to say that God is wholly

{)articipated and that He begets; and what does begetting

9 Vid. App. The Son.


AGAIN8T ARIANIS)I.


175


signify but a real Son? And thus the Son is He of i

fir

r6.

whom all things partake, according to that grace

of the Spirit which COInes from Him; and this shows

that the Son himself partakes of nothing, but what is par-

taken of by us from the Father is the Son; for, as partaking

of the Son Himself, we are said to partake of God; and this

is what Peter said, that ye ?nay be partakers in a divine nature;

as says too the Apostle,! Know ye not that ye are the temple

of God? and, TVe are the temple of the Living God. And

beholding the Son, we see the Father; for our conception

and conlprehension of the Son is knowledge concerning

the Father, because He is the proper Offspring from His

substance. And there is nothing to hinder our belief in a

true and literal Son of God; for God is a Spirit, and in

consequence, as He can be partaken of by all beings in

their Ineasure, without any separation or injury to His sub-

stance, as you would yourselves allow, so it is not difficult

to conceive that full and entire participation of His sub.

stance by our Lord, which is generation, and constitute



Him the genuine, the true, the Only-begotten Son of God.

28. COIning Lack then to the eternity of the Son, it

appears that His Sonship is no difficulty in the way of be...

lieving that eternity, and He is identified with the Father's

,y ord and Wisdonl, in and through whOIn He creates and

makes all things.;-and His Radiance too, in whom He

enlightens all things, and is revealed to whom He will;-

and His Inlpress and Image also, in whonl He is contem-

plated and known, whereby He and His Fatlter are one,

and whoso looketh on Him, looketh on the Father ;-and

the Christ, in whonl all things are redeenled, and the new

creation wrought afresh. And on the other hand, the

Son being such Offspring, it is not fitting, rather it is full

of peril, to say that He is a work out of nothing, or that


I Yi(l. ApI/sIll'.


176


THREE DISOOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. VI. He was not before His generation. N or is this

all :- For he who thus speaks of that which belongs

to the Father's substance, already blasphemes the Father

Himself; since necessarily wrong thoughts of Him are

iovolved in false in1agillations about His Son.


CHAPTER VI.


Answer to intellectual objedions.

29. Though this is enough in refutation of the heresy,

its heterodoxy will appear from reasons such as the follow-

ing: if God be Maker of all things by means of His Son,

to deprive the Son of this necessary prerogative is, in fact,

to deprive the Eternal Father of His creative power. Again,

if the Son once was not, then the Triad is not frOll1

eternity, but was a Monad first, and afterwards a Triad, and

so the true knowledge which we have of God grew, it

seems, and took shape. 2 Then again, if the Son has come

out of nothing, I suppose the whole Triad came out of

nothing too, or, what is more serious still, be

ng Divine,

it included in its unity a created thing, which has worship

and glory together with Hin1-who-is ever, and is made up

of strange and alien natures and substances. Is this a

teaching endurable as regards so august a Truth? Is this

an intelligible worship, which is so inconsistent with itself,

as being at one tin1e yes, and at another no? For what we

know, it will receive, as time goes on, some fresh accession,

and so on without IÍ1nit; since by way of accessions at first


2 As t.he name of the Holy

Trinity has been used from the

first and by our Lord's institution

as the name of initiation in the

instance of everyone admitted


into the Clllrr<,h, it is a virtual

proof of our Lord's divinity prior

to and more authoritative than

the Scripture texts concerning it

and catechetical tradition.


Å.GAINST ÅRIANIS

I.


177


Und at starting it received its consistence. And ED. BEN.

i. 0 16-18.

so doubtless it may decrease on the contrary, for

addition plainly adn1Îts of subtraction. But this is not so;

perish the thought! the Triad is not thus brought into

being. It is not generate; but there is an eternal and one

Godhead in a Triad; and of that Holy Triad there is one

glory; and ye presun1e to divide it into different natures. The

Father is eternal, aud yet ye say of the VV ord which is en-

throned with Him, " Once He was not;" and whereas the Son

is enthroned with the Father, yet ye think to place HÜn far

from Him. The Triad is Creator and Fralner, and yet ye fear

not to degrade It to things which are from nothing; ye scruple

not to make slaves equal to the l\1a.jestyof the Three, and to

rank the King, tþe Lord of Sabaoth, with His subjects.

30. Cease then to confuse together ideas which are in-

compatible, or rather, confuse not what is-not, with Him-

that-is. Such statements do not glorify and honour

the Lord of all, but the reverse; for he who dishonour



the Son, dishonours also the Father. For if theological

truth has its perfection in a Triad now, and this is

the true and only divine worship, and this is the good

and the truth, it must always have been so, unless

the good and the true be something that came after,

and the truth of God's nature is cOITlpleted by additions.

I say, it nlust have been eternally so; but if not eternally,

not so at present either, but at present only so as you

suppose it was from the first ;-so as not to be a Triad

now. But such heretics no Christian would bear; for

it belongs to Greeks to introduce a Triad which is

generate, and to level It with things which came into

being; for these do admit of deficiencies and additions; but

the faith of Christians acknowledges the blessed Trinity

as unalterable and perfect and ever what It was; neither

adding to It what is more, nor imputing to It any loss, for

both ideas are impious. And therefore that faith dissociates

I t from all things which caJne to be, and guards and

Jr


178 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANA

IUS


CHAP. VI. worships the unity of the Godhead as indivisiblC,

and shuns the Arian blasphen1ies, aud confesses

aud acknowledges that the Son was ever; for He is eternal,

as is the Father, of whom He is the Eternal Word; and

now for further proof of this.

31. I say then the eternity of the Son and His unity

of substance with the Father are rnanifested in those titles,

which I have already incidentally insisted on, of StreaIll

frOill the Fountain, Word, WisdOlll and Image. For

instance, if God be, and be called, the Fountain of

WÏßdom and Life,-as He says by Jeremiah, They have for-

saken !tIe, the Fountain of living waters,. and again, .A

glorious high throne from the beginning, is the place of our

sanctuary,. 0 Lord, the Hope of Israel, all that forsake Thee

shall be ashamed, and they that depært from Thee shall be

writtpn in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the

Fountain of living waters; and in the book of Baruch it is

written, Thou hast fO'J.saken the Fountain of JVisdom,-this

implies that Life and Wisdom are not foreign to the Sub-

stance of the Fountain, but belong to It, nor were at

any time without existence, but were always. Now the

Son is all this, who says, I a'in the Life, and, I Wisdom

dwell with prudence. Is it not then impious to say,

"Once the Son was not"? for it is all one with saying,

"Once the Fountain was dry, destitute of Life and Wis-

dom." But a fountain it would then cease to be; for what

begetteth not from itseJf cannot be called a fountain.

What a freight of extravagance is here! for God promises

that those who do His will shall be as a fountain which

the water fails not, saying by Isaiah the prophet, And the

Lord shall satisfu thy soul in drought, and make thy bones fat,.

and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of

water, whose waters fail not. And yet these men, whereas

God is called and is a Fountain of Wisdom, dare to insult

Him as barren and void once of His proper Wisdom.


AGAINST ARIANIS:\f.


179


But thplr doctrine is false; truth wltnefìsing- that ED. BF.

.

Ì.

 19.

God is the eternal Fountain of His proper

"\VisdOln; and, if the Fountain be eternal, the Wisdom also

must needs be eternal. For in It were all things made, as

David says in the Psalm, In Wisdom hast Thou rnade them

all ; and Solomon says, The Lord by Wisdom hath formed the

earth, by understanding hath He established the heavens.

32. And this WisdOln is the Word, for by Him, as John

says, all things were made, and without Him was made not

one thiJlg. 3 And this 'V ord is Christ; for therl

 is -One

God the Father, from whom are all things, and we for Him;

and One Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things,

alzd we through Him. And if all things are through Him,

He Himself is not to be reckoned within that "all." For

he who dares to call Christ, through whom are all things,

one of that "all," is bound also to include in that

" all " God Himself, from whom are all. But if he

shrinks from this as extravagant, and excludes God fron1

that all, it is but consistent that he should also exclude

frOln that all the Only-begotten Son, as being proper to

the Pat her's substance. And, if He be not one of that

an, it is a sin to say concerning Him, "He was not,"

and "He was not before His generation." Such words

may be used of the creatures; but as to the Son, He is

such as the Father is, of whose substance He is proper

Offspring, Word, and WisdOln. For a relation like this

belongs to the Son, as regards the Father, and to the

Father as regards the Son; so that we may neither say

that God was ever without His Rational W ord,4 nor that

the Son was non-existing. For what is meant by a Son, if

He be not from Him? or by 'V ord and "\Visdom, except

what is ever proper to Him? vVhen then was God without

IIim who belongs to Him? or how can a man consider that

which belongs, as foreign and alien in substance? for other

3 Vid. Sc'ripture.

 Vid. App. à^oyo

.


.N2


180 1 1 HREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. VI. things according to their nature as being crea-

tures, are without likeness in substance to the


iaker, but are external to HiIn, n1ade by the Word at His

grace and will, and thus admitting of son1etimes ceasing to

be, if it so pleases Him who made them; (for such is the

nature of things that are made;) but as to what belongs to

the Father's substance, (for this we have already found to

be the Son,) what daring is it and inlpiety to say that

"This comes from nothing," and that "It was not before

its generation," but was ad ventitious, and can at some

time again cease to be ?

33. Let a man only dwell upon this thought, and he

will discern how the perfection and the plenitude of the

Father's substance is impaired by tills heresy; still n101'e

clearly, however, he will see its extravagance if he con-

siders that the Son is also the Image and Radiance of the

]'ather, and Impress, and Truth. For if, when Light

exists, there be withal its Image, viz., Radiance, and if, a

Subsistence existing, there be of it the entire IInpress, and

a Father existing, there be His Truth; let them con-

sider what depths of impiety they fall into, who make

time the measure of the lInage and Countenance:> of

the Godhead. For if " the Son was not before His

generation," Truth was not always in God, which it were

a sin to say; for since the Father was, there was ever in

Hin1 the Truth, which is the Son, who says, I am the

T'I'uth. And the Subsistence existing, of course there was

forthwith its Impress and Image; for God's Image is not

delineated from without, but God Hin1self hath begotten

it; in which seeing Himself, He has delight, as the Son

Himself says, I was His delight. When then did the

Father not see Himself in His own Image? or when had

He not delight, that a man should dare to say, "The

Image is out of nothing," and " The Father had not

IS Vid. App. E1ôor.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


181


delight before the Image was generated"? and how ED. BEN.

i.

 20-21.

should the Maker and Creator see Himself in a

created and generated substance; for such as is the Father,

such must be His lInage. Only consider then the attributes

of the Father, and then, if the Son be His Image, you

will understand what He n1ust be. The Father is eternal,

immortal, powerful, Light, King, Sovereign, God, Lord,

Creator, and

Iaker. These attributes must be in the

I mage, to make it true that he that hath seen the Son hath

seen the Father. If the Son be not all this, but, as the

Arians consider, a thing made, and not eternal, this is not

a true Image of the Father, unless indeed they give up

shame, and go on to say, that the title of Image, given to

the Son, is not a token of a similar substance,6 but is lIis

name only. But this, on the other hand, 0 ye Christ's

enemies, is not an Image, nor is it an Impress. For what

is the likeness of a being brought out of nothing to Him

who brought what was nothing into being? or how can

that which is-not, be like Him that-is, being short of

Him in once not-being, and in its having its place among

things that have come to be?

34. However, Buch the Arians wishing HiIn to be, have

contrived arguments of this kind :-" If the Son is the

Father's Offspring and Image, and is like in all things to

the Father, then it necessarily holds that as He is begotten,

so He begets, and He too becomes father of a son. And

again, he who is begotten from Him, begets in his turn,

and so on without 1imit; for nothing short of this it is to

make the Begotten like Him that beg-at Him." Authors

of blasphemy, verily, are these foes of God! who, sooner

than confess that the Son is the Father's Image, conceive

material and earthly ideas concerning the Father Him-

self, ascrihing to HiIn severings and effluences a.nd influences.

If then God be as man, let Him become also a parenL as

6 Here Athan. recù

nise8 the HomæÜsion of the Semi-arians.


182 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. VI. man, so that His Son should be father of an-

other, and so in succession one from another, till

the series they imagine grows into a nnlltitude of gods. But

if God be not as mHn, as He is not, we must not impute

to Him the attributes of man. For brutes and men, after

a Framer has set them off, are begotten by succession;

and the son, having been begotten of a father who was a

son, becomes accordingly in his turn to a son a father, as

having in himself from hIS father that giffi by which he

hiInself has come to be. Hence in such instances there is

not, properly speaking, either father or son, nor does the

idea of father or the idea of son stay in their case, for the

saIne man becomes both son and father, son of his father,

and father of his son. But it is not so in the Godhead;

for not as man is God; for neither is the Father frOln Father ;

(and therefore it is that He doth not beget one who shall

beget;) nor is the Son fron1 effluence of the Father, nor

is He begotten from a father that was begotten; therefore

neither is He so begotten that He should Leget. Thus it

belongs to the Godhead alone, that the Father is eminently

Father, and the Son en1Ínently Son, and in Then1, and Them

only, does it hold that the Father is ever Father and the

Son ever Son.

35. Therefore he who asks why the Son has not a son,

Innst inquire why the Father had not a father. But both

suppositions are out of place and impious exceedingly.

For as the Father is ever Father, and never could be Son,

so the Son is ever Son, and never could be Father. For

in this rather is He shown to be the Father's Impress and

Image, remaining what He is and not changing, but thus

recei ving frOln the Father to be one and the sanle. 7 If

then the Father change, let the In1age change; for such

is the relation of the Image and Radiance towards Him

who begat It. But if the Father is imnnltable, and what


., TavTóT'tITU.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


183


lIe is that He continues to be, necessaril y does the ED. BEN.

i.

 21-22

In1age also continue what He is, and will not alter.

Now He is Son from the Father; therefore He will not

become other than is proper to the Father's substance. Idly

then have the foolish ones devised this objection also,

wishing to separate the Image from the Father, that they

might level the Son with things generated.


CHAPTER VII.


Answer to intellectual objections.

36. RANKING Him among these, accerding to the teach-

ing of Eusebius, and accounting Him to be such as are the

things which come into being through Him, the Arians

revolted from the truth, and at the beginning, when they

were commencing this hBresy, were used to go about with

phrases of craft which they had got together; nay, up to

this time some of them, when they fall in with boys in

the market-place,8 question them, not out of divine Scrip-

ture at all, but thus, as if bursting out with the abundance

of their heart :-He-that-iB, did He, from Hin1-that-is,

luake Rim who was-not, or Him-who-was? therefore did

He make the Son, whereas He-was, or whereas He-was-

not? And again, "Is the ingenerate one or two?" and

"Has He free-will, and yet at His own choice does not

alter, as being of an alterable nature? for He is not as a

stone to remain by Hin1self without movement. " Next

they turn to won1en, and address them in turn in this

won1anish language, "Hadst thou a son before bearing?

now, as thou hadst not, so neither was the Son of God in

being before His generat.:on." With such words do the

disgraceful luen sport and revel, and liken God to men,


8 Vid. Append. Arians.


.


184 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. VIJ pretending to be Christians, but changing God's

glory into an image made like to corruptible man.

37. Objections so shallow deserve no answer at all; how-

ever, lest theÜ" heresy appear to have any foundation, it

may be right, though we go out of the way for it, to

refute them even here, especially on account of the women

who are so easily deceived by them. When they thus

speak, they should inquire of an architect, whether he can

build without n1aterials; and if he cannot, whether it

follows that God could not make the universe without

materials. Or they should ask whether anyone of the whole

race of men can be without his place; and if he cannot,

whether it fonows that God is in place; that so they may

be brought to shame even by their audience. Or why is

it that, on hearing that God has a Son, they deny Hin1 by

the parallel of then1selves; whereas, if they hear that He

creates and makes, no longer do they object their human

parallels? they ought, when they discuss the subject of

creation, to introduce their human ideas into it, and to

supply God with materials, and so deny Him to be Creator,

till they end in herding with Manichees. But if the

idea of God transcends such thoughts, and, on very first

hearing of Him, one believes and knows that He exists,

not as we exist, and yet that He does exist as God, and

creates not as men create, but still creates as God, it is

plain that lIe begets also not as men beget, but begets as

God. For God does not make man His pattern; but

rather we men, because God is en1inently, and alone truly,

Father of His Son, are also called fathers of our own

children; for of Hin1 is every fatherhood in heaven and earth

næmed. Thus their positions, while unscrutinised, ha ve a

show of sense; but if anyone scrutinise them by reason,

they will be found to merit much derision and mockery.

38. For first of all, as to their first question, which is

f;Heh aß this,-how vague it is I-they do not explain who it


AGAINST ARIANISM.


185


is they ask about, so as to allow of an answer, ED. B

N.

i.

 22 -24.

but they say abstractedly, "He-who-is," " Him who-

is-not." 9 They profess to have thrown their question into

such a shape as to compel an answer of decisive force

agaillßt the eternity of the Word; but only apply it to

actual instances, and you will find that it will not hold.

Who then "is," and what things "are not," 0 Arians? or

who "is," and who "is not"? what things are said "to

be," what "not to be"? for He-that-is, can Inake things

which are not, and things which are, and things which were

ah'eady. For instance, carpenter, and goldsmith, and potter,

each, according to his own art, works upon materials pre-

viously existing, making what vessels he pleases; and

"He that is," nalnely, the God of all, having taken the

dust of the earth, existing and already brought into being,

fashions man; and that very earth, again, whereas once

it was not, He has in its time brought into being by His

own 'V ord. If then this is the meaning of their question

the creature on the one hand before its creation plainly

was not before it caIne to be, and men, on the other, work

the existing lllaterial, "that which was;" and thus their

reasoning is inconsequent, since both "what is" comes to

be, and "what is not" COlnes to be, as these instances

show. So much as regards works, which are external to

God's substance; but it is otherwise with what is internal

to It. If they speak concerning God and His 'V ord, let


8 This objection is found supr.

Encycl. p. 4, ò wv (hòç TÒV fi}

óVTa lie TOV pi} ÕVTOÇ. Agam,

óVTa }'f r

VV1]IeE Î] OVIe óVTa. Greg.

Grat. 29, 9, who answers it.

Pseudo-Basil, contr. Eunom. iv.

p. 281, 2. Basil calls the ques-

tion 1roÀv8pvÀÀ1]TO'JI, contI". EUllom.

ii. 14. It will be seen to be but

the Arian formula of "He was

not before His genol'ation" in


another shape; being but this,

that the very fact of His being

begotten, that is, a Son, implies a

beginning, that is, a time when

He was not; it being by the very

force of the words a.bsurd to s

 y

that "God begat Him that was,;'

or to deny that" God begat Him

that was 1wt:' For the symbol,

OVIC ')lv 1rpìv }'E'JIv1]8ý, vid. Dissert.

:3 in the author's Theol. Tracts.


186 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. vn. them complete their question and then ask, Was

the God "who-is" ever without rational Word?

and, whereas He is Light, was He rayless? or was He

always Father of the \V ord? Or again in this manner, Has

the Father "who-is" made the Word "who-is-not," or, as

He has been ever, so has He ever had with Him His Word,

as the proper Offspring of His substance? But such idle

sophistry scarcely requires an answer, in the face of the

many Scripture testimonies which I have adduced above, .John

saying, In the beginning was the Word, and Paul, fVho

being the Brightness of His glory, and 1Vho is over all, God

blessed for ever, Amen.

39. However, if I must answer them, I aln forced to use

words after their own pattern of irreverence. After many

prayers 10 then that God would be gracious to us, thus we

might ask them in turn: God who-is, has He too so become,

whereas He was-not? or is He also before He came to be?

whereas then He-is, did He make Himself, or is lIe of

nothing, and being nothing before, did He suddenly appear?

Out of place is such a question, and very blasphemous

too, yet parallel. with theirs; for whichever answer they

give, it abounds in impiety. But if it be blasphemous

and utterly impious thus to inquire about God, it will be

blasphemous too to make the like inquiries about His

Word. I am obliged thus to speak in order to expose

their shallow interrogation, for whereas God is, He was

eternally; since then the Father is ever, His Radiance

ever is, which is His Word. And again, God who is,

hath from Himself His Word who also is; and neither

hath the Word been added, whereas He was not before, nor

was the Father once without a VV ord. For this assault

upon th

 Son makes the blasphemy recoil upon the

Father; as if He devised for Himself a Wisdom, and

"r ord, and Son from without; for whichever of these

10 Vid. Append. Atha'lZalìius.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


187


titles we use, we denote the Offspring from the ED. BEN.

i.

 24- 26.

Father, as has been said. As then if a person saw

the sun, and then inquired concerning its radiance, and

aid,

"Did that which-is make that which-was, or that which-

was-not," he would be held not to reason sensibly, but to have

lost his senses, because he fancied that what comes altogether

from the light was external to it, and was raising questions,

how and where and when it were made; in like manner,

thus to speculate concerning the Son and the Father, and

thus to inquire, is far greater madness, for it is to speak of

the VV ord of the Father as external to H

im, and to image

IIis natural Offspring as a work, with the avowal "He was

not before His generation." This is the direct answer to

their question; however, if they want another, let theIn

recollect that, when the TVord was made flesh, the Father,

who-was, "n1ade " the Son who-was,-made Him man.

\Vhereas He "fas Son of God, He luade Him in consum-

mation of the ages also Son of 11an; this they n1ust gl'ant,

unless forsooth, after Samosatene, they affirm that He did

not even exist at all, till He became man.

40. This is sufficient from us in answer to their first

question; and now on your part, 0 Arians, remembering

your own words, tell us whether for the franiing of the

universe, He who-was had need of Him who-was-not, or of

Him who-was? You said that He made for HiInself His

Son out of nothing, as an instrument whereby to nlake

the universe. Which, then, is superior, that which needs

or that which supplies the need? or does not each supply

the deficiency of the other? You rather prove the weak-

ness of the Maker,l if He had not power of Himself to

Inake the universe, but provided for Himself an instrument 2

trom without, as carpenter nÜght do, or shipwright, unable

to work anything without axe and saw? Can anything


I Vid. supr. 12, p. 20.


2 Vid. App. õpya'JIoJl.


188 THREE DISCOURSES OF A.THANASIUS


CHAP. VIII. be more ÏInpious [ yet why should one dweU on

its heinousness, when enough has gone before to

show that their doctrine is a mere fantasy ?


CHAPTER VIII.


Ansu)er to intellectual objections.


41. As to the question which they put to women, " Hadst

thou a son before he was born?" no answer need be given

by us but that which has been given already, namely, that

it is not right to measure a divine act by the parallel of the

nature of mall. However, not to insist upon this, but to

take their own ground, this at least they must grant, that

a son, though necessarily younger than 11 is father, is still

his father's offspring, from his substance, and proper to

him, not from without, and his image. If then we are to

argne from human instances, why do they so insist on the

relation of son to father as involving in the son a begin



ning of being, and are silent about its involving a SaIneness

of nature ?

42. This at first sight, but I win go further: the Son of

God has no beginning because of that sameness. In the idea

of a divine generation, sameness of nature actually pre-

cludes a beginning of being. Why that sameness between

a human father and son, except that a son has ever been

in the father even before his separate existence? Levi

was in the loins of his ancestor Abraham frOln the

first. But time is necessary for the operation of man's

nature. As soon then as the restraints upon his nature

ùre removed, he becomes father of a child, who hitherto

existed within him. So it must be, for man does but grow

into his perfection; but who is to introduce restraints and

growth into our idea of God? vVho is to deny that what


AGAINST ARIANISM.


189


He is now, that He has been, and all thaL is His ED. BEN.

i.

 26-28.

has been, from all eternity? That the Son is eternal

is involved in the very idea of sonship, for sonship belongs

to the Divine Nature. And the force of this reasoning is

confirmed by what we are told about the Son, as the Radiance

of the Father, and about the Father as the Fountain of the

Son. For when was a fountain without its stream, when

was a light without its radiance? Shall these works of God

be lnore perfect than their Maker? Shall His Son which is

so one with Him be with an interval before existence, whereas

these creatures of His hands have none? Thus the

question of heretics to parents exposes their perverseness;

they confess the point of nature, and now are put to shame

on the point of time.

43. Nor is this all. Further to intimate, as regards the

Son, both the use and the abuse of this argument from

earthly similitudes, Divine Scripture supplies us with other

parallels to direct our faith by, when it calls the Son of God

His 'V ord and His Wisdom. For the Word of God is His

Son, and the Son is 'V ord and Wisdom of the Father; and

'V ord and Wisdom is neither creature nor part of Him

whORe 'V ord He is, nor the offspring of a passion. Uniting

then the two titles,3 Scripture speaks of "Son" in order

to preach the natural and true Offspring of His substance;

and, on the oth

r hand, that none may think of the Off-

spring humanly, therefore while signifying His substance

it also calls Him Word, Wisdom, and Radiance; to teach

us that the generation was without passion, and eternal,

and worthy of God. What affection then or what part

of the Father is the Word and the Wisdom and the

Radiance? So much may be impressed even on these

men of folly; for, as they ask WOlnen concerning God's

Son, so let them inquire of men concerning the 'V ord:

and they win find that the word which issues from them

S Vid. Bupr. p. 27, and Append. EconomiaÛ langu,age.


190 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. VIII. is neither an affection of them nor a pal"t of their

mind. But if such be the nature of men, who are

passible and partitive, why speculate they about passions and

portions in the instance of the immaterial and indivisible

God, that under pretence of reverence they may deny the

true and natural generation of the Son? 1Vhat is said of

the Word may be said of the Wisdom too. Men are

capable and are partakers of Wisdom; God partakes of

nothing. He is His own Wisdom and is Father thereof;

and that IIis Wisdom is not occasional, mutable, alterable,

but an Offspring proper to His substance. Wherefore, if

He is now Father, He has ever been Father, for to be

Father implies fuller perfection, and He is all perfect.

44. But, observe, say they, God was always a

Iaker,

nor is the power of framing adventitious to Him; does it

follow then, that, because He is the Framer of aU, there-

fore His works also are eternal, and is it wicked to say of

them, too, that they were not before generation? What

a shallow answer! for what likeness is there between Son

and work, that they should parallel a father's with a

maker's function? How is it that, with that difference

between offspring and work, which has been pointed out

already, they remain so ill-instructed? I repeat, then,

that a work is external to the maker, but a son is the

proper offspring of the substance; it follows that a work

need not have been always, for the workman frames it

when he will; but an offspring is not subject to will, but

belongs to the substance. And a man may be and may

be called workman, though the works are not as yet; but

father he cannot be called, nor can he be, unless a son exist.

And if they curiously inquire why God, though always with

the power to make, does not always make, (though who

hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been H'l.s

Counsellor? or how shall the thing formed say to the potter,

TVhy hast thou made me thus? however, not to leave even a


AGAINST ARIANIRM.


191


weak al'gU111ent unnoticed, ) the y n1ust be told. ED. :BEN.

...., i.

 28-29.

that although God from eternity had the power to

Inake, yet creatures had not the capacity for being lnade

from eternity. For they are out of nothing, and therefore

were not before they came into being, and therefore could

not co-exist with the ever-existing God? Wherefore God,

looking to what was good for them, then lnade them all when

He saw that, upon their coming into being, they would be.

able to abide. And as, though He was able, even from

the ..beginning, in the time of Adam, or N oe, or }\tIoses,

to send His own Word, yet He sent Him not until the

consummation of the ages, for this He saw to be good for

the whole creation; so also, as to His works, He made

them when He would, and as was good for them. But

the Son, not being a work, but propel' to the Father's sub



stance, always is; for, whereas the Father always is, so

that which belongs to His substance must always be; and

this is His Word and His Wisdom. And that creatures

should not be in existence, does not disparage the 1\1:aker;

for He hath the power of framing them when He wills;

but for the Offspring not to be ever with the Father, is a

disparagement of the perfection of His substance. Where-

fore His works were framed, when He would, through His

Word; but the Son not when He would, for He :is ever

the proper Offspring of the Father's substance.


CHAPTER IX. 4

Answer to intellectual objections.

45. BUT as it seems, a heretic is a wicked thing in truth,

and in every respect his heart is depraved and goes after


4 This chapter is transferred

here from the end of the third

Oration (iii.

 58- - 67) as being


there It sort of Postscript, and

properly belonging- to the series of

intellectual objections and their


192 'l'HRgE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASltJ8


CHAP. IX. impiety. For behold, though convicted on all

points, and shown to be utterly bereft of under-

standing, they feel no shame; but as the hydra of Gentile

fable, when its fOrIner serpents were destroyed, gave birth to

fresh ones, contending against the slayer of the old by the

production of new, so also they, hostile and hateful to God, as

hydras, losing their life in the objections which they advance,

invent for thmnselves other questions, Judaic and foolish, and

new expedients, as if Truth were their enemy, thereby to

show the rather that they are Christ's opponents in all

things. After so many proofs against them, they begin

again, sometimes in whispers, sometimes with the per-

sistent iteration of gnats: "Be it so," say they; "in-

terpret these places thus, and gain the victory in reason-

ing and in proof; still you must say that the Son has

been begotten by the Father at His will and pleasure;"

and thus it is that they deceive many, putting forward

the will and the pleasure of God. Now if any orthodox

believer were to say this in simplicity, there wonld be no

canse to be suspicious of the expression, the orthodox in..

tention prevailing over that somewhat simple use of words.

But, since the phrase is frOln the heretics, and the words

of heretics are suspicious, and, as it is written, The wicked

are deceitful, and The words of the wicked are deceit, even

though they but lnake signs, for their heart is depraved,

come, let us examine this phrase also, Jest, though con-

victed on all sides, still, as hydras, they invent a fresh

word, and, by such clever language and specious evasion,

they contrive a fresh sowing of that impiety of theirs in

another way. For he who says, "The Son came to be at

the Divine Will," has the same meaning as another who

says, "Once He was not," and "The Son came into being


answers, with which the work its subject and its language.

opens, and that both in respect to


AGAINST ARIANISM.


193


out of nothing," and "He is a creature." But ED. BEN.

Hi.

 68-60.

since they are now ashamed of those phrases, the

crafty ones have endeavoured to convey their meaning in

another way, using the word "wi}]," as cuttlefish put

forth their blackness, thereby to confuse the innocent, and

to make sure of their peculiar heresy.

46. For whence do they deriye "by will and pleasure"?

or from what Scripture? let these men say, who are so sus-

picious in their language and so inventive of impieties. For

the Father, when revealing from heaven His own "\V ord,

declared, This is lily beloved Son; and by David He said,

111,1/ heart has burst with a good }tV ord; and .J ohn He bade

say, In the beginning was the Word; and David says in

the Psalm, JVith Thee is the well of Life, and in Thy light

shall we see light; and the Apostle writes, Who being the

Radiance oj His Glory, and again, JVho being in the for?n of

God, and, TV/w is the In'lage of tlw invisible God. All the

sacred writers everywhere tell us of the being of the Word,

but none of IIis being lnade "by will," nor of His making

\Lt all; but as to these men, where, I ask, did they find "wi}]

or good pleasure antecedent" to the Word of God, unless for-

sooth, leaving the Scriptures, they simulate the perverseness

of Valentinns? For Ptolemy the Valentinian said that the

J ngenerate had a pair of attributes, Thought and Will,

and first He thought and then He willed; and what He

thought, He could not put forth, unless when the power

of the will was added. Thence the Arians taking a lesson,

wish will and good-pleasure to precede the Word. As to them,

then, let them rival the doctrine of Valentinus; but Wé,

on reading the divine discourses, have only found He was

applied to the Son, and of IIim only did we hear as belng

in the Father and the Father's T lnage; while in the case of

things Inade, since by nature these things once were not, Lut

afterwards came to be, in them only did we recognise an ante-

cedent will and pJeasure, David saying in the hundred and

o


,


194 THREE DISCOURHEH OJ!' A'fHANASIUS


OF'AP. IX. thirteenth Psahn, As for our God He is in heaven,

He hath done whatsoever pleased Him; and in the

hundred and tenth, The works of the Lord are great, sought out

unto all His good pleasure; and again, in the hundred and

thirty-fourth, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He in

heaven, and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places.

47. If then the Son be work and thing made, and one

among others, let Him, as others, be said" by will" to have

come to be, for Scripture shows that these are thus brought

into being. And Asterius, the counsel for the heresy,

acquiesces, when he thus writes, "For if it be unworthy

of the FraIner of all to make at pleasure, let His being

pleased to act be removed equally in the case of all, that

His Nlajesty be preserved unimpaired. Or if it be befitting

God to will, then let this better way obtain in the case of

the first Offspring. For it is not possible that it should be

fitting for one and the same God to will in creating and

also not to will." In spite of the sophist having intro-

duced abundant impiety into these words, namely, that the

Offspring and the thing made are the same, and that the

Son is one offspring out of all the existing offsprings, he

ends with the conclusion that the works may be fittingly

said to be by will and pleasure. Therefore if the Son be

other than all things, as has been above shown, or rather

through Him the works came to be, let not "by will" be

applied to Him; otherwise, He so came into being, just

as those works consist whlich came to be through Him.

Paul, for instance, whereas he was not before, became after-

wards an Apostle by the will of God; and our own calling,

whereas it once was not but took place afterwards, is

preceded by will; and, as Paul himself says again, was

deterlnined according to the good pleasure of His will, and

what "l\Toses relates, Let there be Light, and Let the earth

apppar, and Let Us make 1nan, is, I think, according to

what has been said before. significant of the will of the


AGAINST ARIANISM.


195


Agent. For things which once were not, but exist U

f.6


i.

afterwards from external causes, these. the Framer,

after counselling, makes; but His proper 'V ord begotten fronl

Him by nature, concerning Him He did not counsel befort-

hand; for it is in Him that the Father makes, in Him that

lIe frames, those other things whatever He counsels; as also

Ja.mes the Apostle teaches, saying, Of His own will begat

He us witl

 the TVord of truth. Therefore the 'Vill of God

concerning all things, whether they be begotten again, or are

brought into being once only, is in His Word, in whom He

both makes and begets again what seems right to Him; as

the Apostle also signifies, writing to the Thessalonians: fm.

this is the pleasure of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

48. But consider ;-if in the 'V ord Himself, through whom

lIe makes, is in truth also His Will, and if in Christ is the

pleasure of the Father, how can He, as others, come into

being by will and pleasure? For if He too came, as you

maintain, by will, it follows that the will concerning Him

consists in SOine other 'V ord, through whom He in turn

comes to be; (for it has been shown that God's 1Vill is not in

the things which He brings into being, but in Him through

whom and in whom all things made are brought to be,) that

is, in other words, to say that the Son becmue such by will

is all one with saying that, "Once He was not;" therefore

let thenl make up their minds to say, "Once He was not,"

that, whereas an interval of tin1e is signified by the latter

formula, they may with shame perceive that also to say

"by will" is to place an interval before the Son; for coun-

selling goes before things which once were not, as in the

case of all creatures. But if the VV ord is the Framer of

the creatures, and He co-exists with the Father, how can

the Father's act of counsel precede the E,.erlasting Son as

if He were not? for if counsel precedes, how through Ifinl

are all things? Rather in that casp-, He too, as one aTnong

others, is by will begotten to be a Son, as we also were

02


.


196 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. IX. made sons by the Word of Truth; and it remains

for us, as was said, to seek another Word, through

whom He too was brought to be, and was begotten together

with all things, which were according to God's pleasure.

49. If then there is another 'V ord of God, then be the

Son brought into being by that 'V ord; but if there be not,

as is the truth, but all things by HÜn were brought to be,

which the Father has willed, does not this expose the

many-headed 5 craftiness of these men? I mean that feel-

ing ashamed to say "work," and "creature," and "God's

'V ord was not before His generation," yet in another way

they still maintain that He is a creature, putting forward

"will," and saying, "Unless He has by will come to be,

therefore God had a Son by necessity and against. His

good pleasure." And who is it then who imposes neces-

sity on Him, 0 men most wicked, who draw everything

t,o the pnrpose of your heresy? for what is contrary to

will they see; but what is greater and transcends it, has

escaped their perception. For as what is beside purpose

is contrary to will, so what is according to nature tran-

scends and precedes counselling. A man by counsel builds

a house, but by nature he begets a son; and what, after

being first willed is then built, had a beginning of being,

and is external to the maker; but the son is proper off-

spring of the father's substance, and is not external to

him; wherefore neither does he counsel concerning his

making, lest he appear to counsel about hinlself. As far

then as the Son transcends the creature, by so much does

what is by nature transcend the will; and these men, on

hearing of Him, ought not to measure by will what is by

nature. }'orgetting however that they are heari:r:g about


.


II 'fhe allusion, as before: is to

the hydra, with its ever-springing

heads, as eXplained at the begin-

ning of this chapter, and infr.


D. 52, and with a special allusion

to Asterius, who, supr. p. 87, j



called 7roÀVlcf.tþaÀoç C10tþLt1TiU;.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


197


God's Son, they dare to apply human contrarieties ..E i

. B 2

N.

11 .

 6 66.

in the instance of God, IlaInely, "necessity" and

"beside purpose," to be able thereby to deny that there

is a true Son of God.

50. For let them tell us themselves,-that God is good

and merciful, does this attach to Him by will or not? if

by will, we must consider that He began to be good, and

that His not being good is possible; for to counsel and

choose implies an inclination two ways, and is the property

of a rational nature. But if it be too extravagant that He

should be considered good and merciful at His mere will,

then what they have said themselves must be retorted 011

them,-" therefore by necessity and not with His good-

will He is good; " and, "who is it that imposes this necessity

on Him ? " But if to speak of necessity in the case of God

is an extravagance, and therefore it is by nature that He

is good, much more is He, and lnore truly, Father of the

Son by nature and not by will. 1\Ioreover let thmn answer

us this :-(for against their profaneness I wiqh to urge a

further question, bold indeed, but with a pious intent;

ge propitlious, 0 Lord!) 6-the Father HiInself, does He

exist, first having taken counsel with Himself, then being

pleased, or else before counselling? For since they are as

bold

 in the instance of the VV ord, they Juust receive the like

answer, that they may know that this their pl

sUlnption

l'eaches even to the Father HÌInself. If then they say

that even the Father is from will, what was He before He

counselled, or what gained He, as ye consider, after coun-

selling? But if such a question be extravagant and self-

destructive, and shocking even to ask, (for it is enough only

to hear God's Name for us to know and understand that

He is He-That-Is,) how is it not also against reason to have

parallel thoughts concerning the 'V ord of God, and to luakc


· Vid. App. Atlta1lasius.


198 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CUAP. IX. l)l'etenecs of "will" and "pleasure"? for it

is enough in like rnanller only to hear the

Name of the "\\-r ord, in order to know and understand,

t.hat He who not by will is God, has not by will but by

nature His proper Word. And does it not surpass all con...

cei vable madness, to entertain the bare thought, that God

Himself counsels and considers and chooses and resolves to

have a good pleasure, in order that He be not without 'V ord

and without Wisdom, but may have both? for it is like

raising a question about one's own existence, to take llleasures

for gaining what belongs to one's very nature.

51. There being then much blasphemy in such thoughts,

it will be pious to say that things that are l11ade have


ome to be "by favour and will," but the Son is not a

work of will, nor has come second, as the creation, but is

oy God's nature the proper Offspring of God's Substance.

For His being the proper Word of the Father hinders us

fronl speculating on any act of will as previous to HiInself,

since He is HiIllself the J?<tther's Living )Vill/ and 1 J o\\"e1',

and is Framer of the things which seemed good to the

Father. And this is what lIe says of HiInself in the

Proverbs: TVill is 1Iline and security, J[ine is understanding,

and Mine strength. For as, although IIiulself the JVis-

dom, in which God prepared the heavens, and HÜiIself

Strength and Power, (for Christ is God's Power and God's

Wisdom,) He here has altered the terIns and said .lIfine is

discretion, is understanding, and 1Iline strength, so while

He says, .J.1line is Will, He llIust Hin1se1f be the Living

\Vill of the Father; as we have learned frmll the Prophet

also, that He is become the Angel of g'reat PUJ]Jose, and is

ealled the good pleasure of the Father; for thus we Inust

refute theIn-using human illustrations concerning God.

Therefore if the works subsist "by will and favour," and

the whole creature is lllade "at God's good pleasure," and

7 Vide ßovÀ.Í1.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


199


Panl was called to be an Apostle by the TVill 0" .

D. REN.


 lU.

 63- 64.

God, and our calling has comc about by His good

pleasure and .'Will, and all things have bcen brought into

being through the 'V ord, He is external to the things

which have come to be by win, but rather is Hhnself the

Li ving Purpose of the Father, by whonl aU these things

were brought to be; by whom holy David also gives thanks

in the seventy-second Psalm, Thou hast holden me by my

right hand; Thou shalt guide me 'with Thy Purpose.

52. How then can the Word, being the Purpose and

Good Pleasure of the Father, come into being HÜm:;elf

"by good pleasure and will" as every oue else? unless, as

I said before, in their madness they repeat that He was

brought into being by Hin1self or by some other. 1Vho

then is it by whom He came to be? let them fashion

another Word; and let theln naIne another Christ, rival..

ling the doctrine of Valentinus; for Scripture it is not.

And though they fashion another, yet assuredly he too

COlnes into being through some one; and so while we are

thus reckoning up and investigating the succession of

causes, this Inany-headed heresy of the Atheists is dis-

covered to issue in polytheism and madness unlirnited;

by which, wishing the Son to be a creature and frOln

nothing, they imply the same thing in other words by

putting forth "will" and " pleasure," which rightly

belong to things brought into being and crcatures.

Is it not impious then to impute the characteristics of

things that come to be to the Framer of all? and is it not

blasphemous to say that Will was in the Father before the

'Vord? for if Will precedes in the Father, the Son's words

arc not true, I in the Father; or even if He is in the

Father, yet He will ha ve but a second place, and it becanle

Him not to say I in the Father, since Will was before

Him, by which all things were brought into being and He

IIilnself subsisted, as you hold. For though IIc excel in


200 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. IX. glory, He is not the less one of the things

which by Will come into being. And, as we

have said before, if it be so, how is He Lord and they

servants? but He is Lord of all because He is one with

the Father's Lordship; and the creation is all in servitude,

since it is external to the oneness of the Father, and

whereas it once was not, was brought to be.

53. l\Ioreover, if they say that the Son is by God's Will,

they should say also that He came to be by God's judg-

n1ent; for I consider judgment and will to be the saIne.

For what a man counsels, about that also he has judg-

ment; and what he has in judglnent, that also he coun-

sels. Certainly the Saviour Hirnself has made them

correspond as being cognate, when He says, Counsel is

1Iline and security; l1fine is judgment, and lIfine strength.

For as strength and security are the same, (for they Inean

one attribQte;) so we may say that Judglnent and Will

are the same, which is the Lord. But these in1pious men

are unwilling that the Son should be Word and Living

Will; but they fable that there is with God, as if a

habit coming and going,8 after the manner of men, judg-

ment, counsel, wisdom; and they leave nothing undone,

even to putting forward the "Thought" and "Will" of

V alentinus, so that they may but separate the Son from

the Father, and may call Him a creature, and not the

proper Word of the Father. To them then must be said

what was said to Simon Magus: the impiety of Valentinus

perish with you; and let everyone rather trust to Solomon,

who says, that the Word is Wisdom and .J udgment. For

he says, The Lord by Wisdom hath founded the' earth, by

Judgment hath He established the heavens. And as here by

Judgment, so in the Psalms, By the Word of the Lord were

the heavens made. And as by the Word the heavens, so

He hath rnade whatsoever pleased HÙn. And as the

8 Vide C1VP.ßEß't}ICÓ'.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


201


Apostle writes to the Thessalonians, tlte will of God ED. BEN.

iii.

 64- 66.

is in Christ Jesus.

54. rfhe Son of God then, He is the }Vord and the Wis-

dom, lIe the Judgment and the Living Will; and in Him

is the Good pleasure of the ]father; He is Truth and Light

and Power of the Father. But if the 'Vill of God is vVis-

dom and Judgment, and the Son is Wisdom, he who says

that the Son is "by will," says virtnally that Wisdom has

come into being in "\V isdom, and the Son is luade in the

Son, and the Word created through the Word; which is

incompatible with our idea of God a.nd is opposed to His

Scriptures. For the Apostle proclaims the Son to be the

proper Radiance and Impress, not of the Father's will, but

of His Substance Itself, saying, Who being the Radiance of

His Glory and the Irnpress of His Subsistence. But if,

as we have said before, the Father's Substance and Sub-

sistence be not from will, neither, as is very plain, is what

belongs to the Father's Subsistence from will; for such

as, and so as, that Blessed Subsistence, must also be the

proper Offspring from It. And accordingly the Father

IIimself. said not, "This is The Son, brought into being at

My will," nor "the Son whom I have by My favour,"

but sin1ply JJIy Son, or rather, in whom I am well pleased



Ineaning by this, " This is the Son by nature;" and

"in Him is lodged 1\Iy will about those things which

please 1\ie. "

55. Now we come to the alternative in the interrogation

which they put to us. "Since then the Son is by nature

and not by will, is He without the good-pleasure of the

Father and not with the Father's will? " No, verily; but

the Son is with the pleasure of the Father, and, as He

says Hinlself, The Father loveth the Sun, and

howeth Him

all things. FOI. as not "from will" did the Father begin

to be good, nor yet is good wit.hout win and pleasure, (fo."

what He is, that also is His pleasure,) so also that the Son


202 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. IX. should exist, though it caIne not "from wiU," yet

it is not without I{is pleasure or against IIis pur-

pose. For as His own Subsistence is with His pleasure, so

also the Son, as belonging to His Substance, is not without

His pleasure. Be then the Son the object of the Father's

pleasure and love; and thus let everyone piously account

of the good-pleasure and the not unwillingness of God. For

by that same good -pleasure wherewith the Son is the object of

the Father's pleasure, is the Father the object of the Son's

love, pleasure, and honour; and one is the good-pleasure

which is from the Father into the Son, so that here too we

Inay cOlltenlpJate the Sou in the Father and the Father in

the Son.

56. Let no one then, with Valentinus, introduce a prece-

dent will; nor let anyone, by this pretence of "counsel"

intrude between the Only Father and the Only Word; for

it were Inadness to place will and deliberation between

theIne For it is one thing to say, "Of will He came to

be," and another, that the Father has loye and good-

pleasure towards His Son who belongs to Him by nature.

}'or to say, "Of will He came to be," in the first phwe

implies that "once He was not;" and next it implies an

inclination two ways, as has been said, so that one might

be at liberty to entertain the thought, that the Father had

the powers even of not willing the Son. But to say of the

Son, "He might not have been," is an impious presulllp-

tion, reaching even to the Substance of the Father, as if

what belongs to Him might not l1ave been. For it is

the sanle as saying, "The Father might not have been

good." And a

 the Father is good always and by nature,

so He is always gener.1ti ve by nature; and to say, "The

Father wills the Son," and " The Word wills the Father,"

inlplies, not a precedent will, but genuineness of nature,

:1nd propriety and likeness of Substance. For as in the

case of the radiance and light one might say, that there is


AGAINST ARIANISM.


203


no will preceding radiance in the light, but it is its ii


. 6

7.

natural ofrspring, at the pleasure of the light which

begat it, not by will and consideration, but in nature and truth,

so also in the instance of the Father and the Son, it would

be orthodox to say, that the Father loves and wills the

Son, and the Son loves and wills the Father.

57. To conclude then, call not the Son a work of good

pleasure, nor bring in the doctrine of Valentinus into the

Church; but let Him be the Li ving Will, and Offspring in

truth and nature, as the Radiance from the Light. For

thus has the Father spoken, lily heart has bU'FSt with a good

TVord; and the Son conformably, I in the Father and the

Father in Me. But if the Word be in the Father's heart,

where is will? and if the Son in the Father, where is good-

pleasure? and if He be Will Himself, how is Will in Will?

it is extra vagant; else the Word comes into being in a

word., and the Son in a Son, and Wisdom in a wisdom, as

has been repeatedly said. For the Son is the Father's

All; and nothing was in the Father before the V\T ord :

but in the Word is Will also, and through Him the sub-

jects of will are carried out into effect, as holy Scriptures

have shown. And I could wish that the in1pious men, who

have so far wandered from reason as to be inquiring about

will, as they used to ask their child -bearing WOlllen,

"IIadst thou a son before conceiving him?" would

instead ask the fathers, "Do ye become fathers by

an arbitrary act of will, or because to will is natural to

you?" and "Are your children like your nature and sub-

stance?" For they will reply to theIn, "vVhat we beget,

is like, not our good pleasure, but I ike ourselves; nor be-

come we parents sin1ply by first willing it, but to beget is

proper to our nature; since we too are images of our

fathers." Either then let them condemn themselves, and

cease asking women abouL the Son of God, or let them

learn fronl theIn, that the SOIl is begotten not by will, but


204 THREE DISCOUR8ES OF ATIIANASIUS


CHAP. IX. in nature and truth. BecOIning and suitable to

thmll is a refutation from j human instances, since

the perverse-n1Ïnded men thelnselves dispute in a human

way concerning the Godhead.

58. Truth is loving unto nlen, and cries continually, "If

because of My bodily clothing ye believe Me not, yet

Lelieve the works, that ye may know that I am in the

Father and the Fatller in Me, and I and the Father are one,

and he that hath seen life hath seen the Father. But the

Lord according to His wont is loving to man, and would

fain help them that are fallen, as the Psahns of David speak;

but the impious men, unwilling to hear the Lord's voice,

nor bearing to see Him acknowledged by all as God and

God's Son, go about in swarms, miserable as they are, seek-

ing with their father the devil pretexts for their impiety.

'Vhat pretexts then, and whence, will they be able to find

next? unless they borrow blasphemies frOIll Jews and

Caiaphas, and take Atheislll from Gentiles? for the divine

Scriptures are closed to them, and ffOln eycry part of thelll

they are cOllvicted of being insensate and Christ's ellell1Íes.


CHAPTER X.


Answer to intellectual obJection.fi.


59. THESE considerations encourage the faithful, and

anllOY the heretical, perceiving, as they do, that their

heresy is suffering defeat thereby. Moreover, their

further question "whether the Ingenerate be one or two,"

shows how heterodox are their thoughts, how treacherous

and full of guile. Not for the Father's honour ask they

this, but for the dishonour of the Word. Accordingly,

should anyone, not aware of their craft. answer, "the


AGAINST AltIANISM.


205


Ingenera.te is one," forthwith they spir

 out their ED. BEN.

. i.

 so.

own venom, saying, "Therefore the Son IS among

things created, and well haye we said, He was not before His

generation." - Thus they are ready to make all kinds of

disturbance and confusion, provided they can but separate

the Son from the Father, and reckon the Framer of all

among His own works. Now first they may be convicted

on this score, that, while blaming the Nicene Bishops for

their use of phrases not in Scripture, though these were not

injurious, but for the subversion of their impiety, they

went over to that very tactic themselves, that is, using

words not in Scripture, and, that in contumely of the

Lord, knowing neither what they. say nor whereof they

atfirm. }'or instance, le

 them ask the Greeks on the

subject, who have been their instructors, (for Ingenerate is

a word of Greek invention, not of Scripture,) and when they

have been ínstructed in its various significations, then

they will discover that they cannot even argue pro-

perly on the subject which they have undertaken. For

they have led me to ascertain four senses of the word: 9

first, that by "ingenerate" is meant what has not yet come

to be, but is possible to be, as wood which has not yet

bccOlne, but is capable of becoming, a vessel. Secondly, the

term signifies what neither has nor ever can come to be,

as a triangle that IS quadrangular, and an even nunlber


9 The two first senses here

given answer to the two first

mentioned, supr. p. 50, and, as

he there says, are plainly irrele-

vant. The third there given,

which, as he there observes, is

ambiguous and used for a sophis-

tical purpose. is here divided into

third and fourth, answering to

the two r-;enses which alone are

assigned in supr. p. 53, and

on them the question turns. Thi8

is an instance, of which many


occur, how Ath;m. used his former

writings and worked over again

his former ground, and simplified

or cleared what he had said. In

Deer. Nic. supr. p. 50 (A.D. 350)

we have three senses of áylVV1]TOV,

two irrelevant and the third

ambiguous; here (A.D. 358) he

diviJes the third into two; in

Arim. (A.D. 3[19) he rejects and

omitn<; the two fir:;t. leaving the

two last, which are the critical

se n5es.


206 THltEE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. x. that is odd. Thirdly, by "ingenerate" is meant,

what exists, but not generated from any, nor

having a father at all. Lastly, Asterius, that unprincipled

sophist, the patron too of this heresy, has added in his own

treatise, that what is not, made, but is ever, is "in-

generate." They ought then, when they ask the question,

to add in what sense they take the word "ingenerate," and

then the parties questioned. would be able to answer to

the point..

60. :But if still they thInk it fair merely to ask, "Is the

Ingenerate one or two?" they must be told first of aU, as

ill-educated men, that many are such and nothing is such;

very many things which admit of an origin, and nothing

not admitting, as has been said. But if they ask, according

to Asterius's meaning of the term, "that which is not a

work, but was from eternity," they must be told again

and again, that the Son as well as the Father is in this

sense ingenerate. For He is neither in the number of

things made, nor a work, but has ever been with the

Father, as has already been shown, in spite of their much

f3huffiing for the sole sake of insulting the Lord with,

"He is of nothing," and" He was not before His genera-

tioll." When then, after failing at every tUfll 1 they

betake themselves to asking the question in the other

sense of "existing, but not generated of any, nor having a

father," then we shall ten them that the Ingenerate in this

sense is only one, namely, the Father; and they win gain ø

nothing by their question. For to say that God is in this

sense Ingenerate, does not show that the Son is a thing

made, it being evident from the above proofs that the

\V ord is such as He is who begat Him. Therefore if God

be ingenerate, His lInage is not lnade, but an Offspring,

namely, lEs VV orù and His Wisdom. For what likeness

has the made to the Ingencl'ate ? (one n111st not weary to

use repetition), f or if they will have it that the one is like


AGAIN8T ARIAN r8M.


:207


the other, so that he who sees the one beholds ED. BEN.

Ì.

 30-32.

the other, they are not far from saying that the

Ingenerate is the image of creatures; the end of which

is a confusion of the whole subject, an equalling of things

made with the Ingenerate, and a denial of the Ingenerate

by measuring Him with the works; and all in order to

reduce the Son into their number.

61. However, I suppose even they will be unwilling to

proceed to such lengths, that is, if they follow Asterius the

sophist. For he, earnest as he is in his ad vocacy of the

Arian heresy, and maintaining that the Ingenerate is one,

runs counter to them in saying also, that the Wisdom of

God is in generate and unoriginate; the following is a

passage out of his work: "The Blessed Paul said not that

he preached Christ the power of God or the wisdom of

God, but, without the article, a power of God and a wisdom

of God; thus preaching that the proper power of God

Himself, which is natural to Him and co-existent with

Him ingenerately, is something besides." And, again

soon after: "However, His eternal power and wisdom,

which truth argues to be unoriginate and ingenerate, this

must surely be one." For though misunderstanding the

Apostle's words, he considered that there were two

wisdOlns; yet by speaking still of an in generate wisdom

co-existent with Him, he declares that the Ingenerate is

not simply one, but that there is another in generate with

Him. For what is co-existent co-exists not ',:ith itself,

but with another. If then they agree with Asterius, let

them never ask again, "Is the Ingenerate one or two," or

they will have to contest the point with him; if, on the

other hand, they differ even from him, let them not rest

their defence upon his treatise, lest, biting one another,

they be consumed one of another.

62. So much on the point of their ignorance; but who

can say enough on their wicked purpose? who but would


208


THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. X. justly hate them while possessed by such a n1ad-

ness? for when they were no longer free to say,

"out of nothing," and" He was not before His generation,"

they hit upon this word" Ingenerate," that by saying among

the simple that the Son was generate, that is, came to be,

they might imply the very SaIne phrases "out of nothing,"

and "He once was not;" for in such phrases things made

and creatures are in1plied. If they have confidence in

their own positions, they should stand to them, and not

change about so variously; but this they will not do, from

an idea that success is altogether easy, if they do but

shelter their heresy under colour of the word "ingenerate."

Yet after an, this te.rm is not used in contrast with the

Son, clam our as they may, but with things made; and the

like may be found in the words "Almighty" and "Lord

of the Powers." 1 For if we say that the Father has power

and lordship over all things by the 1V ord, and the Son

rules the Father's kingdom, and has the power of all, as

His Word, and as the Image of the Father, it is quite

plain that neither in this respect is the Son reckoned

among that aU, nor is God called Ahnightyand Lord with

reference to Him, but to those things which through the

Son come to be, and over which He exercises power and

lordship through the VV ord. And therefore the Ingene-

rate is understood, not by contrast with the Son but with the

things which through the Son come to be. And excel-

lently: since God is not such as things that COlne to be, but


1 The passage which follows is

written with his de Deer. before

him. At :first he but uses the

same topics, but presently he in-

corporates into this Discourse an

actual portion of his former work.

with only such alterations as an

author commonly makes in tran-

scribing. This, which is not UL-

frequent with Athan., shows us


the care with which he made his

doctrinal statements, though they

seem at :first sight written off.

It also accounts for the diffuseness

and repetition which might be

imputed to his composition, wha.t

seems superfl nons being often

only the insertion of an extract

from a former work.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


209


is their Creator and Framer through the Son. And ED. BEN.

i.

 33-34.

as the word ,,' Ingenerate" signifies a relation to

things created, so the word "Father" is indicative of the

Son. And he who names God Maker and Framer and 1n-

generate, regards and apprehends things that are created and

come to be; and he who calls God Father, thereby conceives

and contemplates the Son. And hence one might marvel

at the obstinacy which is added to their in1piety, that,

whereas the term "Ingenerate" has the aforesaid good

meaning, and admits of being piously used, they, in their

private heresy, bring it forth for the dishonour of the

Son, not having read that he who honoureth the Son

honoureth the Father, and he dishonoureth the Father

who dishonoureth the Son. If they had any concern at all

for reverent speaking and for the honour due to the

Father, it became them rather, and this were better and

higher, to acknowledge and call God Father, than to give

Him this nanle. For, in calling God ingenerate, they are,

as I said before, naming Him from His works, and as

1\Iaker only and Framer, supposing that hence they nlay

imply that th

 "\V ord is a work to their own private satis-

faction. But he who calls God Father, names Him from

the Son, being well aware that since there is a Son, of

necessity through that Son all things that have come

into being were created. And they, when they call IIim

Ingenerate, name Him only from His works, and know

not the Son any more than the Greeks. But he who

calls God Father, names Him fron1 the Word; and

knowing the Word, he acknowledges Him to be Framer

of all, and understands that through HiIn all things were

made.

63. Therefore it is more pious and more accurate to

denote God from the Son and call Him Father, than to

name Him from His works only and call Him Ingenerate.

For the latter title, as I have said, does nothing more than

p


.


210 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAll. x. refer to all the works, individually and collectively,

which håve COlnc into being at the will of God

through the Word; but the title Father, has its sig!1Ïficancc

and its bearing only from the Sou. And, whereas the "\V ord

surpasses things that have a beginning, by so much and

lucre doth calling God Father surpass the calling Hilu In-

generate. For the latter is unscriptural, and suspicious, as

ha ving various senses; so that when a nlan is asked con-

cel'ning it, his Inind is carried about to many ideas; but the

word Father is simple and scriptural, and more accurate,

and distinctly implies the Son, And" Ingenerate" is a word

of the Greeks, who know not the Son; but "Father" has

been acknowledged and vouchsafed by our Lord. For He,

knowing Himself whose Son He was, said, I am in tlte

.Father, and the Father is in }'le; and, He that hath seen Me,

hath seen the Father, and I and the Father are One; but

nowhere is He found to call the Father Ingenerate.

Moreover, when He teaches us to pray, He says not,

" V{hen ye pray, say, 0 God Ingenerate," but rather,

When ye pray, say, Our IJ1ather, 'Who art in heaven. And

it was His will that the sUlnmary of our faith should

have the same force in bidùing us be baptised, not

into the name of Ingenerate and generate, nor into the

l1anle of Creator and creature, but into the N anle of

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For with such an

initiation we, too, being of thê works, are henceforth

Inade sons, and using the name of the Father, acknowledge

also from that Naine the Word in the Father Himself.

A vain thing then is their argument about the term

"Ingenerate

n as is now proved, and nothing more than a

fantasy.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


211


CHAPTER XI.

Answer to intellectual o

iections.

64. ÅS to their question whether the Word IS ED. BEN.

i.

 34-35.

mutable,2 it is superfluous to examine it; it 18

enough sÏ1nply to write down what they say, in order to

show its daring Ï1npiety. How they trifle, appears frOlD

the following questions :-=-" Has He free will, or has He

not? is He good from purpose according to free will, and

can He, if He will, alter, being of an alterable nature?

or, as wood or stone, has He no purpose of His own,

free to be moved hither and thither?" It is but agree-

able to their heresy thus to speak and think; for when

once they have fralned to theIllselves a God out of

nothing and a created Son, of cours

 they also adopt such

terms as are suitable to the idea of a creature. However,

"lien in their controversies with authorities of the Church

they hear from them of the real and only W ûrd of the

Father, and yet venture thus to speak of Him, does not

their doctrine then become the most loathsome that can be

found? Is it not enough to shock a man on mere hear-

ing, though unable to reply, and to make him stop his

ears, from astonishlnent at the novelty of what he hears

them say, which even to utter is to blaspheme? For if the

Word be mutable and alterable, where wiU He stay, and

what will be the issue of His progress? how shall the

mutable possibly be like the Iminutable? How should he

who has seen the mutable, be considered to have Seen the

Imnlutable? in which of His states shall we be able to

behold in Him the Father? for it is plain that not at all


2 Tp E7TTÒ r, not, cbangeable, but

of a moral nature capable of im-

provement or the reverse. Arius

maintained this in the strongest

terms at starting. "On being


asked whether the Word of God

is capable of altering as the devil

altered, they scrupled not to say.

, Yea, He is capable.' JJ Alex. ap,

Socr. i. 6, p. 11.

p2


.


212 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XI. times shall we see the Father in the Son, because

the Son is ever altering, and is of a changing

nature. For the Father is unalterable and unchangeable,

and is always in the same state and always the same; but

if, as they hold, the Son is alterable, and not alwáYs the

same, but ever of a changing nature, how can such a one be

the Father's Image, not having the likeness of His unalter-

ableness? how can He be in the Father at all, if His moral

choice is indetern1Ïuate? Nay, perhaps, as being alterable,

and advancing daily, He is not perfect yet. But away with

such madness of the Arians, and let the Truth shine out,

and show that they are beside themselves. For must not He

be perfect who is equal to God? and must not He be un-

alterable, who is one with the Father, and is His Son proper

to His substance? and the Father's substance being unalter-

able, unalterable must be also the proper Offspring from it.

And if nevertheless they blasphemously impute alteration to

the Word, let them learn how much their own reason is in

peril; for from the fruit is the tree known. For this is

why he who hath seen the Son, hath seen the Father, and

why the knowledge of the Son is knowledge of the Father.

65. Therefore the image of the immutable God must be

unalterable; for Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and

to-day. and for ever. And David in the Psalm says of

Him, Thou, Lm'd, in the beginning hast laid the foundation

of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thine hands.

They shall perish, but Thou remainest; and they all shall

'wax old as doth a garment. And as a vesture shalt Thou

fold them up, and they shall be changed, but Thou art the

sarne, and Thy years shall not fail. And the Lord Himself

says of Himself through the Prophet, See now that I, even

I, am He, and I vary not. For, though it Il1ay be said tha

the Father is signified in these passages, yet it suits the

Sou also to speak them,3 specially because, after becOluing

· Vid. supr. p. 6.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


213


ma.n, he manifests His own identity and unalterable- ED. BEN.

t.

 35-36.

ness to any who think that by reason of the flesh

He has been changed

nd become other than He was.

More trustworthy are the sacred writers, or rather the Lord,

than the perversity of the impious. For Scripture, as in

the above-cited reading of the Psalter, signifying under the

name of heaven and earth, that the nature of all things

that come to be, and the whole creation, is alterable, and

changeaole, yet by excepting the Son from these, shows

us thereby that He is in nowise one who had a beginning;

nay teaches that He changes everything else, and is Him-

self not changed, in saying, Thou art the same, and Thy

years shall not fail.

66. And with reason; for things made, being from

nothing, and not existing before their making, bave a

nature which is changeable; but the Son, being from the

Father, and proper to His substance, is unchangeable and

una1terable as the Father H in1 self. For it were sin to say

that frOln that substance which is unalterable was begotten

an alterable word and a changeable wisdom. For how is

He longer the Word, if He be alterable? or can that be

'Yisdom which is changeable? unless forsooth, as accident

is in substance,4 so these would be in God; viz., as in any par-

ticular substance a certain grace and habit of virtue exists

accidentally, which is called Word and Son and Wisdom,

and admits of being taken from that substance or added

to it. For they have often expressed this sentiment, but

it is not the faith of Christians; as not declaring that

there is truly a 'Y ord and Son of God, or that the wisdom

spoken of is the true Wisdom. For what alters and

changes, and. has no stay in one and the same condition,

how can that be true? whereas the Lord says, I am the

Truth. If then the IJord HÌInself speaks thus concerning

Himself, and declares IIis nnalterablene

R, and the sacred

, Vide supr. p. 2.00. Also App. (1VP.{

fß1JICÓ'.


.


"


214 THRBE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OHAP. .

II. writers have learned and testify this, nay, and our

notion of God approve of it as pious, whence did

these men of impiety draw this novelty? from their heart,

as from a seat of corruption, did they vomit it forth.


CHAPTER XII.


An.çwer to objections from Scripture; first, Phil. ii. 9, 10.


67. So much on objections to the sacred truth, arising-

out of the doctrine itself; now I go on to speak of the

Scripture announcements about it, that is, viewing then1

not according to the perverseness of Arian heresy, but in

tha.t true sense which the Church has ever maintained. 5

They say then, that the Apostle writes,-

Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given

HÙn a Name 'Which is above every name; that at the Name

of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things

in earth and things under the earth: and David,

Wherefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with

the oil of gladness above Thy fellows.

Then they urge, as something acute: "If He was exalted

and received grace, on a wherefore, and on a 'Wherefore

was anointed, He received the reward of His good choice;

but having acted fr01n choice, He is altogether of a mutable

nature." This is what. Eusebius and Arius have dared

to say, nay, to write; while their partisans do not shrink

from conversing about it in full market, not seeing bow

mad an argument they use. For if He received what

He had a5

 reward of His good choice, and would not

have had it, unless He had needed it and had His work to


IS llCôucijt1al.. It is observable

that Athan. does not deny that

Scripture can be read wrongly


a8 if it always spoke for itself,


and carried with it its own in-

terpretation), !Jut only says it

admits of a.n orthodox sensc. Vide

ópOót;, &c.


AGAINST ARIANISl\f.


215


show for it, then having gained it from virtue and ED. BEN

i.

 37-38.

growth in good, certainly it was possible for such

a being "therefore" to be Son and God, witho\.lt being a

rea'! Son. For what is from another by nature, is a rea]

offspring, as Isaac was to AbrahaIn, and Joseph to Jacob,

and the radiance to the sun; but the so-called sons from

virtue and grace, have in place of nature only a grace by

acq nisition, and are something else besides the gift itself;

as the men who have receiyed the Spirit by participation,

concerning whon1 Scripture saith, I have begotten and exalted

children, and they have rebelled against Me. And of course

since they were not sons by nature, therefore, when they

changed, the Spirit was taken away from them and they

were disiuherit.ed; and again on their repentance that God

who thus at the beginning gave them grace, will receive them

and give light, and call them sons again. This is how

they speak, and it is all very clear and plain when said of

those whose sonship is not natural but adoptive: but do

they go so far as to maintain that such is the sense in which

our Lord Jesus is the Son of God? If so, then doubtless

He is neither very God nor very Son, nor like the Father,

nor in anywise has He God as Father of His being accord-

ing to substance, but as Father of the mere grace .given to

HÍIn, and as Creator of His being, according to substance,

after the similitude of all others. And being such, if this

is their view, it will be manifest further that He had not

the name "Son" frOln the first, but it was the prize of

works done and of an advancement in virtue, at the time

when He became man and took the form of servant; and

after becoming obedient unto death, He was highly exalted,

and received that Name as a grace, at which every knee

should boUJ.

68. This line of thought is very clear, but perhaps it will

be found to go sOlnewhat further than these nwn wouJd wish.

For, let me ask theIn,

upposing lIe was then exalted and


216 THREJ;

 DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XII. then began to be worshipped, and then was first

called Son, what was He before His incarnation?

Have they made up their minds on this point? I repeat,

what was He before this? One must urge the question on

them again, to make it understood what their impiety re-

sults in. For if the Lord be God, Son, Word, yet was not

all these before He became man, then either He was some-

thing else besides these, and afterwards becaIne partaker of

these for His virtue's sake, as we have said, or they must

of necessity adopt the alternative (may it fall upon their

heads!) that He did not exist before that time, but is wholly

man by nature, and nothing more. Are they content with

such an issue of their reasoning? Why, it is the very senti-

ment of Samosatene and of the present Jews; it is no teach-

ing of the Church. If this be their mind, wherefore, as

being Jews, are they not circulncised with them too, in-

stead of pretending Christianity, while they are its foes?

For if He did not pre-exist, or did indeed, but afterwards

was advanced, how were all things made by Him, or how,

if He were not perfect, did the Father delight in Him?

And He, on the other hand, if now advanced in good, how

did He before that rejoice in the presence of the Father?

And, if it was after His death that He received His worship,

how is Abraham seen to worship Him in the tent, and

l\[oses in the bush? and how, as Daniel saw, were myriads

of myriads, and thousands of thousands, ministering unto

Him? 6 And if, as they say, He had His advancement only

now, how did the Son Himself make luention of that His

glory before and above the world, when He said, Glorify

Thou ]JIe, 0 Father, with the glory which I had with Thee

before the world was. If, as they say, it was now that He

was exalted, how did He before that bow the heavens and

come down; and again, the Highest gave His voice? There-


6 All this implies a traditional of tho books cf the O

d Testa.

a.nd authoritative interpretation ment.


AGAINST ARIANIS1tI.


217


fore, if, even before the world was made, the Son ED. BEN.

i.

 38-39.

had that glory, and was Lord of glory and the

Highest, and descended from heaven, and is ever to be WOf-

shipped, it follows that He had no advance in greatness in

consequence of His descent, but rather by that descent Him-

self bettered the things which needed bettering; and if He

descended in order to their bettering, therefore He did not

receive in reward the name of Son and God, but rather He

Himself has made us sons of the Father, and made lnen

gods, by Himself becoming man.

69. Before going on, then, to explain the passages of

Scripture objected to us, I think so far is clear, that at least

the Arian sense is quite incompatible with what the Lord has

told us of Himself, as God and SOIl of God, of His descent

from heaven, and the reason of it. He was not first man

and then became God, but He was God and then became

man, and that in order to make us gods. 0 therwise, if

only when He became man, He was called Son and God,

yet before He became man, God called the ancient people

sons, and made 1\Ioses a god to Pharaoh (and Scripture says

of an assembly, God standeth in the congregation of gods), it is

plain that He is called Son and God later than they. How

then are all things through Him, and He before all? or

how is He first-born of the whole creation, if He has others

before Him who are called sons and gods? And how is it

that those first partakers of the gift do not partake of the

"\V ord? This opinion is not true; it is a discovery of our

J udaisers. For how in that case can any at all know God

as their Father? for adoption there cannot be apart from

the real Son, who says, No one knoweth the Fatlzer save the

Son, and he to wllOmsoever the Son will reveal Him. And

how can there be deifying apart from the Word and before

Him? yet, saith He to the brethren of these men, the Jews,

If He called tltem gods, unto wlwu't tlte lVord of God ('{{me.

And if all that are called sons and gods, whet.her in earth


218 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XII. or in heaven, were adopted and deified through

the 'V ord, and the Son Hhnself ìs the Word, it is

plain that through Him are they all, and He Himself before

all, or rather He Himself only is very Son, and He alone is

very God from the very God, not receiving these prerogatives

as a reward for His virtue, nor being something else beside

them, but being all these by nature and according to sub-

stance. For He is Offspring of the Father's substance, so

that one cannot doubt that after the resemblance of the un-

alterable Father, the Word also is unalterable.

70. Hitherto we have met their irrational conceits with

the true conceptions _ implied in the word "Son," as

the Lord Himself has enabled us, and confining ourselves

to them. But it will be well next to expound the inspired

passages in question, that the unalterableness of the Son

and His unchangeable nature, which is the Father's, as

well as their perverseness, may be still more fully proved.

The A postle then, writing to the Philippians, says, Let

this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; who,

being in the form of God, thought it not ?

obbery to be equal

with God; but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon

HÙn the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of

men. And, being found in fashion as a man, He humbled

Himself, and becarne obedient to death, even the death of the

cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given

Hint a Name which is above every name; that at tlw Name

of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things

in earth, and things under the earth, and that every ton,que

should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God

tile Father. Can anything be l)lainer and nlore express

than this? He was not frmn a lower soote advanced; -

but rather, existing as God, He took the form of a Rervant,

and in taking it did not advance HimHelf in dignity but

humbled Hinlself. 'Vhere then is there here any reward

of virtue, or what advanCeInellt and prOIllotion in humilia..


AGAINST ARIANISM.


219


tion? For if, being God, He becanle man, and, ED. BEN.

Ì.

 39----41.

after descending from on high, is said to be exalted,

where is He exalted, being God ?-this withal being plain,

that since God is highest of all, His 'V ord must necessarily

be highest also. 'Vhither then could He be exalted higher,

who is in the Father and is like the Father in all things?

71. Therefore He is beyond the need of any addition;

and not such as the Arians think Him. For though the

"\Y ord did descend in order to be exalted, and so it is

written, yet what need was there that He should humble

Himself at all, as if to seek that which He had already?

And what grace did He receive who is the Giver of grace?

or how did He receive that Name for worship, who is

always worshipped by His Name? Nay, certainly before

He became man, the sacred writers invoke Him, Save me,

o God, for Thy Name's sake; and again, Some put their

t'/"list in chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the

Name of the Lord our God. And while He was worshipped

by the Patriarchs, concerning the Angels it is written, Let

all the Angels of God U'orship Him. And if, as David says

in the 71st Psaln1, His Name remainetlt before the sun, and

bejore the moon from one generation to another, how did He

receive what He had always, even before He now received

it? or how is lIe exalted, being, even before His exalta-

tion, the Most High? or how did He receive the right of

being worshipped, who was ever worshipped before lIe

became man?

72. This doctrine is not a human riddle, but a divine

Inystery. In the beginnin!/ was the JVord, and the IVord 'U)(fS

U'ith God, and the TVord was God; but for our sakes afterwards

the Word was made flesh. And the term in question, highl.lJ

exalted, does not signify that the substance of the "\V urd

was exalted, for lIe was eyer and is equal In Cod, but the

exaltation is of the Inauhood. Accorùingly, this is not

said before the 'V orù became flesh; that it might be pJa.in


2

O THREE DIHCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XII. that humbled and exalted are spoken of His hu-

manity; for where there is humble estate, there

too may be exaltation; and if because of His taking flesh

" humblpd" is written, it is clear that "highly exalted" is also

said because of that incarnation. For of this was man's na.ture

in want, because of the degradation of the flesh and of death.

Since then the Word, being the Image of the Father and

immortal, took tlw form of a servant, and as man underwent for

ns death in His own flesh, that thereby He might offer

Himself for us through death to the Father; therefore, also,

as man, He is said because of us and for us to be highly

exalted, that as by His death we all died in Christ, so again

in Christ IIÌlnself we might be highly exalted, being raised

from the dead, and ascending into heaven, whither the Fore-

runner is for us entered, not into the figures of the true, but

into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.

But if now for us the Christ is entered into heaven itself,


hough He was even before and always Lord and Fralner

of the heavens, for us therefore is that present exaltation

also written. And as He Himself, while sanctifying alJ,

says also that He sanctifies Himself to the Father for our

sakes, not that the V{ ord may beconle holy, but that He

Himself may in Himself sanctify all of us, in like manner

we must take the present phrase, He highly exalted Hirn,

not that He Himself should be exalted, for He is the

highest, but that He may becOIlle righteousness for us, and

that we may be exalted in Him, and that we may enter

the gates of heaven, which He has also opened for us, they

saying who run before, Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates, and

be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall

come in. For here, also, not on Him were shut the gates,

who is Lord and Maker of all, but because of us it is

written, to whom the door of paradise was shut. And

therefore in a human relation, because of the fie

h which

He bore, it is said of IIÜn, Lift up, 0 ye gates, and shall


AGAINST ARIANISM.


221


come in, as if a nlan were enterin g ; but in a ED. BEN.

i.

 41-42.

divine relation on the other hand it is said of Him,

since the Word 'Was God, that He is the Lord and the

King of glory. Such an exaltation, as fulfilled in us, the

Spirit fore-announced in the eighty-eighth Psalnl, saying, And

in Thy righteousness shall they be exalted, for Thou art the

glory of thpir strength. And if the Son be Righteousness, then

He is not exalted as being lIimself in need, but it is we who

are exalted in that Righteousness, which is He.

73. And so too the words gave llim are not written for

the Word Himself; for even before He became man, He

was worshipped, as we have said, by the Angels and by the

whole creation, as having the prerogative of the Father;

but because of us and for us this too is written of HÎIn.

For as Christ died and was exalted as man, so, as nlan,

is He said to take what, as God, He ever had, that even

this so high a grant of grace might reach to us. For the

'V ord was not impaired in receiving a body, that He should

seek to receive a grace, but rather He deified that which

He put on, nay, gave it graciously to the race of man. For

as He was ever worshipped as being the 'V ord and existing

in the for'in of God, so, being what He ever was, though

beCOlne man and called .Jesus, He still has, as before, the

whole creation under foot) and bending their knees to IEnl

in this Nanle, and confessing that the \V ord's becoming flesh,

and undergoing death in flesh, hath not happened agaiu::;t

the glory of His Godhead, but to the glory of God the Father.

For it is the Father's glory that man, made and then lost,

should be found again; and when done to death, that

lIe should be made alive, and should become God's temple.

For whereas the powers in heaven, both Angels and Arch-

angels, were ever worshipping the Lord, as they are now

worshipping Him in the Name of Jesus, this is our grace

and high exaltation, that even when He became man, the

Son of God is worshippcri., and the heavenly powers are


222 TRUE}.: DISCOOHSES OF ATRANASIUS


CHAP. XII. not startled at seeing all of us, who are of one

body with Him, ilttroduced into their reahlls. And

this had not been, unless He who existed in the form of

God had taken on Hiln a servant's fOl"Jn, and had humbled

Himself, yielding His body even unto death.

74. Behold then the foolishness of God, as men consider

it because of the Cross, has become of all things most

honoured. For our resurrection is stored up in it; and no

longer Israel alone, but henceforth all the nations, as the

Prophet foretold, are leaving their idols and acknowledging

the true God, the Father of the Christ. And the delusion

of demons is come to nought, and He only who is really

God is worshipped in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For that the Lord, incarnate and with the Name of

Jesus, is worshipped as God's Son, and the Father known

through Him, is a plain proof, as has been said, that not

the Word, considered as the Word, received this so great

grace, but that it was we. For, because of our relationship to

His Body, we too have become God's temple, and in conse-

quence are made God's sons, so that even in us the Lord

is now worshipped, and beholders report, as the A postle

says, that God is in the'ln of a truth. As also John saith in

the Gospel, As many as received Hirn, to them gave He power

to become children of God; and in his Epistle he writes,

By this we know that He abideth in us, by His BpÙ.it which He

hath given us. And this too is an evidence of His good-

ness towards us, that, while we were exalted because the

Highest Lord is in us, and for onr sake grace was given

to Him, (because the Lord from whom it comes had be-

come a man like us,) He on the other hand, the Saviour,

humbled HiInself in taking our body of humiliation, and

took a servant's form, putting on that flesh which was

enslaved to sin. And He indeed gained nothing from us

for His own advancement: for the Word of God is without

want and full; but rather it was we who were advanced


AGAINST ARIANIS:M.


223


from IIiIn; for lIe is the L1ght, which lighteneth i.E

.


4.

every 'inan that cometh into the 'World.

75. In vain then do the Arians lay stress upon the

conjunction wherefore, in consequence of Paul having said,

J;Vlterefore hath God highly exalted Him. For in saying this

he did not iInply His resurrection was any prize of virtue,

or advancement for the better, but he assigned the cause

why the exaltation was bestowed upon us. And what is

tlllS but that He who existed in form of God, the Son of a

divine Father, 11lunbled Hilnself and became a servant

instead of us and in our behalf? For if the Lord had not

become man, we had not been redeemed from sins, nor

raised from the dead, but had remained dead under the

earth; not exalted into heaven, but lying in Hades

Because of us then and in our behalf are the words, highly

exalted and given.

76. This then I consider the meaning of this passage,

and that especially in harmony with the sentiment of the

Church. However, there is another way of handling it,

not divergent but parallel; yiz., that, though it does not

speak of the exaltation of the 'V ord Himself, considered as

'V ord (for He is, as was just now said, most high and like

His Father), yet by reason of His incarnation, the passage

speaks of His resurrection from the dead. For after saying,

He hatll, humbled Himself even unto death, the passage imlne-

diately adds, Wherefore He hath highly exalted HÙn; wishing

to show, that, although as man it is recorded of Him that

He died, yet, as being Life, He was exalted in the

resurrection; for He who descended, is the same also who

rose again. This then is the second sense of "wherefore," in

the pa.ssage; the Lord's exaltation was, I have said, in order

to ours; but further, it was the necessary result of the

divinity which, even as regards the body, death could not

detain. He descended in a body, and He rose again because

it was God who was in that body. And this I say is the


224 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XU. reason, according to this interpretation, why lIe

brought in the conjunction IVllerefore; not to signify

a reward of virtue nor an advancement, but the direct cause

why the resnrrection took place; and why, while all other

Iuen from Adam down to this time have died and remained

dead, He only in integrity of being rose from the

dead. The cause is this, which He Hilnse1f has already

taught us, that He was God, who afterwards became man.

For all other men, being merely born of Adam, died, and

death reigned over them; but He, the Second l\rlan, is from

heaven, for the TVm-d was made fi esh, and such a 1\f an is

said to be from heaven and heavenly, because the Word

descended frOlll heaven; wherefore He was not held undel'

death. For though He hUlnbled Himself, allowing His

own Body even to die, in that it was capable of death, yet it

was without delay exalted from earth, because He was also

God's Son in a body. Accordingly what is here said, TVltere-

fore God also hath highly e:ralted Him, answers to St. Peter's

words in the Acts, TVhom God raised up, having loosed the

bonds of death, because it was not possible that He should bE

holden of it. For while Paul has written, "'Vhereas being

in form of God He becan1e nlan, and lllunbled IIiIllself unto

death, therefore God also hath highly exalted HÌIn," so

also Peter says, "'Vhereas, being God, He became man,

and by signs and wonders was proved to eye-witnesses to

be God, therefore it was not possible that He should be

holden of death." To man it had not been possible to succeed

in such a matter; for death is proper to man; wherefore

the 'V ord, being God, became flesh, that, being put to death

in the flesh, He might quicken all mcn by His own power.

77. Here I lllust add one word in explanation. Since the

VV ord is said to be exalted and to receive gifts fronl God,

heretics think this must necessarily affect or impair the

substance of the Word, but this is not so. He is said to be

exalted from the lower parts of the earth, because death


AGAINST ARIANISM.


225


also is ascribed to Him. Both events are reckoned ED. BEN.

i.

 44-45.

His, since it was His Body, and none other's, that

was exalted from the dead and taken up into heaven. And

again, the body being His, and the Word not being external

to it, it is natural that when the Body was exalted, He,

as man, should, because of the body, be spoken of as ex-

alted. If then He did not become man, let this not be

said.of Him; but if the Word became flesh, of necessity

the resurrection and exaltation, as when a man is spoken of,

must be ascribed to Him, in order that the death which is

ascribed to Him may be a redemption of the sins of men

and an abolition of death, and that the resulTection and

exaltation may for His sake remain secure for us. And

both phrases run, God hath highly exalted Him, and God

hath given to Him, in order to show that it is not the

Father that hath become flesh, but it is His "\V ord, who

has become man and after the manner of men has received

gifts from the Father, and is exalted by Him, as has been

said. And it is plain, nor would anyone dispute it, that

what the Father gives, He gives through the Son. And

it is marvellous and overwhelming verily, that the grace

which the Son gives from the Father-, that the Son Himself

is said to receive; and that the exaltation, which the Son

effects from the Father, with that the Son is Himself

exalted. For He who is the Son of God, He HÎInself

becaIne the Son of

lan; and, as Word, He gives what

comes from the Father, for all things which the Father

does and gives, He does and supplies through Him; and as

being the Son of 1\lan, He Himself is said, after the manner

of men, to receive what proceeds from Himself, because His

Body is none other than His, and is a natural recipient of

grace, as has been said. For He received it as far as man's

nature was exalted; which cxa1t.ation was its being deified.

But such an exaltation the 'V ord Hitnsl'1f always had accord-

ing to the Father's Godhead and perfectioll\ which was His.

Q


26 THREE DISCOURSER OF ATHANASIUS


CHAPTER XIII.


1ns'wer to objections from Scripture; secondly, P,

rtlm xliv. 7.

CnAP. XIII. 78. SUCH an explanation of the Apostle's words

confutes the impious men; and what the Psalmist

says admits also the same orthodox sense, which they mis-

interpret, but which in the Psalmist is Inanifestly according

to piety. He says then, Thy throne, 0 God, is for ever and

ever; a sceptre of trighteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom.

Thou hast loved trighteousness, and hated iniquity, 1()hereforp

God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of glad-

ness above Thy fellows. Behold, 0 ye Arians, and. acknow-

ledge even hence the truth. The Psalmist speaks of us all

as fello'ws or partakers of the Lord; but were He one of

thiI)gs which come out of nothing and of things made par-

takers, He Himself had been Ol1e of those who partake.

But, since he sang of HÜn as the eternal God, saying, Thy

tkrone, 0 God, is for ever and ever, and has declared that

all other things partake of Him, what conclusion must we

draw, but that He is distinct from created things, and He

onl y the Father's veritable Word, Radiance, and Wisdom,

which all things Inad

 partake, being sanctified by Him in

the Spirit? And therefore He is here "anointed," not

that He may beC01l1e God, for lIe was so even before; nor

that He may become I{jllg, for He had the KingdOln

eternally, existing as God's lInage, as the sacred Oracle

shows; but, as before, in our behalf is this written. For

the Israelitish kings, upon their being anointed, then

became kings, not being so before, as David, as Ezekias,

as Josias, and the rest; but the Savionr on the contrary,

being God, and ever ruling over the Father's Kingdom, and

being Himself the Dispenser of the 1101y Ghost, neverthe-

less is here said to be anointed, that, as before, being said

as man to be anointed with the Spirit, He n1Ïght provide

for us men, not only exaltation and resurrection, but the

indwelling and intimacy of the Spirit. And, signifying this,


AGAINST ARIANISM.


227


the Lord Himself hath said by His own mouth, l

f4':-':i.

in the Gospel according to John, I have sent --_

them into the world, and for their sakes do I sanctify ]'Iyself,

that they may be :5anctified in truth. In saying this He has

shown that He is not the sanctified, but the Sanctifier;

for He is not sanctified by other, but He Himself sanctifies

Himself, that we may be sanctified in the Truth. He who

sanctifies Himself is IJord of sanctification. How then does

this take place? 'Vhat does He mean but this? viz., "I,

being the Father's Word, I give to l\Iyself, when become

n1an, the Spirit; and hi the sanle Spirit do I sanctify

Myself when become Inan, that henceforth in 1\1e, who

am Truth, (for Thy Word is Truth,) all men may be

sanctified. "

79. If then for our sake He sanctifies Himself, and does

this when He has becoine man, it is also very plain that

the Spirit's descent on Him in Jordan, was a descent upon

us, because of His bearing our body. And it did not take

place for any advancement of the Word, but again for

our sanctification, that we might share His anointing, and

that of us it might be said, Know ye not that ye are God's

Temple, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? For when

the Lord, as man, was washed in Jordan, it was we who

were washed in IIim and by IIÜn. And when He received

the Spirit, we it was who by Him are made capable of re-

ceiving It. And lIloreover for thIS reason, it was not as Aal'on

or David or the rest, that He was anointed with oil, but

in another way above aU His fellows, with the oil of glad-

ness; which He Himself interprets to be the Spirit, saying

by the Prophet, The Spirit of the Lord is upon hIe, because

the Lord hath anointed J[e; as also the Apostle has said,

How God anointed Him with the Holy Ghost. 'Vhen then

were these prophecies fulfilled in Hin1 but when on His

coming in the flesh fIe was baptized in tJ ordan, aT.d the

Spirit descended un Him? And indeed the Lord Himself

Q2


228 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUB


CIIAP. XIII. says to His disciples, The Spirit shall take of

fine;

and I will send Him; and Receive ye the Holy

Ghost; but notwithstanding, He who, as the Word and

Radiance of the Father, gives to others, elsewhere is said

to be sanctified, because now He has become man, and the

Rody that is sanctified is His. From Him then we have

begun to receive the unction and the seal, John saying, And

ye have an unction from the Holy One; and the Apostle, And

ye were sealed with the Holy Spi1 0 it of promise. Therefore

because of us and for us are these words.

80. What ad vance then in goodness, and reward of

virtue or generally of conduct, is proved from this in our

Lord's instance? :For if He was not God, and then had

become God, if not being King He was promoted to

royalty, your reasoning would have had some faint plausi-

bility. But if He is God and the throne of His kingdon1

is everlasting, in what way could God advance? or what

was there wanting to Him who was sitting on His Father's

throne? And if, as the Lord Himself has said, the Spirit

is His, and takes of His, and is sent by Him, it is not

the Word, considered as the 1V ord and Wisdom, who is

anointed with that Spirit which He Himself gives, but the

flesh assullled by Hiln which is anointed in Hun and by

Hbn; that the sanctification coming to the Lord as man,

lnay COlne to all men frOll1 Him. For not of Itself, saith

!-Ie, doth the Spirit speak, but the Word is He who gives

It to the worthy. For this is like the passage considered

above; for as the Apostle has written, JVlto existing in

form of God thought it not 'robbery to be equal with God,

but !tumbled Himself, and took a sm'vanl's form, so David

celebrates the Lord, as everlasting God and King, but

sent to us and aSSU111Íng our body which is mortal. For

thit:; is his lueaning in the Psalnl, All Thy ga1 0 ments smell

of myrrh, aloes, and cassia; and it is represented by Nico-

dCIllUS and by l\iary's company, when he came bringing a


AGAINST ARIANISM.


229


mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pounds l

r4


8.

weight, and they the spices which they had prepæred -_

for the burial of the Lord's body.

81. What prol1lotion then was it to the Immortal to

have assumed the mortal? or what gain is it to the

Everlasting to have put on the temporal? what reward

can be great to the Everlasting God and King, being as

He is in the bosom of the Father? Perceive ye not, thai

this too was done and written because of us and for us,

that us who are mortal and temporal, the Lord by be-

coming man might make imn10rtal, and bring into the

everlasting kingdom of heaven? Blush ye not, speaking

lies against the divine oracles? For, when our Lord

Jesus Christ had been among us, we indeed were profited

as being rescued from sin; but He is the saIne: nor did

He alter, by becoming man, (to repeat what I have already

said,) but, as has been written, The Word of God abideth

for ever. Surely as, before His becoming man, He, a8

being the Word, dispensed to the saints the Spirit as His

own, so also after He was made man, He sanctifies all by

the Spirit, and says to His Disciples, Receive ye the Holy

Ghost. And He gave It to Moses and to the other seventy;

and through Him David prayed to the Father, saying,

Take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. On the other hand,

when made man, He said, I will send to you the Paraclete,

the 8pÙ'it of truth; and He sent Him, He the "\V ord of

God, as being faithful to His promise.

82. Therefore, Jesus Ckrist is the same yesterday, to-day,

and for ever, remaining unalterable, and at once gives and

receives, giving as God's Word, receiving as man. ÅS

He Himself says, The glory which Thou gavest .Jle, I have

oiven to them, that they may be one even as We are one.

Because of us then He asked for glory, and the words

took and gave and highly exalted occur that we might take, .

and to us might be given, and we might be exalted in


230 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATJUNASIUS


OHAP. XIII. Him; as also for us He sanctifies Hhnself that we

might be sanctified in HiIn. For He says not,

"Wherefore He anointed Thee in order to Thy being God

or King or Son or Word;" for so He was before and is for

ever, as has been shown; but rather, "Since Thou art God

and King, therefore Thou wast anointed, since none but

Thou couldst unite man to the lIoly Ghost,- Thou, the Image

of the Father, in which we were made in the beginning;

for Thine is also the Spirit." For the nature of creatures

could give no warranty for this, Angels having trans-

.gressed, and men disobeyed. Wherefore there was need of

God, and such is the Word, that those who had come under

a curse He HiInself might set free. If then He was fronl

nothing, He would not have been the Christ or Anointed

One, being one among others, and merely partaking gifts

with the rest. But, whereas He is God, as being Son of

God, and is everlasting King, and exists as Radiance and

Impress of the Father, therefore fitly is He the expected

Christ, whom the Father announces tiO mankind by reve-

lation to His holy Prophets; that as through Him we

have come into being, so also in HÜn an men might be

redeemed from their sins, and by Him all things might be

ruled.

83. It is very plain then why, when tihe Lord came on

earth, there was a nec

ssity that He should not refuse

to be called inferior to the Spirit, in respect of His man-

hood, as He really was. Thus, when the Jews said that

He cast out devils ill Beelzebub, He answered and said

to them, for the exposure of their blasphemy, But if I

through the Spirit of God cast out devils, &0. Behold, the

Giver of the Spirit here says that He cast out devils in

the Spirit; but this is not said, except because of His

flesh. For since man's nature is not equal of itself to

casting out devils, but only in power of the Spirit, there-

fore as man He said, But if I through the Sy]irit of God cast


AGAINST ARIANISM.


231


out devils. Of course too when He said, WhosoevPr ED. BEN.

i.

 48-

O.

shall speak a wm"d against the Son of J[an, it shall

be forgiven him, He signified that the blasphemy offered to

the Holy Ghost was greater than this against His humanity.

Such blasphemy was theirs who said, Is not this the Ca1"- ,

penter's son? but they who blaspheme against the Holy

Ghost, and ascribe the deeds of the Word to the d0vil,

shaH have inevitable punishment. This is what the Lord

spoke to the Jews, as man; but to the disciples, show-

ing His Godhead and His majesty, and intimating that

He was not inferior but equal to the Spirit, He gave

the Spirit. and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, and 1

send Him, and He shall glorify Me, and Whatsoever He

hea1"eth, that He shall speak. As then in this place the

Lord Himself, the Giver of the Spirit, does not refuse to

say that through the Spirit He casts out devils, as man;

in like manner He the same, the Giver of the Spirit,

refused not to say, The I...'?pÙ"it of the Lord is upon .11Ie,

because He hath anointed Me, in respect of His having

become flesh, as John hath said; that it might be shown

in both these particulars, that it is we who need the

Spirit's grace in our sanctification, and again it is we who

are unable to cast out devils without the Spirit's power.

Through whom then and frOln whom behoved it that the

Spirit should be given but through the Son, whose also

is the Spirit? and when were we enabled to receive It,

except when the Word became man ? and, as the passage of

the Apostle shows that we should not have been redeemed

and highly exalted, had not He who exists in form of God

taken a servant's form, so David also shows, that not

otherwise should we have pal "taken of the Spirit and been

sanctified, save that the Giver of the Spirit, the Word

Himself, had spoken of Himself as anointed with the

Spirit for us. And therefore did we securely receive It,

because He was declared to be anointed in the flesh; for the


.


232 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XIII. flesh being first sanctified in Him, and He being

said, as man, to have received the gift in behalf

of the flesh, we have after Him the Spirit's grace, receiving

out of His fulness.

84. Nor do the words, Thou hast loved righteousn(}ss and

hated iniquity, which are added in the Psalm, show, as again

you suppose, that the nature of the 'V ord is mutable,

but rather by their very force signify His immutability.

For since of things made the nature is alterable, and the

one portion of creation had transgressed and the other

disobeyr.d, as has been said, and it is not certain how they

will act, but it often happens that he who is now good

afterwards alters and becomes different, and one who was but

now righteous, soon is found unrighteous, therefore there was

here also need of One who was unalterable, that men n1Íght

have the immutability of the righteousness of the Word as

an image and type for virtue. And this thought commends

itself strongly to the light-minded. For since the first man

Adam changed, and through sin death came into the world,

therefore it became the second Adam to be unchangeable;

that should the Serpent again assault, even tihe Serpent's

deceit might be baffied, and, the Lord being unalterable

and unchangeable, the Serpent might become powerless in

his assaults against all. For as, when Adam had trans-

gressed, his sin reached unto all men, so, when the Lord

had become man and had overthrown the Serpent, that

exceeding strength of His should extend to all men, so that

each of us may say, For we are not ignorant of his devices.

Good reason then that the Lord, who is everlasting and in

nature immutable, loving righteousness and hating ini-

quity, should be anointed and HiInself sent on mission,

that, being and remaining the same, He might, by taking

this alterable flesh, condemn sin in it, and might secure

its freedom, and its ability henceforth to fulfil the righteous-

ness of the law in itself, so as to be able to say, But we are


AGAINST ARIANIRM.


233


not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that tlte ED. BEN.

i.

 ó1-ó2.

Spirit of God dwelleth in us.

85. Vainly then, here again, 0 Arians, have ye made this

supposition, and vainly alleged the words of Scripture; for

the Word of God is unalterable, and is ever in one state,

and that no other than the Father's; since how is He like

the Father, unless He be thus? or how is all that is the

Father's, the Sun's also, if He has not the unalterableness

and unchangeableness of the Father? Not as being subject

to laws, and as being impelled this way and that, does He

love this and hate that (for to say tihat from fear of disad-

vantage He chose the opposite, would only be to admit in

another way that He is alterable); but, as being God and

the Father's "\V ord, He is a just judge and lover of virtue,

or rather its source. Therefore being just and holy by

nature, on this account He is said to love righteousness

and to hate iniquity; as much as to say, that He loves and

takes to Him the virtuous, and rejects anù hates the un-

righteous. TI1ÏB is only what divine Scripture says of the

Father too: The Righteous Lord loveth righteousness: Tholl

hatest all them that work iniquity; and, The Lord loveth the

gates of Sion, mm.e than all the dwellings of Jacob; and, J tUob

have I loved, but Esau have I hated; and in Esaias, there is

the voice of God again saying, I the Lord love righteous-

ness, and I hate grasping ways. They ought then to ex-

pound those former words which relate to the Son, as

these latter which relate to the Father; it is but reason-

able, for the Son is the Father's lInage. Else, if the former

imply that the Son is alterable, the latter will imply change

in the Father too. But since to hear this even sup-

posed in controversy may have a bad effect on the mind,

let us rule it at once that, when it is said that God loves

righteousness and hates unrighteous grasping, this does not

mean that He looks towards both the one and the other, and

is capable of either, selecting the one and passing by the


234 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHAN ASIUS


CHAP. XIII. other, as it may be, for this is characteristic of

the creature, but that, as a judge, He loves and

takes to Him the righteous and withdra ws from the bad.

It follows then to think the same concerning the In1age of

God also, that He loves and hates no otherwise than thus.

For such must be the nature of the Image as is Its Father,

though the Arians in their blindness fail to see either that

lInage or any other truth of the divine oracles. For when

forced from the conceptions, or rather misconceptions, of

their own hearts, they fall back upon passages of divine

Scripture, here too, from dulness of intellect, according to

their wont, they discern not their meaning; and laying down

their own impiety as a sort of canon of interpretation, they

wrest the whole of the divine oracles into accordance with"

it. And so, as soon as they give utterance to such doctrine,

they deserve nothing more than to be told, Ye do err, not

knowing the Scriptu1 0 es nor the power of God; and if they

persist in it, they must be put to silence, by the words,

Render to man the things that a1 0 e luan's, and to God the

things that are God's.


CHAPTER XIV.


Answer to objections from Scripture; thirdly, Hebrews i. 4.


86. BUT it is written, say they, in the Proverbs, The Lord

created }'le the be,qinnin.q of His wa.1Js, for His works; and in

the Epistle to the Hebrews the Apostle says, Bein,q made

so much better than the Angels, as He hath by inheritance

obtained a more excellent Name than they. And soon after,

Wherefore, hol.1J brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,

consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Ghrist

Jesus, who was .faithful to Him that appointed Him. And in

the Acts, Tlterefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


235


that God hath made that same Jesus 'Whom ye ED. BEN.

i.

 62-54.

have crucified both Lord and Christ. These pas-

sages they have brought forward at every turn, mistaking

their sense, and fancying they proved that the Word of God

was a creature and work, and one of things that were

brought into being; and thus they deceive the thoughtless,

putting forth the words of Scripture as their pretence, but

instead of the true sense of it, sowing upon it the poison of

their own heresy. For had they known, they would not have

been impious against the Lord of glory, nor have wrested the

good words of Scripture into a wrong direction. This is what

comes of their appeal to Scripture; but after all it were well,

did we know where precisely to find them, or if they knew

for certain themselves where they stand. Do they, for in-

stance, as they sometimes seem to do, hold to Caia phas and

his Jews, who look for some temporal greatness from" God

dwelling upon earth?" If so, why do they quote the words

of the Apostles, which are out of place with Jews? Or again,

denying that the Word was made flesh, what right have they

as if Manichees to appeal to the Proverbs, an Old Testament

book, in their favour? Or if, for secular reasons, fron1

ambition, lucre, or from regard of public opinion, they are

forced to say in words contrary both to Jews and 1\fanichees,

that the Word was made flesh, why do they make their con-

fession of faith by halves, instead of speakjng out, and inter-

preting St. John's words of the incarnate presence of the

Saviour, since we are to consider that they do not otherwise

interpret it? For it is not seemly, while confessing that the

Word became flesh, yet to be ashamed at what is written of

Him, and on that account to pervert the sense.

87. Thus, it is written, Having become so much better than

the Angels; let us then first examine this. N ow it is right

and necessary, as in all divine Scripture, so here, faithfully

to expound the occasion concerning which the A postle

wrote, and the person, and the thing, lest t.he reader, from


.


236 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATRANASIUS


CHAP. XIV. ignorance missing either these or any similar

particular, should be wide of the true sense. Thiß

principle understood that earnestly inquiring eunuch, when

he thus besought Philip, I pray thee, of whom doth the Prophet

speak this? of himself, or of some other man? for he feared

lest, expounding the lesson of the wrong person, he should

wander from the right drift. And the disciples, wishing to

learn the time of what was foretold, besought the Lord, Tell

us, said they, when shall these things be? and what is thE-

sign of Thy coming? And again, hearing from the Saviour

the events of the end, they desired to learn the time of it,

not only that they might be kept from error themselves, but

that they might be able to teach others; as, for instance,

when they had learned, they set right the Thessalonians, who

were going wrong. When then a man knows properly these

points, his understanding of the faith is right and healthy;

but if he mistakes any such, forthwith he falls into heresy.

Thus the party of Hymenæus and Alexander were beside

the time, when they said that the resurrection had already

been; and the Galatians were after the time, in making much

of circumcision now. And to miss the person was the lot

of the Jews and is still, who think that of one of them-

selves it is said, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a

Son, and they shall call His Name Emmanuel, which is, being

interpreted, God with us; and that, A Prophet shall the Lord

your God raise up to you, is spoken of one of the Prophets;

and who, as to the words, He was led as a sheep to the

slaughter, instead of learning from Philip, conjecture thCln

to be spoken of Esaias or some other of the Prophets which

had been.'


7 The more common evasion on

the part of the Jews was to inter-

pret the prophecy of their own

sufferings in captivity. It was

an idea of Grotius that the pro-

phecy received a first fulfilment in


Jeremiah, vid. Justin. Tryph. 72,

et al. Iren. Hær. iv. 33. 'rertull.

in J ud. 9. Cyprian. Testim. in

J ud. ii. 13. Euseb. Dem. iii. 2,

&c.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


237


88. Such has been the state of mind under ED. BEN.

i.

 54-55.

which Christ's enemies have fallen into their foul

heresy. For had they known the person, and the thing, and

the occasion to which the Apostle's words relate, they would

not have expo.unded of Christ's divinity what belongs to

His manhood, nor in their foUy have committed so great an

Ünpiety. 8 N ow this wiU be readily seen, if one expounds

properly the beginning of this passage. For the Apostle

says, God who at sundry times and diverse manners spake in

ti,Jnes past unto the fathers by the prophets hath in these last

days spoken unto us by His Son; and then again shortly after

he says, when He had by Himself purged our sins, He sat

down on the right hand of the l1flljesty on high, having be-

come so much better than the Angels, as He hath by inheri-

tance obtained a more excellent Name than they. Here, first,

who is spoken of? 9 the Son of God; He is the person.

And the time? later than the prophets, and when He took

flesh. And what was the thing done? the purging of our

sins. Proceeding then with his account of that economy in

which we are concerned, and speaking of the last times,

the Apostle is naturally led to observe that not even in the

former times was God silent with men, but spoke to them

by the Prophets. And, whereas the Prophets ministered,

and the Law was spoken by Angels, therefore when the Son

too visited the earth, and that in order to minister, he was

forced to add, Having become so much better than the Angels,

wishing to show that, as much as the Son excels a ser-

vant, so much also the ministry of the Son is better than

the ministry of servants. Contrasting, then, the old

minIstry and the new, the Apostle speaks out to the Jews,

writing and saying, Become so much better than the Angels.


8 This implie

, as aùove, that

the truths of t;cri pture are not to

be picked out and ascertained from

the

acred text by ind uction, but

can no otherwise be learned than


by coming to Scripture after a

definite instruction.

9 Vid. p. 29, infr. p. 257, Sent.

Diull

 4.


238 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XIV. This is the occasion and the drift of the passage,

but here these men find two difficulties; first, they

object, that the Apostle says that our Lord has "become,"

but to become is to come to be, that is, to have a beginning.

Again, secondly, he calls Him "better than the Angels;"

that is, the Son HiInself is an Angel, though better than the

rest. This is what they urge against the orthodox doctrine.

89. 1 Now, if they insist on the Apostle's language as

being the language of comparison, and on comparison as

denoting a oneness of kind, so that the Son is of the nature

of Angels, they will in the first place incur the disgrace of

ri valling and repeating what Valentinus held, and Carpo-

crates, and those other heretics, of whom the former said

that the Angels were one in kind with the Christ, and

the latter that Angels are the framers of the world. Per-

chance it is under the instruction of these masters that

they compare the Word of God with the Angels; yet

what likeness is there between the one and the other?

Surely alnid such speculations, they will be moved by the

Psalmist, saying, JVho is he among the gods that shall be like

unto the Lord 'I and, Among the gods there is none like unto

Thee, 0 Lord. It is true, as they say, that comparison does

belong to subjects one in kind, not to those which differ.

Noone, for instance, would compare God with man, or

again, man with brutes, nor wood with stone, because their

natures are unlike; but God is beyond cOlllparison, and

luan is cOlupared to lnan, and wood to wood, and stone to

stone. This is true, but in such cases we speak not of better,

but of "rather" and of "more;" thus Joseph was comely

rather than his brethren, and Rachel than Leah; star is

not better than star, but rather excels in glory; whereas


] There is apparently much con-

fusion in the arrangement of the

pal'agraphs that follow; thoußh

the appearance may perhaps arise

trolll Athan. 's incorporating somo


passage from a former work intr

his text; vid. supr. p. 208, note.

Attempts have been made here



make the order more simple.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


239


in bringing together things which differ in kind, ED. BEN.

t

 55-62.

then better is used to mark the difference. 0 b-

serve then., had the Apostle said," by so much has the Son

precedence of the Angels," or "by so much greater," or

more honourable, you would have had a plea, as if the Son

were cOlnpared with the Angels; but he does not say so,

he says, better, and in saying that He is better, and differs

as far as Son differs frOln servants, the Apostle shows that

He is other than the Angels in nature.

90. And of this we have proof from divine Scripture:

David, for instance, saying in the Psalm, One day in Thy

courts is better than a thousand; and Solomon crying out,

Receive my instruction and not silver, and knowledge beyond

choice gold. For wisdorn 'is better thcfl

 rubies; and all

the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.

Are not wisdom and stones of the earth different in sub-

stance and separate in nature? Are heavenly courts at

all akin to earthly houses? Or is there any similarity

between things eternal and spiritual, and things temporal

and mortal? And this is what Esaias says, Thus saith the

LOTd unto the eunuchs that keep jly sabbaths, and choose

the things that please Ale, and lake hold of JIy Covenant;

even unto them will I give in JIÙze house, and within .i11y

'llJalls, a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters:

I will [Jive them an everlasting name that shall not be cut o.ff.

Therefore in like manner there is nought of kin between

the Son and the Angels: so that the word better is not

used to compare but to contrast, because of the difference

of His nature from them. And therefore the Apostle

also himself, when he interprets the word better, places

its force in nothing short of the Son's excellence over

things created, calling the one Son, the other servants;

the one, as a Son with the Pat her sitting on Ilis right;

and the others as servants, standing before lIim, and

being sent, and fulfilling- ofli(.cs. Scripture, in speakillg


240 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OHAP. XIV. thus, implies, 0 Arians, not that the Son ig

brought into being, but rather that He is

other than such beings as have a beginning, and belongs

to the Father, being in His bosom.

91. If indeed He be in substance other than and distinct

from created things, what comparison of His substance

can therOt be, or what likeness to them? And this Paul

makes plain in this very passage, For unto which of the

Angels said He at any time, Thou art My Son, this day have

I begotten Thee 1 And of the Angels He saith, Who maketh

His Angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire. Ob-

serve here the word made belongs to things that come

into being, and he calls them works; but to the Son he

speaks not of a making, nor of a becoming, but of eternity

and kingship, and a Framer's office, exclaiming, Thy

Throne, 0 God, is for ever and ever; and, Thou, Lord, in

the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the

heavens are the works of Thine hands; they shall perish, but

Thou remainest. From which words even they, were they

but willing, might perceive that the Framer is other than

the things fralned, the former being God, the latter being

creatures which have been made out of nothing. Not that,

They shall perish, means as if the creation were destined for

destruction, but the words indicate the nature of things

created by the issue to which they tend. For things which

admit of perishing, though, through the grace of their


Iaker, they perish not, yet have come out of nothing, and

themselves witness that they once were not. And on this

account, since their nature is such, it is said of the Son,

Thou remainest, to show His eternity; for not having the

capacity of perishing, as things have which began to be, but

having eternal duration, it is foreign to Hinl to have it said,

" He was not before His generation," but it belongs to Him

to be always, and to endure together with the Father. .dud

though the Apostle had not thus written in his Epistle to


ÁGAINRT A RIANJRM.


241


the Hebrews, still his other Epistles, and the whole ED. BEN.

i.

 55-62.

of Scripture, would certainly forbid their enter-

taining such notions concerning the Word. But since he has

here expressly written it, and, as has been above shown,

the Son is Offspring of the Father's substance, and He is

Framer, and other things are framed by Him, and He

is the Radiance and 'V ord and Image and Wisdom of the

Father, and things are nlade to stand and serve in their place

below the Trinity, therefore the Son is different in kind

and different in substance from things created, and on

the contrary belongs to the Father's substance and is one in

nature with it. And hence it is that the Son too says not

.Jly Father is better than I, lest we should conceive Him to

be foreign to His Father's Nature, but greater, not indeed in

fulness of powers, nor in length of time, but because of His

generation from the Father Himself; nay, in saying greater

He again shows that He is proper to His substance.

92. At the same time, though the Apostle's words so

clearly discriminate the substance of the Word from the

nature of creatures, what he directly had in view, when he

contrasted the one with the other, and called Him better

than them, was the Lord's visitation in the flesh and the

economy which He then sustained, and which showed that

He was not like those former messengers; so that, as

luuch as He excelled in nature those who were sent before

by HÏ1n, by so much also the grace. which came frOlll and

through Him was better than the ministry through

Angels. For it is the function of servants to demand

the fruits and no more; but of the Son and Master to

forgive the debts and to transfer the vineyard.

93. And this is what the Apostle proceeds to show:

Therefore, he says, we ought to give the more earnest heed to

tho thiags which we have heard, lest at any time we should let

them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast,

alul every transgression and disobedience received a just recom-

B


242 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XIV. lJense of reward; how shall 'we eSfape if 'We neglect

-- so great salvation; which at the first began to bE,

sJ10ken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that

heard Him. But if the Son were in the number of things

created, He was not better than they, nor did disobedience

involve increase of punishment because of HiIn; any more

than in the l\Iinistry of Angels there would be, according to

each Angel, greater or less guilt in the transgressors, but the

la w was one, and one was its vengeance on transgressors.

But, whereas the "r ord is not in the number of created

things, but is Son of the Father, therefore, as He Himself

is better and His acts better and transcendent, so also the

punishment is worse. Let thenl contemplate then the

grace which is through the Son, and let them acknowledge

the witness which He gives even from His works, that He

is other than things created, and alone the very Son in the

Father and the Father in Him. And the Law was spoken

by Angels, and perfected no one, needing the visitation of

the Word, as Paul hath said; but that visitation in the

flesh has perfected the work of the Father. And theIl,

frOlll Adam unto Moses death reigned; but the presence

of the Word abolished death. And no longer in Adam

are we all dying; but in Christ we are all reviving. And

then from Dan to Bersabe was the Law proclaimed, and

in J udea only was God known; but now, unto all the

earth has gone forth their voice, and all the earth has

been fiUed with the knowledge of God, and the disciples

have made disciples of all the nations, and now is fulfilled

what is written, They shall be all taught of God. And then

what was revealed, was but a type; but now the truth has

been nlanifested. 2 And this again the Apostle himself


2 Parts of this chapter are

much more finished in style


han the gener31 course of his

Orations. It may be indeed only


the natural consequence of his

warming with his subject, but

this eloquent passage looks very

much like an insertion. Some


AGAINST ARIANISM.


248


describes afterwards n10re clearly, saying, By so ED. BEN.

i.

 55-62.

fuuclt did Jesus become surety of a better testament;

and again, But now hath He obtainelt a more excellent

ministry, by how much also He is the lIJediator of a bettm.

covenant, whic}" was established upon better promises. And,

For the Law made nothing perfect, but was the bringing in

of a better hope. And again he says, It was therefore neces..

sary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be

purified witli these; but the heavenly things themselves with

better sacrifices than these. Both in the verse before us then,

and throughout, does he ascribe the word better to the Lord,

who is better and other than created things. For better is

the sacrifice through Him, better the hope in Him; and

also the promises through fIirn, not merely as great com-

pared with small, but the one differing frmn the other in

nature, because He who conducts this ecollOlny is better than

all creatures.

94. "Better" then, as has been said, could not have

been brought to pass in any other than the Son, who sits

on the right hand of the Father. And what does this

denote but that the SOil is really Son, and that the God-

head of the Father is the same as the Son's? For, because

the Son reigns in His Father's kingdonl, hence is He seated

upon the same thi'one as the Father, and because contem-

plated in the .Father's Godheaù, therefore is the "\V ord God,

and whoso beholds the Son, beholds the E'ather; and thus

there is but one God. Sitting then on the right, yet hath

He not His Father on the left; but, whatever is right and

precious in the Father, that also the Son has, and He says,

All things that the Father hath are jJfine. "\Vherefore also the

Son, though sitting on the right, also sees the Father on the

right, though it be as having become man, that lIe says,


words of it are found in Sent.

D. 11, written a ff\w years sooner.

He certainly transcribed himself


in other places, ss S. Leo, e.g.,

repeats himself In a.nother con-

troversy.


244 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASTUS


CHAP. XIV. I Baw tlu) Lord alwalls before ],[.11 face, for He i.



on lJfy right hand, therefore I shnll not fall. This

shows moreover, that the Son is in the Father and the Father

in the Son; for the Father being on the right, the Son is on

the right; S and while the Son sits on the right of the

Father, the Father is in the Son. And the Angels indeed

111Ìnister ascending and descending; but concerning the SOH

He saith, And let all the Angels of God worship Him.

And when Angels minister, they say, "I am sent unto

thee," and "the Lord has comlnanded;" but the Son,

though He say in hUlnan fashion, "I am sent," and conleS

to finish the work and to minister, .nevertheless says, as be-

ing 'V ord and Image, I arn in the Father, and the Father in

J.1Je; and He that hath seen .ll{e hath seen the Father; and

The Father that abideth in .Ale, He doeth the works; for

whatever we behold in that Image is the Father's handi..

work.

95. And now coming, secondly, to the expres..

sion become, which here occurs, neither does this show

that the Son is created, as you suppose. If indeed it

were simply become and no lllore, a case might stand for

the Arians; but whereas they are forestalled with the word

Son throughout the passage, showing that He is other

than things created, so again Bot even. the word become

occurs absolutely, but better is inlmediately subjoined to

it. For the writer thought the expression imlnaterial,

knowing that in the case of one who was confessedly a

genuine Son, to say become is tJhe same with saying that

He had only in some sense been made, and that He is in a


3 Nee ideo tam en quasi hu..

manâ formâ circumscriptum esse

Deum Patrem arbitrandum est,

ut de il10 cogitantibus dextrum

aut sinistrum latus animo occur-

rat; aut id ipsum quod sedens

Pater dicitur, flexis poplitibus fieri


putandum est, ne in illud incida.

mus s<lcrilegium, &c. August. de

Fid. et Symb. 14. Does this pas-

sage of Athan.'s show that the

.\.nthropomorphites were stirring

in Egypt already?


AGAINST ARIANISM.


245


certain relation better. For it matters not, should ED. BEN.

i.

 55-62.

we speak of what is really generate, as "become"

or "made;" but on the contrary, things made, God's

handiwork as they are, cannot be called generate, except so

far as after their making they partake of the Son who is

the true Generate, and are therefore said themselves to have

been generated also, not at all because of their own nature,

but because of their participation of the Son in tbe Spirit.

And this again divine Scripture recognises; for it not only

Bays in the case of things really made, All things came to be

throu.qh Him, and 'Without Him there 'Was not anything made,

and, In Wisdom hast Thou made them all; but in the case

of sons also who are really generate, To Job there came seven

sons and three daughters, and Abraham was an hundred

years old when there became to him Isaac his son; and


Ioses said, If to anyone there come sons. Therefore, since

the Son is other than things created, and is alone tbe proper

Offspring of the Father's substance, this plea of the Arians

frOln the word become is worth nothing.

96. The quarrel tben between us and them turns on the

previous question, whether the Son is a real Son, or in

name only, not in fact. If He is already known to be the

genuine Offspring of the Father, then "become" will do

"His divine greatness no harm; but certainly, if Sonship

bas still to be proved as His own, then this expression, as

far as it goes, nlay be used as an arguinent against llis

possessing it. But, if it is to prevail, let them not in mere

consistency separate Him and the other inhabitants of

heaven. If lie is to be accounted an Angel, and has COlne

to be such as the rest have, let Him share their nature; if

they are sons, let HÜu be creature; if He stands before

the Throne, let thèln all, as well as fIirn, be on the Right

Hand. This must be, if Arius can bring Scripture on his

side; but if, on the other hand, Paul, as I have already

quoted hiIn, distinguishes the Son from things made, 8:1.Y-


246 THREE DISCOURSES O}i' ATHANASIUS


OHAP. XIV. ing, To which of the Angels said He at any time, Thou

art Jly Son? and the One frames heaven and earth,

but they come into being by Him, and He sitteth with the

Father, but they stand-by ministering, who does not see

that he has not used the word become of the substance of

the Word, but of that special ministration to which He

condescended? For as, being the Word, He became flesh,

so when become man, He became by so much better in

His ministry than the minjstry which came by the Angels,

as Son excels servants and Framer thingB fralned. Let

them cease therefore to take the word become to relate to

the substance of the Son, for He is not one of things that

have conle to be; and let them acknowledge that it is

indicative of His ministry, and of the economy of which

His coming was a condition.

97. Moreover

 that He is said to have become our surety, in

the passage which I just now quoted, explains in what sense

the word become is to be taken. He became our surety by

taking flesh; then it was therefore that He became better

than the Angels, viz., when He visited the earth and was

born of Mary. Paul then does not speak of the Son, Wis-

dom, Radiance, Image of the Father, coming to be, but of

His cOIning to be the minister of the covenant, in which

death, which once ruled, is abolished; for here also the

ministry which is through Him has become better, in that

what the Law could not do in that it was weak th1.ough

the flesh, God sending His Own Son in the likeness oj

sinful flesh, and for sin conde'inned sin in the flesh,

ridding it of the trespass, in which, being continu-

ally held captive, it admitted not the Divine Mind.

And having rendered the flesh capable of the Worù, He

lnade us walk, no longer according to the flesh, but accord-

ing to the Spirit, and say again and again, "But we are

not in the flesh but in the Spirit," and, "For the Son of

God came into the world, not to judge the world. but


AGAINST ARIANISM.


247


to redeem all men and that the world mI g h t be ED BEN

. I.

 55-62.

saved through Him." Formerly the world, as

guilty, was under judgment from the Law; but now the

Word has taken on Himself the judgment, and having

suffered in the body for all, has bestowed salvation upon all.

With a view to this, hath John exclaÏ1ned, The law 'Was given

by J.1foses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. BetteJ

is grace than the Law, and truth than the shadow.

98. To conclude: If they still carryon the contest, it will

be natural to meet them with the force of those similar ex-

pressions which are used concerning the Father Himself.

This may serve to prevail with them to refrain their tongue

from evil, or may teach them the depth of their folly.

Now it is written, Become my strong rock and hOllse of defence,

that Thou mayest save me. And again, The Lord became

a defence for the poor, and like passages, which are found

in divine Scripture. If then they apply these passages

to the Son, which perhaps is nearest the truth, then let

them acknowledge that the sacred writers ask Him, as

not being a creature, to become to them a st1"ong rock

and house of defence; and for the future let them under-

stand become, and He made, and He created, of His incarnate

presence. For then did He become a strong rock and hou.se

of defence, when He bore our sins in His own body upon

the tree, and said, Come unto Me all ye that labour and are

heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

99. However, if they are unwilling thus to interpret,

and therefore refer these passages to the Father, win they,

when it is here also written, "Become" and" He became,"

venture so far as to affirnl that God has come into being?

Yea, they will dare, as they thus argue concerning His

Word; for the course of their argument carries them on

to conjecture the sallIe thiugs concerning the Father, as

they devise concerning His V{ ord. But far be such a no-

tion ever from the thoughts of &ll the faithful! for neither


248 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


.


CHAP. XIV. is the Son in the number of things made, nor do

the words of Scripture in question, Become, and He

beca1ne, denote beginning of being, but that succour in Him

which comes to the needy. For God is always, ahd one and

the same; but men came into being afterwards through the

Word, when the Father Himself willed it; and God is in-

visible and inaccessible to created things, and especially to

men upon earth. 'Vhen then n1en in infirmity invoke Him,

when in persecution they ask help, when under injuries

they pray, then the Invisible, being a lover of man, shines

forth upon them with His beneficence, which He exercises

through and in His proper Word. And forthwith the divine

Inanifestation is made to everyone according to his need,

and He becomes to the weak in health, and to the perse-

cuted, a refuge and house of defence; and to the injured He

says, lVhile Thou speakest I 'Will say here I am. Moreover the

usage of Jnen recognises this, and everyone will confess its

propriety. Often succour comes from man to man; one has

undertaken toil for the injured, as Abraham for Lot; and

another has opened his home to the persecuted, as .A.bdias

to the sons of the prophets; and another has entertained

a stranger, as Lot the Angels; and another has supplied

the needy, as Job those who begged of him. As then,

should one and the other of these benefited persons say,

"Such a one became an assisiAnce to me," and another

" and to me a refuge," and" to d.nother a supply," yet in so

saying would not be speaking of the origination or of

the substance of their benefactors, but of the beneficence

coming to themselves from them, so also when the sacred

writers say concerning God, He became, and become Thou,

they do not denote any original becoming, for God is un-

originate and illgenerate, but the salvation which comes

to pass in the case of nleH froln H Ì1n.

100. This being so understood, it is parallel also respect-

ing the Son, that whatever, and however often, a phrase


AG ArNST ARIANISM.


249


occurs, such as beC<.l/lne and become, it should ever ED. BEN.

i.

 63-64.

be taken in the same sense: for when the JVord

became flesh and dwelt l

mong us, and came to minister and

to bestow salvation OIl all, then He became to us salvation,

and became life, aud became propitiation; then His economy

in our behalf became better than the Angels, and He

became the Way and became the Resurrection. And as

the words Become '1ny stTong rock do not denote that the

substance of God Himself became, but His loving-kindness,

as has been said, so also here the having become better than

the Angels, and fIe became, and by so 'Jnuch is Jesus be-

corne a better surety, do not signify that the substance of

the Word is created (perish the thought I), but the benefi-

cence which towards us came through His incarnation;

unthankful though the heretics be, and obstinate in behalf

of their impiety.


.


.


250 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHAKASIUS


DISCOURSE II.


CHAPTER XV.


A.nswer to objections from Scripture; Fourthly, Hebrews iii. 2.


CHAP. xv. 101. I DID indeed think that enough had been

- - said already against the hollow professors of Arius's

madness, whether for their refutation or in the truth's behalf.

They, however, do not succumb; but even invent new modes

. for their impiety. Thus they 111isnnderstand the passage in

the Proverbs, The Lord hath created Ale a beginning of His

ways for His Works, and the words of the Apostle, Who

was faithful to Him that made Him, and argue outright,

that the Son of God is a work and a creature. But

although they might have learned from what is said above,

had they not utterly lost their power of apprehension,

the Truth witnessing it, that the Son is not from nothing

nor in the number of things created at all, (for being

God, He cannot be a work, and it is a sin to call Him a

creature, and it is of creatures and works that we say, "it was

out of nothing," and "it was not before its generation,")

yet since, as if dreading to desert their own fiction, they

are accuston1ed to allege the aforesaid passages of divine

Scripture, which have a good n1eaning, but are by them

practised on, let us proceed afresh to take up the question

of the sense of these, in order to remind the faithful, and as

to the Arians to show from each of these passages that they

have no knowledge at all of Christianity. Were it other-


AGAINST ARIANISM.


251


wise, they would not have shut themselves up in the

f."




:

unbelief of the present .Jews, but would have in-

quired and learned that, whereas In the beginning was the

Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God,

therefore it was on the 'V ord's becoming man at the good

pleasure of the Father, that it was suitably said of HÜn,

as by John, The Word became .flesh, so by Peter, He hath

made Him Lord and (Jhrist; and, as by means of Solomon

. in the Person of the Lord Himself, The Lord created lIIe

a beginning of His ways for His works, so by Paul, become

so much better than the Angels; and again, He emptied

HÙnselj and took upon Him the form of a servant; and

again, Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly

calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profes-


ion, Jesus, who was faithful to Him that made Him. For

all these texts have the same force and meaning, a religious

one, declarative of the divinity of the Word, even those

of them which speak hun1anly concerning Him, as having

become Son of Inan.

102. But, though this distinction is sufficient in itself for

their refutation, still, since from a misconception of the

Apostle's words, (to mention them first,) they consider the

Word of God to be one of the works, because of its being

written, Who was faithful to Him ,that made Him, I have

thought it needful to silence this reiterated argument of

theirs, taking in hand, as before, their own statement.

103. If then, He be not a Son, let Him be called a work,

and let all that is said of works be said of Him, nor let

Him and Him alone be designated Son, and Word, and


T isdom ; neither let it belong to God Himself to be

called Father, but only Framer and Creator of the things

which by Him are brought into being; and let the

creature be Image and Impress of His framing will, and

let Him, as they WOJld have it, be without generative

nature, so that there is neither Word, nor Wisdom, 110,


252 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XV. nor Image, of His proper substance. For if He

be not Son, neither is He I mage. But again, if

there be not a Son, how then say you that God is a Creator?

since all things that come to be are through the 'V ord

and in "'\Visdom, and without This nothing can be, whereas

you say He hath not That, in and through which He makes

all things. For if the Divine Substance be not fruitful

Itself, but ban-en, as they hold, as a light that lightens not,

and a dry fountain, are they not ashamed to speak of I-lis

possessing fraining energy? and whereas they deny That

which is by nature, do they not blush to put before It that

which is by will? But if He frames things that are

external to Him and were not before, by willing them to

be, and becomes their Maker, much more will He first be

Father of an <Jffspring from His proper Substance. For if

they attribute to God the willing with respect to things which

are not, why do they not recognise that in God which lies

above the win ? now it is a something that surpasses will,

that He should ha ve a nature, and should be Father of

His proper "'\V ord. If then that which comes first, which

is according to nature, does not exist, as they would have

it in their folly, how can that which is second come to

be, which is according to wiU? for the

T ord is first, and

then the creation.

104. On the contrary, the Word exists, whatever they

dare to say, those impious ones; for through Him did

creation come to be, and God, as being 1\Iaker, plainly

hath also IIis framing \V ord, not external, but belonging

to Him ;-for this must be repeated. If He has the power

of will, and His will is effective, and suffices for the

consistence of the things that come into being, and if

again His Word is effective and a FraIneI', that Word

must surely be the Living Will of the Father, and Ilis

energy in substance, and His real VV ord, in whom all

things both consist and are excellently governed. Noone


AGAINST ARIANISM.


252


can even doubt, that He who disposes is P rior to ED. BEN.

Ii.

 2-3.

the disposition and the things disposed. And thus,

as I said, God's creating is second to His begetting; for Son

Ï1n plies something proper to Him and truly from that blessed

and everlasting Substance; but what is only from His will

cmnes into consistence from without, and is framed through

His proper Offspring who is from that Substance.

105. In the judgment of reason then they are guilty of

great extravagance who say that the Lord is not Son of

God, but a work, and it follows that we all of necessity

confess that He is Son. And if He be Son, as indeed He

is, and a son is contessedly, not external to his father, but

frOIn him, let them not. question about the ternls, as I said

before, which the sacred writers use concerning the Word

Himself, (for instance, not "HiIn that begat Him " but

Him that made Him), for as long as it is confessed what

His nature is, the particular words used of HÜn in such

instances need raise no question. For terms do not

disparage His nature; rather that Nature draws to Itself

those terms and changes their sense. For terms are not

prior to substances, but substances are first, and terms

second. 1 Wherefore also when the substance is a work or

creature, then the words He made, and He became, and He

created, are used of it properly, and designate the work.

But when the Substance is an Offspring and Son, then He

made, and He became, and He created, no longer properly

belong to it, nor designate a work; but we use He made

without question for" He begat."

1 06. Yet, in spite of what is so plain, they insist upon

Who made as some great support of their heresy.

ut this

stay of theirs is but a broken reed; for if they were aware

of the style of Scripture, they IHuat at once give sentence


) Here again, as was noted

above, Athan. shows how per-

sistently he starts with an eccle-


siastical tradition, and the as-

sumption of ß dogma.


.


254 THREE DISCOURSgS OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XV. against thell1selves. For I repeat, although parents

speak of the sons Wh01l1 they beget as "being

made" and "being created," for all this they do not deny

their nature. Thus Ezechias, as is written in Esaias, said

in his prayer, From this day I will make children, who shall

declare Thy righteousness, 0 God of my salvation. He then

said, I will make; but the Pl.ophet in that very book and

t.he Fourth of Kings, thus speaks, And the sons who shall

ccJme forth of thee. He uses then make for "beget," and he

calls those who were to spring frolD hin1, made, and no one

questions whether the term has reference. to a natural off-

spring. Again, Eve, on bearing Cain, said, I have gotten a

man from the Lord; thus she too used gotten for "brought

forth." For, though she had herself borne the child, she

said, I have gotten. Nor would anyone consider, because

of I have gotten, that Cain was purchased from without,

instead of being born of her. Again, the Patriarch Jacob

said to Joseph, And now thy two sons, Ephraim and l}!anass88,

which became thine in Egypt, before I came unto thee into

bgypt, are mine. And Scripture says about Job, And there

came to him seven sons and three daughters. As Moses too

Ua.S said in the Law, If sons become to anyone, and, If he

7/I,((,A8 a SOl

. Here again they have spoken of those who

\\01è begotten, 3,S become and made, knowing that, so long

as 1ihtJ are acknowledged to be sons, we need not luake a

q uestl(\Il of they became, or I have gotten, or I made. For

nature alld the t'!'ut

l of tile case draw the meaning to thmn-

sel ves.

107. This being 130" when men ask whether the Lord is

a creature or work, it is proper to ùsk of them this first,

whether He is or is not

on and Word and Wisdom. For

if this is shown, the surm

se lIobouú work and creation falls

to the ground at once and is enaeJ. F'Jr what is a work

could never be a Son and '" ord; nor coald the Son be a

work. And the Lord being proved ,to be the Father's Sun


AGAIN

T ARIANIS1\I.


255


naturaHy and genuinely, and Word, and "\Visdom, RD. BEN.

ii.

 3-ð.

though He made be used concerning Him, or He

became, this is not said of Him as if a work, but the sacred

writers use the words indiscriIninately as in the case of

Solomon, and Ezechias's children. For though the fathers

had begotten them from themselves, still it is written, 1

have made, and I have gotten, and He became. Therefore

God's enemies, in spite of their repeated allegation of such

trifling words, ought now, however late in the day, after

what has been said, to put away their impious thoughts,

and think of the Lord as of a true Son, Word, and Wis-

dom of the Father, not a work, not a creature. For if the

Son be a creature, by what word and by what wisdom

was He made? for all the works were made through the

Word and the Wisdom, as it is written, In Wisdom hast

1.'hou made them all, and All things were made by Him, and

'Without Him was not anything made. But if it be He who

is the Word and the Wisdom, by which all things come to

be, it follows that He is not in the number of works, nor

in short of any things that arc made, but the Offspring of

the Father.

108. And as made is used for begat, so, as I have said,

is servant used for Son. Fathers call the sons born of theIl1

their servants, yet without denying the genuineness of their

nature; and often they affectionately call their own servants

children, yet without putting out of sight their purchase of

them originally; for they use the one appellation from their

authority as being fathers, but in the other they speak

from affection. Thus Sara called Abraham lord, though

not a servant but a wife; and, while to Philemon who

purchased him the Apostle joined Onesimus the servant as

a brother, Bethsabe, although mother, called her son servant,

saying to his father, Thy servant Solomon ;-afterwards also

Nathan the Prophet came in and repeated her words to

David, Solomon thy servant. Nor did they think it mattered


256 THREF. DISCOURRER OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XV. to call the son a servant, for while David heard

it, he recognised what his nature was, and they

too, while they spoke it, forgot not his genuine

onship,

praying that he might be made his father's heir, though

they gave him the name of servant; for he to David was

son by nature. As then, when we read this we interpret it

fairly, without accounting Solonlon a servant b{-'cause we

hear hinl so called, but a son natural and genuine, so also,

if, concerning the Sa.viour, who is confessed to be in trutll

the Son, and to be the Word by nature, the sacred writers

say, JVho was faithful to Him that made Him, or if He

say of Himself, The Lord crealPd ]'le, and I am thy servant

llnd he Son of Thine handmaid, and the like, let not

any on this account deny that He is proper to the Father

and from Him; but, as in the case of Solomon and David,

Jet them have a right idea of the Father and the Son.

For if, though they hear Solomon caned a servant, they

acknowledge him to be a son, are they not deserving of

many deaths,2 who instead of holding to the same explana-

tion in the instance of the Lord, whenever they hear

"OffSpl'illg," and "W ord," and "Wisdom," forcibly mis-

interpret and deny the generation, natural and genuine,

of the Son fro In the Father; and on hearing language and

terms proper to a work, forthwith drop down to the notion

of llis being a work by nature, and deny the 'V ord; and

this, though it is possible, from His having been nlude

man, to refer all these terms to His humanity? And are

they not also proved to be an abomination unto the Lord,

as having diverse 'weights with them, and with this weight

estimating those other instances, and with that blaspheming

the Lord?

109. Our Lord then, since a Son, cannot be a work: and

now consider what grave consequences follow from so cOll-


2 Vid. Append., Use of Force.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


257


siderin g Him. Solomon sa y s in one P lace in Eccle- ED. BEN.

li.

 5-6.

siastes, that God shall bring every work into judg-

ment, with every secret thing whether it be good or whether it

be evil. If then the Word be a work, do you mean that He

as well as others will be brought into judgment? and what

room is there for judgment, when the Judge is on trial ? who

is there to give to the just their blessing, who to the unworthy

their punishment, if the Lord, as you must suppose, is

standing on trial with the rest? by what law shall the Law-

giver Himself be judged? These things belong to the works,

blessing and punishment from the Son. Henceforth then

fear your Judge, and listen to Solomon. For if God shall

bring the works one and all into judgment, but the Son is

not in the number of those works put on trial, but rather

is Himself the Judge of works one and all, is not the

proof clearer than the sun, that He is not a work but the

Father's Word, in whom all the works both come into

being and come into judgment?

110. Further, if the expression, Who was faithful, is a

difficulty to them, from the thought that faithful is used of

Him as of others, as if He makes acts of faith and so re-

ceives the reward of faith, they must proceed at this rate

to find fault with Moses, for saying, God faithful and true,

and with St. Paul for writing, God is faithful, who will not

suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able. But when

the sacred writers spoke thus, they were not thinking of

God in a human way, but they acknowledged two senses

of the word faithful in Scripture, first believing, then trust-

worthy, of which the former belongs to man, the latter to

God. Thus Abraham was faithful, because he had faith in

God's Word; and God faithful, for, as David says in the

Psalm, The Lord is faithful in all His words, or is trust-

worthy, and cannot lie. Again, If any faithful woman have

widows, she is so called for her right faith; but, It is a

faithful saying, because what God hath spoken, has a claim

s


.


258 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XV. on onr faith, for it is true, and nothing but truth.

Accordingly the words, fVho is faithful to Him

that made Him, implies no paralled with others, nor means

that by having faith He became well-pleasing; but that being

Son of the True God, He too is faithful, and ought to be

believed in all He says and does, HiInself remaining unalter-

able and not changed in His human economy and incarnate

presence.

111. Hitherto from a simple exp1anation of "Inade," I have

shown how far that term is frorn an argument in behalf of

the Word of God being a work. But this will be still clearer

if we consider the occasion when it was used and for what

purpose. Let it be observed then that the Apostle is not

discussing things before the creation when he so speaks,

but when the Word became flesh; for thus it is written,

tVherefore, holy brethren, partakm's of the heavenly calling,

consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Jesus,

who was faithful to Him that made Hinl,. Now, when be-

came He Apostle, but when He put on our Hesh? and when

became He High Priest of our profession, but when, after

offering Himself for us, He raised His Body from the

dead, and, as now, Himself brings near and offers to the

Father those who in His faith approach Him, redeelning

all, and for all propitiating God ? Not then as wishing to

signify the Substance of the "\r ord nor Ilis natural genera-

tion from the Father, did the Apostle say, JVho was faithjiÛ

to Him that made lJim,-(perish the thought 1 for thp

Word is not made, but makes,)-but as signifying His

descent to mankind and High-priesthood which was a

coming to be, as-in the case of Priests-we may easily see

from the account given of the Law and of Aaron.

112. I mean, Aaron was not born a high-priest, but a

man; and in process of time, when God willed, he became

high-priest; yet became so, not without conditions, nor by

token of his ordinary garments, but putting oyer them the


AGAINST ARIANISM.


259


e p hod , the breast p late , the lon g vestments , which the ED. BEN.

11.

 6-8.

women wrought at God's command, and going in --

them into the holy place, he offered the sacrifice for the

people; and in them, as it were, mediated between the vision

of God and the sacrifices of men. Thus. then the Lord also,

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,

and the TVord was God; but when the Father willed that

ransoms should be paid for all, and to all grace should be

given, then truly the Word, as Aaron his vestment, so did

He take earthly :flesh, having lVlary for the Mother of His

Body as if virgin earth, that, as a High Priest, having an

offering as others, He might offer Himself to the Father,

and cleansing us all from sins in His own blood, might

raise us from the dead. For what happened of old was a

shadow of this; and what the Saviour did on His coming,

this Aaron shadowed out according to the Law. As then

Aaron was the same and did not change by putting on the

high-priestly dress, but remaining the san1e was only

vested, so that, had anyone seen him offering, and had

said, "Lo, Aaron has this day become high-priest," he

had not implied that he then had been born man, for man

he was even before he became high-priest, but that he had

been made high-priest in his ministry, on putting on the

garments made and prepared for the high- priesthood; in

the same way it is possible in the Lord's instance also to

understand suitably, that He did not become other than

Himself on taking the :flesh, but, being the same as before,

He was robed in it; and the expressions He became and He

was made, must not be understood as if the Word, con-

sidered as the Word, were made, but that the Word, being

Framer of all, afterwards was made High Priest, by putting

on a body which was brought into being and made, and

such as He can offer for us, wherefore He is said to be

lllade. If then indeed the Lord did not become man, that

is a point for the Arians to battle; but if the Word became

S2


260 THREE DISCOURSES O

' ATIIANASIUS


CHAP. XV. flesh, what ought to have been said concerning HiIn

when become man, but Who 'Was faithful to Him that

made Him? for as it is proper to the Word to have it said

of Himself, In the beginning 'Was the Word, 80 it is proper

to a man to become and to be made. Who then, on seeing the

Lord as a man going to and fro, and yet appearing to be God

from His works; would not have asked, Who made Him

man? and who again, if asked such a question, would not

have answered, that the Father made Him Inan, and sent

Him to us as High Priest? 3

113. And this meaning, and time, and character, 4 the

Apostle himself, the writer of the words, Who is faithful

to Him that made Him, will best nlake plain to us, if we

attend to wbat goes before them. For there is one train

of thought, and the passage is all about One and the Same.

He writes then in the Epistle to the Hebrews thus: Foras-

much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He

also Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death

He might destroy him that had the POW(Jf of death, that is,

the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were

all their lifetime subleet to bondage. For nowhere doth He

take hold of the Angels; but He taketh hold of the seed

of Abraham. Wh(Jfefore in all things it behoved Him to be

made like unto His brethren, that He might be a m(Jfciful

and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to

make refXJnciliation for the sins of the people. For in that

He Himself hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succour

them that are tempted. Wh(JfeJore, holy brethren, partakers

of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest

of our profession, Jesus; who was faithful to Him that


S In such passages as this are

taught without technical terms

the theological truths that our

Lord has but one personality, that

it is placed in His Divinity not

His humanity, that His humanity


acts in Him as if an additional

attribute, and that there is an

interchange of the properties of

Godhead with those of manhood

in His one Person.

4 Vid. sUIJr. p. '237.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


261


made Him. Who can read this whoie passage with- ED. BRN.

if.

 8-9.

out condemning the Arians, and admiring the blessed

Apostle who has spoken so well? for when was Christ made,

when became He Apostle, except when, like us, He took part

in flesh and blood? And when became He a merciful and

faithful High Priest, except when in all things He was

made like unto His brethren 1 And then was He made

like, when He became man, having put upon Him our

flesh. Wherefore Paul was writing concerning the Word's

human economy, when he said, Who was faithful to Him

t!tat made Him, and not concerning His Substance. Have

not therefore any more the madness to say that the "\V ord

of God is a thing made, whereas He is Son by nature Only-

begotten; and then had brethren, when He took on Him

flesh like ours; which, moreover, Himself offering by Him-

self, He was named High Priest, and became merciful and

faithful,-merciful, because in mercy to us He offered

Himself for us, and faithful, not as sharing faith with us,

nor as having faith in anyone as we have, but as deserv-

ing to have faith placed in Him in all He says and does,

and as offering a faithful sacrifice, one which remains and

does not fail. For those which were offered according to

the Law, had not this faithfulness, passing away with the

day and needing a further cleansing; but the Saviour's

sacrifice, taking place once, has perfected the whole, and is

become faithful as remaining for ever. And Aaron had

successors, and in a word the priesthood under the Law

exchanged its first ministers as time and death went on;

but the Lord, having a high-priesthood without transition

and without succession, has become a faithful High Priest,

as continuing for ever; and faithful too by promise, that

He may hear and not mislead those who come to Him.

114. This may be also learned from the Epistle of great

Peter, who says, Let them that suffer according to the will

of God, commit their souls to a faithful Oreator. For He


.


262 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XV. is faithful as not changing, but abiding ever, and

rendering what He has proinised. N ow the so-

called gods of the Greeks, unworthy the nan1e, are faithful

neither in their essence nor in their promises; for the saIne

are not everywhere, nay, the local deities are wasting away

as time goes on, and are undergoing a natural dissolution;

wherefore the Word cries out against them, that faitlt is not

strong in them, but they are waters that fail, and in them

there is no faith. But the one only and really and true God

of all, is faithful, who is ever the saIne, and says, See now,

that I, even I am He, and I change not; and therefore lIis

Son too is faithful, being ever the same and unchanging,

deceiving neither in His essence nor in His promise ;-as

again says the Apostle, writing to the Thessalonians, Faith-

ful is He who calleth you, who also will do it; for in doing

what He promises, He is faithful to His words. And he

thus writes to the Hebrews, showing that the epithet means

"unchangeable:" If we believe not, yet He abideth faith-

ful; He cannot deny Himself. Therefore reasonably the

Apostle, discoursing concerning- the bodily presence of the

vV ord, says, an Apostle and faithful to Hirn that made Him,

showing us that, even when made man, Jesus Christ is

the same yesterday and to-day, and for ever is unchangeable.

And as the Apostle makes mention in his Epistle of His

being made man, when mentioning His High Priesthood,

so too he kept no long silence about His Godhead, but

rather mentions it forthwith, furnishing to us a safeguard

on every side, and most of all when He speaks of His

humiliation, that we may forthwith know His loftiness and

His majesty which is the Father's. For instance, he says,

lIfoses as a servant, but Christ as a Son; and the former

faithful in his house, and the latter over the house, as hav-

ing Himself built it, and being its Lord and Framer, and

as God sanctifying it. For J\1:oses, a man by nature,

became faithful, as believing God who spoke to him by


A<1AINST ARIANISM.


263


His 'V ord; but the Word was not as one of things ..E

. BEN.

. 11. )' 10-11.

which are made out of nothing in a bodily fornI, -

nor as creature in creature, bnt as God in flesh, and Framer

and Builder of all in that which was built by Him. And

men are clothed in flesh in order to be and to subsist; but

the Word of God became man in order to sanctify the :flesh,

and, though He was Lord, was in the form of a servant;

for the whole creation is the Word's servant, which by

Him came to be and was made.

115. Hence it holds that the Apostle's expression, He

made, does not prove that the Word is made, but that

body, which He took like ours; and in consequence He is

called our brother, as having become man. But since it has

been shown that even though the term made be referred

to the Very Word, it is used for "begat," what further

perverse expedient will they be able to fall upon, now

that the present discussion has cleared up the term in

every point of view, and shown that the Son is not a

work, but in His Substance indeed the Father's Offspring,

while in the Economy, according to the good pleasure of

the Father, He was on our behalf made, and consists as

man? For this reason then we read in the Apostle,

Who was faithful to Him that made Him; and in the Pro-

verbs, even His creation is spoken of. For so long as we are

confessing that He became luan, there is no question, as

was observed before, whether we shall say "He became,"

or "He has been made," or "created," or "formed,"

or was " servant," or "son of a handmaid," or "son of

man," or "was constituted," or "took a far journey," or

"was bridegroom," or "brother's son," or "brother." All

these terms happen to be proper to man's nature; and

such as these do not designate the Substance of the Word,

but that He has become man.


.


264 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAPTER XVI.


Answer to objections from Scripture; Fifthly, Acts ü. 36


OBAP. XVI. 116. THE same too is the meaning of the passage

in the Acts which they also allege, viz., that in

which Peter says, that He hath made both Lord and Christ that

sæme Jesus whom ye have crucified. For here too it is not

written, "He made for Himself a Son," or "He made Him-

self a Word," to countenance them in such notions. If

then it has not escaped their memory, that they are speak-

ing concerning the Son of God, let them lnake search

whether it is anywhere written, "God made HiInself a Son,"

or "He created for Himself a Word;" or again, whether it

is anywhere written, in plain terms, "The Word is a work

of creation;" for this is the point, and then let them pro-

ceed to make their case, that here too they may receive their

answer. But if they can produce nothing of the kind, and

ònly catch at such stray expressions as He made and He has

been made, it is to be feared lest from hearing, In the be-

ginning God made the heaven and the earth, and He made the

sun and the moon, and He made the sea, they should come

in time to call the Word the heaven, and the Light which

took place on the first day, and the earth, and each par-

ticular thing that has been made, so as to end in resen1bling

the Stoics, as they are called, the one drawing out their

god into all things, the other putting God's Word on a level

with each work in particular; which they have well-nigh

done already, saying that He is one of His works.

117. But here they must have the same answer as before,

and first be told, as before, that the Word is a Son and

not a work, and that such ternlS are not to be understood

of His Godhead, but the reason and nlanner of them in-

vestigated. To persons who so inquire the human econOluy

will plainly present itself, which He undertook for our


AGAINRT ARIANISM.


265


sake. For Peter, after saying, He ltilth 'made Lord ED. BEN.

it.

 11-12.

and Ghrist, straightway added, this Jesus whom ye

crucified; which makes it plain to anyone, (even, pet.hapB,

to them, provided they attend to the context,) that not

the Substance of the Word, but He according to His man-

hood is said by Peter to have been made. For what was

crucified but the body? and how could be signified what was

bodily in the Word, except by saying He made 'I

118. Especially has that word, He made, a meaning in

that place consistent with orthodox teaching; 6 in that Peter

has not said, as I observed before," He made Him Word,"

but He made Him Lord, nor that in general terms, but

towards you, and in the midst of you, as much as to say, "lIe

manifested Him." And this very thing has Peter himself,

starting from this master doctrine, carefully expressed,

w hen he said to them, Ye men of Israel, hear these words:

Jesus of N aza'reth, a man manifested of God towards you by

miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by Him in

the midst of you, as ye yourselves know. Consequently the

term which he uses in the end, made, this he has explained

in the beginning by manifested, for by the signs and won-

del'S which the Lord did, He was manifested to be not merely

man, but God in a body and Lord also, that is, the

Christ. Such also signifies John in the Gospel, There-

fore the more did the Jews persecute Him, because He not

only had broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was His

own Father, making Himself equal with God. For the Lord

did not then fashion Himself to be God, nor indeed is a made

God conceivable, but He made Himself God by so manifest-

ing Himself in the works, saying, Though ye believe not lrle,

believe My works, that ye may know that I am in the Father,

and the Father in Ale. Thus then it is that the Father has

made Him Lord and King in the midst of us, and towards

us, who were once disobedient; and it is plain that He

II Vid. Append. òp9ó(;.


266 THREE :ntSCOtJRSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XVI. who is now displayed as Lord and King-, doc!\

not now begin to be King and Lord, but begins

to show His Lordship, and to extend it even over the dis--

obedient. If then they suppose that the Saviour was not

Lord and King, even before He became man and endured

the Cross, but then began to be Lord, let them know that

they are openly reviving the statenlents of the Samosatene.

But if, as we have noted and declared above, He is Lord and

King everlasting, seeing that Abraham worships HiIn as Lord,

and Moses says, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon

Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;

and David in the Psalms, The Lord said unto III y Lord,

Sit Thou on My right hand,. and, Thy Throne, 0 God, is

for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre oj

Thy Kingdom, and Thy Kingdom is an everlasting King-

dom, it is plain that even before He became man, He was

I{ing and Lord everlasting, existing as Image and Word

of the Father. And the Word being everlasting Lord and

King, it is very plain again that Peter did not say that the

Substance of the Son was made, but spoke of His lordship as

extended over us, which became when He became man, and,

redeeming all by the Cross, became Lord of all and King.

119. However, if they continue the argument on the

ground of its being written, He made, as unwilling that He

made should be taken in the sense of He manifested, either

from want of apprehension, or from their Christ-assailing

purpose, let thein attend to another sound exposition of

Peter's words. For id who becomes Lord of others, comes

into the possession of beings already in existence; but if

the Lord is Framer of all, and everlasting King, and when

He became man, then gained pc.JSsession of us, here too is

a way in which Peter's language evidently does not signify

that the Substance of the Word is a work, but denotes the

subsequent subjection of all things, and the Saviour's Lordship

over all which "became." And this coincides with what


AGAtNST A1t lA:N' I SM.


287


we said before; for as we then introduced the i


.]


4.

words, Become my God and defence, and the Lord

became a refuge for the oppressed, and it stood to reason

that these expressions do not show that God has come into

being, but that His beneficence becomes such towards each

individual; such a sense hath the expression of Peter also.

For the Son of God indeed, being Himself the 'V ord, is Lord

of all; but we formerly and originany were subject to the

slavery of corruption and the curse of the Law, and then

by degrees fashioning for ourselves things that were not, we

served, as says the blessed Apostle, them which by nature are no

Gods, and ignorant of the true God, we preferred things that

were not to That which was; but afterwards, as the ancient

people in Egypt groaned under their burdens, so, when we

too had the Law implanted within us, and according to

the unutterable moanings of the spirit made our inter-

cession, 0 Lord our God, take possession of us, then, as He

became for a house of refuge and a God and defence, so also

He became our Lord. It was not that He then began to

be, but we began to have Him for our Lord. For upon

this, God being good and Father of the IJord, in pity, and

desiring to be known by all, makes His own Son put on

Him a human body and become man, and be caned .Jesus,

that in this body offering Himself for all, He might deliver

all from false worship and corruption, and might Himself

become of all the Lord and King.

120. His becoming therefore in this way Lord and King,

this it is that Peter means by, He hath made Him Lord and

hath sent Him as Christ; as much as to say that the Father

in making Him man, (for to be made be]ongs to man,) did

not sinlply make Him man, but has made Him man in order

to His being Lord of all men, and to His hallowing all

through His own Anointing. For though the Word exist-

ing in the forIn of God took a servant's form, yet the

assuInption of the flesh did not nmke a servant of the


268 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OHAP. XVI. Word, who was by nature Lord; but rather,

not only was it that emancipation of all humanity

which takes place by the Word, but that very Word who

was by nature Lord, and was then made man, hath by means

of a servant's form been made Lord of all and Christ, that

is, in order to hallow all by the Spirit. And as the great

God, when becoming a God and defence, and saying, I will be a

God to them, does not then become God more than He was

before, but becomes such, at His pleasure, to those who need

Him, so Christ, also being by nature Lord and King ever-

lasting, does not, upon His mission, become Lord more than

He was, nor then begin to be Lord and King, but then is

Inade according to the flesh what in substance He had been

ever; and, having redeemed all, He becomes thereby a

second time Lord of quick and dead. For Him _ henceforth

do all things serve, and this is David's meaning in the

Psalm, The Lord said unto J1ly Lord, sit Thou on lily right

hand until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool. For it was

fitting that the redemption should take place through none

other than Him who is the Lord by nature, lest, though

created by the Son, we should name another as our Lord, and

fall into the Arian and Greek folly, serving the creature

beyond the all-creating God.

121. This, at least according to my nothingness, is the

rneaning of this passage; moreover, a true and a good

meaning have these words of Peter as regards the Jews.

For the Jews have wandered from the truth, while expect-

ing the Christ as to come, in not reckoning that He

undergoes a passion, saying what they understand not, viz.,

We know that when the Ghrist compth, He abideth for ever,

and how sayest Thou that He must be lifted up 'I Next they

suppose Hinl, not the Word coming in flesh, but, a mere

lllan, as were all the kings. The Lord then, admonishing

Cleophas and the other, taught thenl that the Christ must

first suffer; and the rest of the Jews that God lllllst sojourn


AGAINST ARIANISM.


269


among them, saying, If He called them gods to i




4

i6.

'whom the 'word of God came, and the Scripture cannot

be broken, say ye of Him whom the Father hath sanctified and

sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am

the Son of God? Peter then, having learned this from the

Saviour, in both points set the Jews right, saying, " 0 Jews,

the divine Scriptures announce that Christ cometh, and you

consider Him a mere man as one of David's descendants,

whereas what is written of Him shows Him to be not such

as you say, but rather announces Him as Lord and God,

and immortal, and dispenser of life. For Moses has said,

Ye shall see your Life hanging before your eyes. 6 And David

in the hundred and ninth Psalm, The Lord said unto My

Lord, Sit Thou on J[y 'right hand, till I make Thine enemies

Thy footstool; and in the fifteenth, Thou shalt not leave My

,f)oul in hell, neither shalt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see

corruption. Now that these passages have not David for

their scope he himself witnesses, avowing that He who was

coming was his own Lord. Nay you yourselves know

that he is dead, and his relics are with you.

122. "That the Christ then must be such as the Scrip-

tures say, you will all confess yourselves. For those

announcements come from God, and in them falsehood can-


8 Vide Iren. Hær. iv. 10, 2.

Tertull. in J ud. 11. Cyprian,

Testim. iii. 2, n. 20. Lactant.

Instit. iv. 18. Cyril, Catech. xiii.

19. August. contr. Faust. xvi.

22, which are referred to in loco

Cypr. (0. Tr.) To which add

Leon. Serm. 59, 6. Isidor. Hisp.

contr. J ud. i. 35, ii. 6. Origen,

in Cels. ii. 75. Epiph. Hær. p.

75. Damase. F. o. iv. 11, fin.

This interpretation, I am told,

is recommended even by the letter,

which has ')j

 J

 o


'

n,

cÍ7rÉvavTI TWJI Òcp()(lÀJlWV O'ov. Sept.


Pendebit tibi a regione, Gesenius;

who also says, U Since things

which are à regi01

e of a place,

are necessarily a little removed

from it, it follows that '):J

 sig-

nifies at the same time to be at a

small distance, tJ referring to the

case of Hagar, who was but 8

bow-shot from her child. Also,

though the word here is


 n,

yet i1

n which is the same root,

is used for hanging on a stake,

or crucifixion, e.g. Gen. xx. 19.

Deut. xxi. 22. Esth. v. 14; vii.

10.


270 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XVL not be. If then ye can state that such a one has

come before, and can prove him God from the

signs and wonders which he did, ye have reason for maintain-

ing the contest; but if ye are not able to prove that He

has come, but are expecting Him still, recognise the true

season of His coming from Daniel, for his words relate to

the present time. But if this present season be that which

was of old afore-announced, and ye have seen what has

taken place among us, be sure that this Jesus, whom ye

crucified, this is the expected Christ. For David and all

the Prophets are dead, and the sepulchres of all of. them

are with you, but that Resurrection which has now taken

place has shown that the scope of these passages is Jesus.

For His clllcifixion is denoted by Ye s}tall see your Life

hanging, and the wound in His side by the spear answers

to He was led as a sheep to the slctughter, and the resurrec-

tion, nay more, the rising of the ancient dead from out

their sepulchres, (for these most of you have seen,) this is,

Thou shalt not leave },[ y soul in hell, and He swallowed up

death in His strength, and again, God will wipe a'l.fJay.

For the signs which He actually displayed show that He

who was in a body was God, and that He was the Life and

Lord of death. For it became the Christ, when giving

life to others, Himself not to be detained by death; but this

could not have happened, had He, as you suppose, been a

mere man. But in truth He is the Son of God, for to

death all men are subjected.

123. "Let no one therefore doubt, but let the whole house

of Israel know assuredly that this Jesus, whOln ye saw in

shape a man, doing signs and such works as no one ever

yet had done, is Himself the Christ and Lord of all. For

though made man, and called JESUS, as was said before, He

received no loss by that human passion, but rather, in being

made man, He is manifested as Lord of quick and dead.

For since, as the A postle said, in the wisdorn of God tlte


AGAINST ARIANISM.


271


world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the En. BEN.

ii.

 16-17.

foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

And so, since we men would not acknowledge God through

His Word, nor serve the \V ord of God our natural Master,

it pleased God to show in man His own Lordship, and so

to draw all men to Himself. But to do this by a mere man

beseemed not; lest, having man for our Lord, we should

become worshippers of man. Therefore the Word Himself

became flesh, and the Father called His Name J eSBS, and so

made Him I.Jord and Christ, as much as to say, 'lIe made

Him to fille and to reign;' that while at the Nanle of Jesus,

whom ye crucified, every knee bows, we may acknowledge

as Lord and I{ing both the Son and through Him the

Father." This was the true meaning and drift of Peter's

speech, and it had its effect upon his hearers. :Thlost of

them, on hearing it, came to a better mind,1 although the

Arians are where they were.

124. Were it likely to affect them, parallel cases might

be mentioned. For instance, Isaac's blessing on his two

sons. He said to Jacob, Become thou lord over thy brother;

and to Esau, Behold I have made him thy lord. Now

though the word made had implied Jacob's substance and

coming into being, even then it would not be right in them

so much as to imagine the same of the Word of God, for

the Son of God is no creature as Jacob was,-a little thought

might set their n1Ïllds right herein. But if they do not

understand such words of his substance nor of his coming

into being, though Jacob was by nature crea.ture and work.

is not their madness worse than the Tempter's, if what in

consequence of a parallel phrase they dare not ascribe even to

things by nature creatures, this they attach to the Son of God,


T oi 7r}...E"irrToL, vid. 7rórraL JLV-

fJLáðE{;, Act. xxi. 20. 7ro}...vç TE ÓX XO {;

rwv iE(Jiwv, ibid. vi. 7. Vid. Jenkin

on the Christian Religion, vol. ii.


ch. 32. Lardner, Jewish and

Heathen Test. ch. i. Burton,

Eccles. Rist. first Cent. p. 50-

52.


272 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANARIUS


CHAP. XVI. tsaying that He is a creature? For Isaac said

-- Become and I have made, signifying neither the

coming into being nor the substance of Jacob, (for after

thirty years and more from his birth he said this,) but meaning

his authority over his brother, which came to pass subsequently.

125. Much more then did Peter say this without intima-

ting that the Substance of the 1Vord was a work; for he

knew Him to be God's Son, confessing, Thou art the Christ,

the Son of the Living God; but he meant His Kingdom

and Lordship which was fonned and brought to pass

according to grace and relatively to us. For while saying

this, he was not silent about the Son of God's everlasting

Godhead which is the Father's; moreover, he had said

already, that He had poured the Spirit on UB; now to give

the Spirit with authority is not the act of creature or

work, but the Spirit is God's Gift. For the creatures are

hallowed by the Holy Spirit; but the Son, in that He is

not hallowed by the Spirit, but on the contrary is Himself

the Giver of it to all, is therefore no creature, but true Son

of the Father. And yet, He who gives the Spirit, the Same

is said also to be made; that is, to be made among us Lord

by reason of His manhood, while giving the Spirit because

He is God's 'V ord. For He ever was and is, as Son, so also

Lord aud Sovereign King of all, being like in all things to

the Father, and having all that is the Father's, as He

IIimself has said.


CHAPTER XVII.


Answer to objectwns from Scripture; Sixthly, Introductory

to Proverbs viii. 22.


126 Now in the llext place let us consider the passage in

the Proverbs, The Lord created J.Jfe a b(!ginning 0/ His ways


AGAINST A1UANISM.


13


for His 'uJorks; 8 although in showing that the ED. BEN.

il.

 17 -18.

Word is no work, it has been also shown that He

is no creature; for it is the same to say creature or work.

Wherefore one n1ay marvel at these men, thus inventing for

thenlselves excuses for being impious, and nothing daunted

at the refutations which Ineet them upon every point. For

first 9 they set about deceiving the simple by their ques-

tions, "Did He who is, make Him that was not, from

Him who was not, or Him that was?" and, "IIad you a

son, before begetting him?" And when this had been

proved worthless, next they pitched upon the question,

"Is the Ingenerate one or two?" Then, when in this

they had been confuted, straightway they formed another,

"Has He free-will and an alterdble nature?" But being

forced to give up this, next they set about saying, Being

made so much better than the Angels; and when the Truth

exposed this pretence, now again, collecting theIn all

together, they think to recommend their heresy by work

and creature. For they mean those very things over

again, and are true to their own perverseness, putting into

many shapes and turning to and fro the same en'ors, if so

be, to deceive some by their look of richness and variety.

Although then abundant proof has been given above of this,

yet, since they make all places resound with this passage from

the Proverbs, and to many who are ignorant of the faith


8 We have found this text

urged against the Catholic doc-

trine in the third century to sup-

port an Arian doctrine, supr.

p. 46. Eusebius NicOD1f'd., in his

letter to Paulinus, adduces it

against Alexander in the very

beginning of the controversy,

Theod. Rist. i. 5, p. 752.

Atban. says, supr. p. 29, that

after this it WaS again put forward

by the Arians about A.D. 3GO. It

is presont.Jy eXplained at greater


length than any other of the

texts he handles, forming the

subject of the rest of this Dis-

course.

9 From the methodical manner

in which the previous portions

of this Discourse are here re-

ferred to, it woulJ almost seem

as if he were answering in course

some Arian work. He does not

seem to be intending to trace the

controversy historically.


T


274 THRE1i

 DISCOUW:ms OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP.XVII. of Christians, semn to say something telling, it is

necessary to examine separately, He created, as well

as Who was faithful to Him that made Him; that, as in

all other texts, so in this text also, they may be proved to

have got no further than a fantasy.

127. And first let us see the answers, which they re-

turned to Alexander of blessed memory, in the outset, while

their heresy was in course of formation. They wrote thus:

"He is a creature, but not as one of the creatures; a

work, but not as one of the works; an offspring, but not

as one of the offsprings." 10 Let every one consider the

unscrupulous and crafty character of this heresy; for

knowing the bitterness of its own malignity, it makes an

effort to trick itself out with fair words, and says, what

indeed it means, that He is a creature, yet thinks to be

able to hide itself by adding, "but not as one of the

creatures." However, in thus writing, they rather convict

themselves of impiety the more; for if, in your opinion,

He is siInply a creature, why add the hypocritical excep-

tion, "but not as one of the creatures"? And if He is

simply a work, how "not as one of the works"? In

which we may see the poison of the heresy. For by

saying, "offspring, but not as one of the offsprings,"

they reckon many sons, and one of these they pronounce

to be the Lord; so that according to them He is no longer

Only-begotten, but one out of many brethren, and is

merely called offspring and son.

128. Of what use then is the hypocrisy of saying that He

is a creature and then not a creature? for though ye shall

say, Not as "one of the creatures," I will prove this

sophism of yours to be a poor one. For stin ye pronounce


10 Vid. Arius's letter, supr. p.

97. This WaB the sophism by

means of which V slens succeeded

wi th the Fathers of Ariminum,


vide S. Jerome in Luciferian. 18 1

vide also in Eusebius, supr. p. ÔS,

and Append. Eusebius.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


27Ô


HÏIn to be one of the creatures; and wha.tever a ED; BEN.

ii.

 19.

nlall might say of the other creatures, such ye hold

concerning the Son, 0 truly fools and blind. For is any

one of the creatures just what another is, that ye should

predicate this of the Son as some prerogative? And all the

visible creation was made in six days :-in the first, the

light which fIe called day; and in the second the finnanlent;

and on the third, He gathered together the waters, and

bared the dry land, and brought out the various fruits

that are in it; and on the fourth, He made the sun and

the moon and all the host of the stars; and on the fifth

He created the race of living things in the sea, and of

birds in the air; and on tbe sixth, He made the quadru



peds on the earth, and at length man. And the int'isibll

things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,

being understood by the things that are made; and neithel'

the light is as the night, nor the sun as the moon; nor

the irrational works as rational man; nor the Angels as

the Thrones, nor the Thrones as the Powers, yet they are

all creatures, but each of those things made exists and

continues according to its kind and in its own substance,

as it was made.

129. He is either Creator or creature, take your choice,

and, if you will not acknowledge Him as Creator, drop

down to the extravagance of placing Him on the level

of creatures; I repeat, put aside a distinction which

will not hold. Let the Word be excepted from the

number of the works, and as Creator be restored to the

Father, and be confessed to be Son by nature; or if

He be simply a creature, then let Him be assigned that

same condition as the rest have one with another,

and let them as well as Him be said everyone of them

to be " a creature, but not as one of the creatures,"

"offspring or work, but not as one of the works or off-

springs,"-for ye say that an offspring is the same as a

T2


.


276


'tHREE DIRCüùRSES OF ATRANA8It1S


CHAP.XVII. work, writing, "generated or made." 1 But again,

- - --- you allow that He is " not like one of the creatures."

J think so indeed! Star certainly differs from star in

glory, and the rest have each of them their mutual dif-

ferences, when compared together; but what creature is

distinguished from others as He is by being their Lord,

and having theIn for His servants, and being an efficient

cause of the rest, and bringing them into being instead

of being Hin1self caused? No; all, by the force of their

very nature, confess their Fran1er; as David, when he

says in the Psalm, The heavens declare the glory of God,

afld the ji7'mament slwweth His handy work; and as

Zorobabel the wise, All the earth called upon the Truth,

and the heaven blesseth it: all works shake and tremble at

it. And again, who is "the Truth," thus spoken of by

Zorobabe], but the Son? for He says, I a1n the Truth? and

who is the Framer of the universe but the Word, whose

.voice hath gone forth into all lands? And do you mean to

say that He who tells us, I was by the Father disposing,

and who says, lily Father worketh hitherto and I work,

Jnarking by the word hitherto His eternal existence in the

1?ather as the Word, who is prover to the Father, who

works what the Father works, that He is after all a

creature, only not like the other creatures, or that He is

in any sense a creature? Nor yet ha ve we got to the

bottom of this extravagance. If on the one hand what the


1 }'fVV1jeÉVTD Ì] 7rOt1}e!VTa; as if

they were synonymous; in oppo-

sition to which the Nicpne Creed

says, Yfvv1}BÉvTa ov 7rOt1je!vTa. In

like manner Arius in his letter

to Eusebius uses the words, 7T'pi.v

}'fv'lJ1jBÿ ijroL ICTLaep, Î] optaep, Î]

eEP.EÀlWe7}. Theodor. Rist. p. 750.

And to Alexander, ÙxpÓ'lIWr; YfV-

vTJeEh. IWi. 7rpÒ aiw'llwv ICTLaeEì



lCai. efJ1ÆÀlWeEír;, supr. p. 85. And


Eusebius to Paulinus, ICTUTTÒV lCa;,

efJ1ÆÀtWTÒV lCai Yf.VV1}TÓV. Theod.,

p. 752. The different words pro-

fess to be Scriptural, and to ex-

plain each other; "created" being

in Provo viii. 22. and .. made" in

the p3.ssages considered in the

last two chapters, while · C ap-

pointed ., or c, declared" is in Rom.

i. 4, and "founded" or "estaL-

lished " in Provo viii. 23.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


277


Father worketh, the Son worketh also, and what i


.2


i.

the Son creates that is what the Father creates,

yet on the other hand the Son is the Father's work or

creature, it follows that the Son created Himself, which is

absurd and impossible. And once again; if He be a crea-

tive cause, and yet a creature, why may not other creatures

be creators too? If a creator may be a creature, creatures

Inay be creators, or is it not rather true, that, as soon as

we consider Him a creature, we grant that He has no

power to create at an ?

130. For how, if as you hold, He is come of nothing, is

He able to fashion that nothing into being? or if He,

a creature, withal frames a creature, the same will be con-

ceiyable in the case of every creature, viz., the power to

frame others. And if this pleases you, what is the need

of the Word, seeing that things inferior in the scale of

being can be brought to be by things superior? or at

all events, everything that has been brought into being

could have heard in the beginning God's words, Become

and be made, and so would ha ve been framed. But this is

not so written, nor could it be. For of things which are

brought into being none is an efficient cause, but all things

were made through the fVord, who would not have wrought

all things, were He Himself in the number of the creatures,

for neither would Angels be able to frame, since they too

are creatures (though Valentillus, and l\Iarcion, and

Basilides think so, whose copyists you are); nor will the

sun, as being a creature, ever make what is not into what

is; nor will man fashion man, nor stone devise stone, nor

wood give growth to wood. But God is He who fashions

nlan in the womb, and fixes the mountains, and makes

wood grow; whereas nlan, as being capable of science, puts

together and shapes that material, and works things that

al'e as he has learned to do; and lllakes much of it if they are

hut brought to be, and being conscious of what his nature


278 THREE DI

COURßES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP.XVII. is, if he needs aught, knows to ask it of God. If

- - then God wrought and compounded, as nlan does,

out of existing materials, we countenance a Gentile thought,

according to which God is an artificer and not a Maker;

yet even in that case let the Word work the materials,

at the bidding and in the service of God. But if He caBs

into existence things which existed not, and that by His

proper Word, then the 'V ord is not in the number of

things non-existing aI?-d called into being; or we have to

seek another Word, through whom He too was caUed;

for certainly by God's Word the things which-were-not

came to be.

131. .And whereas all things are from nothing, and are

creatures, then if the Son, as they say, is one of the

creatures too, and of things which once were not, how does

He alone reveal the Father, and none else but He know

the Father? For if He, a work, could possibly know the

Father, then must the Father be also known by all

according to the propoition of the measures of each: for

aU of them are works as He is. But if it be impossible for

things which have had a beginning either to see or to

know Him, for the sight and the knowledge of Him

surpasses all, (since God Himself says, No one shall see ]JIy

face and live,) yet the Son has declared, No one knoweth the

Father save the Son, therefore the Word is dIfferent

from things that have been created, in that He alone

knows and alone sees the Father, as He says, Not that any

one hath seen the Father, save He that is from the Father,

and No one knoweth the Father save the Son, though .Arius

think otherwise. How then did He alone know, except

that He alone was proper to Him? and how proper, if He

were a creature, and not a true Son frOln HiIn? (for one

must not mind saying often the same thing for religion-

sake.) Therefore it is irreligious to think that the Son is

only one among all things; and blasphc1l10US and unnwan-


AGAINST ARIANISM.


279


in g to call Him "a creature, but not a

 one of ED. BEN.

ü.

 22-23.

the creatures, and a work, but not as one of the

. works; an offspring, but not as on

 of the offsprings;"

unmeaning, for why not as one of these, if, as they say,-

He was not before His generation? for it belongs to the

creatures and works not to be before their generation, and

to subsist out of nothing, even though these excel those in

glory; for that difference of one with another will be found

in all creatures, which appears in those which are visible.

132. It may be added that, if the Son were "creature

or work, but not as one of the creatures," as the heretics

pretend, merely because of His excelling the rest in glory, it

were natural that Scripture should describe and display

Him by a comparison in His favour with the other works ;

for instance, that it should say that He is greater than

Archangels, and more honourable than the Thrones, and

both brighter than sun and moon, and greater than

the heavens. But it does not in fact thus describe Him,

but, the Father manifests Him to be His own proper and

only Son, saying, Thou art

ly Son, and This is My beloved

Son, in whom I am well pleased. Accordingly the Angels

ministered unto Him, as being one beside themselves; and

they worship Him, not as being greater in glory, but as

being some one beyond all the creatures, and beyond

themselves, and alone the Father's proper Son according

to substance. For if He was worshipped as excelling

them in glory, each of things subordinate ought to wor-

ship what excels itself. But this is not the case; for

creature does not worship creature, but servant worships

Lord, and creature God. Thus Peter the Apostle hinderH

Cornelius wPo would worship him, saying, I myself also

am a man. And an Angel, when .John would worship hin1

i

 the Apocalypse, hinders him, saying, See tholt do it not;

.for I am thy fellow-sprvant, and oj thy brethren the Prophets,

and of them that keep the sa.'Jin.qs of this book: worship God.


.


280 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP.XVII. Therefore to God alone appertains worship, and

-- this the very Angels know, that though they excel

other beings in glory, yet they are creatures all, andÞnot of

those who receive worship, but of those who worship the

Lord. Thus Mauoe, the Father of Sanlson, wishing to

offer sacrifice to the Angel, was thereupon hindered by

hiIn, saying, Offer not to me, but to God.

133. On the other hand, the Lord is worshipped even by

the Angels; for it is written, Let all the Angels oj God

'Worship Him; and by all the Gentiles, as Esaias says, The

labour of Egypt and merchandise of Ethiopia and oj the

Sabeans, 'Inen of stature, shall come Ol}er unto Thee, and they

shall be Thine; and then, they shall fall down unto Thee, and

shall make supplication unto Thef, saying, Surely God is in

Thee, and there is none else, there is no God. And He accepts

His disciples' worship, and certifies them who He is, say-

ing. Call ye J[e not Lord and ],[aster? and ye say well,for

so I am. And when Thornas said to Him, J.{y Lord and my

God, He allows his words, rather accepting him than

hindering him. For He is, as the other Prophets declare,

and David says in the Psahn, the Lord of forces, the Lord

of Sabaoth, which is interpreted the Lord of Armies, and

God true and Almighty, though the Arians burst at the

tidings. But He had not been thus worshipped, nor been

thus spoken of, were He in the number of creatures.

But now, since He is not a creature, but the proper Off-

spring of the Substance of that God who is worshipped,

and His Son by nature, therefore He is worshipped and is

believed to be God, and is Lord of armies, and Sovereign,

and Almighty, as the Father is; for He has said Him-

self, All things that the Father hath are lIine. For it

belongs to the Son to have the things of the Father,

and to be such that the Father is seen in HiIn, and

that through Him aU things were Inade, and that the

salvation of all comes to pass and consists in Hiln.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


281


CHAPTER XVIII.


Answer to objections from Scripture; sixthly, IntTodll

tory

to Proverbs viii. 22.


134. AND here it were well to ask them also 1i


'2


4.

this question, for a still clearer refutation of their

heresy :- 'Yherefore, when all things are creatures, and all

are brought into consistence from nothing, and the Son

Himself, according to theIn, is creature and work, and one

of those things which once were not, wherefore has God made

all things through Him alone, and without Him was made

not one thing? or why is it, when all things are spoken of,

that no one thinks the Son is signified in the number all,

but only things that come to be; whereas when Scripture

speaks of the Word, it does not understand HÌll1 as being

in the number of all, but ranks Him with the Father, as

Him in whom providence and salvation for all are wrought

and effected by the Father, though all things surely might at

that very same command have come to be, at which, they

say, He was brought into being by God alone? For God is

not wearied by commanding, nor is His strength unequal to

the Inaking of all things, that He should alone create the

only Son, and need Ilis service and aid for the framing of

the rest. For He lets nothing stand over which He wills

to be done; but He has willed only, and all things sub-

sisted, and no one hath resisted His will. "Thy then were

not all things brought into being by God alone at the

same command at which the Son came into being? Or

let them tell us, why did all things through Hinl come to

be, who was but brought into being Himself.

135. IIowever,2 they say in answer, that, on God's deter-


2 Vid. Bupr. p. 22; vid. also d.

similar argnment in Epiphanius

Hær. 76, p. û;'J!, but the argu-

ments of Ath. in these Ora.tions


arc so generany adopted by the

suc('eeding lì'athers, tha.t it is im-

possible a.nd needlC'ss to en UTI1 tJ

rate the i nstauces of agreement.


.


282 THREE DISCOURBES O

' A'fHANABIUS


Cn. XVIII. mining to create this finite Nature, "when He saw

that it could not endure the touch of His im-

mediate hand, and its creation by means of It, He makes

and creates first and alone one, and calls Him Son and Word,

that, through Him as an intermediate

 all things Jllay there-

upon be brought to be." This they not only have said,

but they have been bold enough to put it into writing,

namely, Eusebius, Arius, and Asterius the sacrificer. Yet if

they shall assign the toil of making all other creatures as

the reason why God made the Son only, the whole creation

will cry out against them as saying unworthy things of God;

and Esaias too, who has said in Scripture, the Everlasting

God, the Lord, the Oreator of the ends of tlJ,e earth, jainteth

not, neither is 'weary: there is no searching of His under-

standing. But if, again, God made the Son alone, as not

deigning to make the rest, but committed them to the

Son as an assistant, this on the other hand is un worthy of

God, for in Him there is no pride. Nay, the Lord reproves

the thought when He says, Are not two sparrows sold for

a farthing? and not one of them shall fall on the ground

without your Father who is in heaven. And again, Talce

no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, nor yet for your

body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than 'Jneat,

and the body than raiment? Behold the fowls of the aìr,for

they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet

your heavenly Father feedeth them; are ye not much better

than they? TVhich of you, by taking thought, can add onn

cubit unto his stature? And why take ye thought for

raiment? Oon.sider the lilies of the field, how they grow;

they toil not, neither do they spin: and yet I say unto you,

that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one

of these. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field,

UJhirk to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall

Hp not much more clothe you, 0 ye of little faith? If then

it be not unworthy of God to exercise IIis providence, even


AGAINST ARIANISM.


283


down to things so small as a hair of the head, and 1i


'2


6.

a sparrow and the grass of the field, also it was not

unworthy of Him in the first instance to make them. For

what things are the subject of His providence, of those He

is Maker, that is, by means of His own proper Word. Nay,

a worse absurdity lies before the men who thus speak; for

they distinguish between the creatures and their framing;

and consider the latter the work of the Father, the crea-

tures the work of the Son; but, if so, either all things must

be brought to be by the Father with the Son, or at least if

all that has a beginning comes into being through the

Son, we must not call Him one of those created things.

136. Next, they may be exposed thus :-if even the Word

be of created nature, how, whereas this nature is too feeble

to sustain God's own handiwork, could He alone of all

endure to be made by the Ingenerate and untell1pered

Substance of God, as ye say? for it follows either that, if

lIe could endure it, all could endure it, or, it being en-

durable by none, it was not endurable even by the \V ord.

for you say that He is one of things which have a

beginning. And again, if because created nature could

not endure to be God's own handiwork, there arose need

of a mediator, it clearly follows that, the Word having

come to be, and being a creature, there is need of a medium

in His framing also, since lIe too is of that same nature

which does not admit of being made by God without a medium.

But if some being as a medium be found for Him, then

again a fresh mediator is needed for that second, and thus

tl'acing back and following out by reasoning, we shan

invent a vast crowd of accumulating mediators; and thus

it will be Ï1npossible that the creation should subsist, as

ever wanting an interll1ediate, and that medium being un-

able to COlne into being without another previous mediator;

for all of the1l1 will be of that created nature which does not,

as ye say, endure to be the workmanship of God alone.


284 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OR. XVIII. How abundant is that folly, which obliges them to

hold that what has already come into being, ad-

mits not of that coming! Or perhaps they opine that

they have not even yet come to be, as still seeking their

mediator; for, on the ground of their so impious and futile

notion, what really is would not have subsistence, for want

of the intermediate.

137. But again they allege this :-" Behold, through

Moses too did He lead the people from Egypt, and through

him He gave the Law, yet he was a man; so that it is

possible for like to be brought into being by like." They

should veil their face when they say this, to save their much

shame. For 1\10ses was not sent to frame the world, nor

to call into being things which were not, nor to fashion

men like hÌInself, but only to be the minister of parlance

to the people and to King Pharaoh. And this is a very

different thing, for to minister belongs to things made as of

servants, but to frame and to create is of God alone, and

of His proper Word and His Wisdom. Wherefore, in the

matter of framing, we shall find none but God's Word;

for all things are made in Wisdom, and 'Without the TVord

was made not one thing. But as regards ministrations

there are, not one only, but many out of the whole

number, whomever the Lord will send. For there

are Inany Archangels, many Thrones, and Powers,

and D01ninions, thousands of thousands, and myriads of

myriads, standing before Him, ministering and ready to

be sent. And many Prophets, and Twelve Apostles, and

Paul. And Moses himself was not alone, but Aaron

with him, and next other seventy were filled with the

Holy Ghost. And 1\lJoscs was succeeded by Jesus the Son

of Nave, and he by the Judges, anò. they by, not one, but

by a number of IGngs. If then the Son were a creature

and one of things that had a beginning, there would have

been n1any such SOllS, ill order that God Inight have lllany


AGAtNRT ARIANISM.


285


such Jl1inisters, just as there is a multitude of those Eo. BEN.

Ïi.

 26-28.

others. But if this is not to be seen, for the

creatures are many, but the Word is one, anyone will

collect froin this, that the Son differs from all, and is not

on a level with the creatures, but is proper to the }-'ather.

Hence many "\V ords there are not, but one only VV ord of the

oue Father, and one Image of the one God.

138. "But behold," they say, "there is but one sun and

one earth. " Let theIn Inaintain, senseless as they are,

that there is one water and one fire, and then they may

be told that everything that is brought into being is

one in its own substance, but for the ministry and service

committed to it, by itself it is not adequate nor sufficient

alone. For God said, Let there be lights in the finnament

of heaven, to give light upon the earth, and to di'vide the day

from the night; and let them be for signs and for seasons and

for days and years. And then He says, And God made two

great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser

light to rule the night: He made the stars also. And God

set them in the firmampnt of the heaven, to give light upon the

earth, and to 'rule over the day and over the night. Behold

there are many lightß, and not the sun only, nor the moon

only, but each is one in substance, and yet the service of

all is one and comnlon; and what each lacks is supplied

by the other, and the office of lighting is performed by all.

Thus the sun has power to shine throughout the day and

no more; and the moon through the night; and the stars

togethel' with them accOlnplish the seasons and years, and

become for signs, each according to the need that calls for

it. Thus too the earth is not for all things, but for the

fruits only, and to be a ground to tread on for the living

things that inhabit it. And the firmalnent is to divide be-

tween waters and \Vat

r

, and is a place to set the stars in.

So also fire and water, with other things, have been brought

into being to be the constituent parts of bodies; and in


.:fJ


286 THRER DISCOURSES OF ATHANARIUS


011. XVIII. short no one thing is alone, but all things that

are made, as if lllembers of each other, make up

as it were one body, nainely, the world. If then they thus

conceive of the Son, they deserve a good pelting, as con-

sidering the Word to be a part of this universe, and a part

insufficient without the rest for the service committed to

Him. But if this be manifestly impious, let them acknow-

ledge that the V\T ord is not in the number of things which

have been made, but is the sole and proper Word of the

Father, and of those things the FraIner.

139. "But," they have said, "though lIe is a creature

and has been brought into being, yet as from a master

and artificer has He learned to frame things, and thus has

ministered to God who taught Him." For thus the Sophist

Asterius, having learned to deny the Lord, has dared to

write, not observing the absurdity which follows. For if

framing a universe be a thing to be taught, let them

beware lest they say that it is not by nature but by skill

that God Himself is a FraIner, so as to adlnit of His losing

the art. Besides, if the Wisdom of God attained to it

by definite teaching, how is it still WisdOln, when it needs

lessons? and what was it before it learned? For it was

not Wisdom if it needed teaching; it was surely but some

empty thing, and not Wisdom in substance, but from im-

proving itself it had the name of Wisdom, and will be only

so long Wisdom as it can retain what it has learned. For

what has been acquired not by any nature, but from learning,

admits of being at one time unlearned. But to speak thus

of the Word of God is not the part of Christians, but of

Greeks. For if the power of fraining a world accrues to

anyone from teaching, these insensate men are ascribing

jealousy and weakness to God; jealousy, in that He has

not taught many beings how to fraine, so that there may

be around Him, as Archangels and Angels Inany, so world-

fraUler

 many; and weakness, in that He could not n1ake by


'"


AGAINST ARIANISM.


287


Hinu

elf, but needed a fellow-worker, or under- ED. BJr.l't.

ii.

 28-30.

worker; and yet creation Inust begin with God

alone, even according to their showing, if, as they say, the

Son is a creature, and so there was no one else to make Him

but God. But God is deficient in nothing: perish the

thought! for He has said Himself, I am full. Nor did the

Word become Framer of the universe from teaching; but

being the Image and "\Visdom of the Father, He works what

appertains to the Father. Nor hath He made the Son for

the making of things generate; for behold, though the Son

exists, still the Father is seen to work, as the Lord Himself

says,

[y Father worketh hitherto, and I work. If, however,

as you say, the Son came into being for the purpose of

making the things which were made after Him, and yet the

Father is seen to work even after the Son, you must hold

even in this light the making of such a Son to be super-

fluous. Besides, why, when He would create us, does He

seek for the intern1ediate at all, as if His will did not suffice

to constitute whatever seemed good to Him ? Yet the Scrip-

tures say, He hath doue whatsoever pleased Him, and }Vho

hath resisted His will? And if His mere will is sufficient

for the framing of all things, you Inake the office of a middle

power superfluous; for your instance of Moses, and the SUll

and the moon, has been shown not to hold.

140. And here again is an argument to silence you.

You say that God, willing the creation of that nature which

has a beginning, and deliberating concerning it, designs

and creates the Son, that through Him He may frame us;

now, if so, consider how great an impiety you have dared

to utter. First, because the Son thereby appears rather

to have been for us brought to be, than we for Him; for

we were not created for IIim, but He is made for us; so

that He owes thanks to us, not we to Him, as the wonlan

to the man. For the .man, says Scripture, was not created

.for the woman, but the woman for the man. Therefore as the


288 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATRANASIUS


CR. XVIII. man is the image and glm"y of God, and the WU)JUlll

flip glory of the man, so we are made God's image

and for His glory; but the Son is our image, and exists for

our glory. And we were brought into being that we might

be; but God's Word was made, as you must hold, not that

He might be, but as an instrument for our need, so that not

we from IIim, but IIe is constituted from our need. Are

not men who even conceive such thoughts, more than in-

sensate? For if for us the 'V ord was made, He has not

precedence of us with God; for God in that case did not

take counsel about us having Him within Him, but having

us in HiIllself, counselled as they say concerning His own

\V ord. But if so, perchance the Father had not even a

will for the Son at all; for not as having a will for Him,

did He create Him, but with a wiU for us, He formed Him

for our sake; for He designed Him after designing us;

so that, according to these impious men, henceforth the

Son, who was made as an instrument, is superfluous, now

that they are made for whom He was created.

141. But if the Son alone was made by God alone,

because He could endure it, but we, because we could not,

were made by the Word, why does He not first take counsel

about the Word, who could endure His making, instead

of taking counsel about us? or why does He not make

more of Him who was strong than of us who were weak?

or why, making Him first, does He not counsel about Him

first? or why, counseUing about us first, does He not make

us first, His will being sufficient for the constitution of all

things? But He creates Him first, yet counsels first

about us; and He wills us before the l\'Iediator; and when

He wills to create us, and counsels about UB, He calls us

creatures; but Him, whom He fraInes for us, He calls

Son and proper Heir. But we, for whose sake He made

Him, ought rather to be called sons; or certainly He,

who is His Son. is rather the object of His previous


AGAINST ARIANISM.


289


thoughts and of His will, for whom He Inakes us ED. BEN.

'-' ii.

 30-31.

aU. Such the bi1l3, such the vOInit of the heretics. 3


CHAPTER XIX.


Answer to objections from Scripture; sixthly, Introduction to

Proverbs viii. 22.


142. BUT the sentiment of Truth in this 111atter must not

be hidden, but must have high utterance. For the 'V ord

of God was not made for us, but rather we for Him, and

in Him all things were created. Nor, because we were weak,

was He made by the. Father alone, as able to endure this,

that He might frame us by means of Him as an instrument;

perish the thought! it is not so. For though it had seenled

good to God not to make creatures, still had the }Vord beeu

no less with God, and the Father in Him. At the same

time, created things could not without the tV ord be brought

to be; hence they were made through HÜn-and reason-

ably. For since the Son is the Word proper and natural

to God's substance, and is from lIim, and in Him, as He


S lpErOt lCaì vavríat; vavríat sea-

sickness; as to l/LfTot, (for which vid.

supra. p. 86; also Disc. p.214, n. 66,

&c.) the word. according to Cressol

de Theatl'. Rhet. iii. 11, has a tech-

nical meaning, when used of dis-

putation or oratory, and denotes

extempore delivery as contrasted

with compositions on which pains

have been bestowed. And this

agrees with what Athan. fre-

quently observes about the Arians,

as saying wha.t came uppermost

to serve their purpose, with no

care of consistency. Thus St.

Greg. Nyss. says of Eunomius,

"All such things were poured forth,


l1r'l]p.É.u(}'l], by this writer without

reflection (ðwvoíaç)," in Eunom.

ix. p. 250, d. And in a parallel

case 8ynesius, " He does not

cherish the word within who is

forced to pour forth daily, l/LfÌv."

Dion. p. 56, 00. 1612. And Epic-

tetus, in a somewhat similar

sense, 'I There is great danger of

pouring forth straightway, what

one has not digested." Enchirid.

46; vid. also Dissert. iii. 21. A dif-

ferent allusion of course is con-

tained in the word A

Épafla, which

Athan. sometimes uses, and which

is taken from 2 Pet. ii. 22.


v


"


290 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CHAP. XIX. said Himself, the creatures could not have come

to be, except through Him. For as the light

enlightcns all th illgS by its radianùe, and without its radiance

nothing woulil be il1unlÍnated, so also the Father, as by a

hand, in the Word wrought all things, and without I-IÍlu

makes nothing. For instance, God said, as 1\10ses relates,

Lft there be light, and Let the 'l(xtlcrs be gathered together,

and let the dry land appNlr, and Let us nzake rnan; as also

holy David in the Psalm, He spake and it was done; He

commanded and it stood fast, And He spoke, not that, as

in the case of lnen, SOIne under-worker nlight hear, and

learning the will of Him who spoke might go away and do

it; for this is what is proper to creatures, but it is ullseemly

so to think or speak of the \V ord. For the Word of God

is Franler and executes, aud He is the Father's vVill. Hence

it is that divine Scripture says not that some one heard

and answered, what was to be the manner or nature of the

things which He wished made; but God only said, Let it

become, and Scripture adds, And it becamf; for what He

thought good and counselled, that forthwith the Word

began aud put in execution.

143. For when God cOffilnands others, whether th6

Angels, or converses with lVloses, or pron1Ïses AbrahaIn,

then the hearer answers; and the one says, TVhereby shall 1

know? and the other, Commission some one else; and again,

If they ask mp, TVhat is His Name, 'what shall I say to them?

and the Angel said to Zacharias, :Phus saith the Lord; and

he asked the Lord, 0 Lord of hosts, how long wilt Thou not

have mercy on Jerusalem,? and waits to hear good 'Words and

comfortable. For each of these has in it the Mediator 'V ord,

and the 'Visdom of God, which makes known the will of the

Father. But when that VV ord Rinlself works and creates,

then there is no questioning and answering, for the Father

is in Hinl and the 'V ord in the Father; but it suffices to

will, and the work is done; so that the phrase He said is a


AGAINST ARIANISM.


291


token of the will for our sake, and It 'Was so denotes íi


)3


2.

the work which is done through the 1V ord and the

WisdOln, in which \VisdOlll also is the 'ViII of the Father.

And the meaning of God said is explained to us in the TVord,

for, He says, Thou hw;t made all things in Wisdom; and By

the TVord of the Lord were the heavens made; and There is

one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him.

144. It is plain from this that not with us are the Arians

fighting about their heresy; but while they put us forward,

their real fight. is against the Godhead. For if the

voice were ours which says, This is Jfy Son, snlall were our

con1plaint of theIn; but if it is the Father's voice, and the

disciples heard it, and the Son too says of Himself, Before all

the 'mountains He begat ]'fe, are they not fighting against

God, as the giants in

tory, ha ving their tongue, as the

Psalmist says, a sharp sword for impiety? For they neither

have feared the voice of the Father, nor reverenced the

Saviour's words, nor trusted the sacred writers, one of whOln

writes, Who being the Brightness of His glory and the ex 04

pression oj His subsistence, and Ohrist the power oj God and

the wisdom of God; and another says in the Psalm, JVith

Thee is the 'Well oj life, and in Thy Light shall we see Light,

and Thou hast rnade all things in Wisdom; and the Prophets

say, And the Word oj the Lord came to me; and John, In the

beginning was the TV01'd; and Luke, As they delivered tltem

unto us which from the beginning were eye-witnesses and minis-

ters oj the Word; and as Da vid again says, He sent His

Word and healed them. All these passages proscribe on

every side the Arian heresy, and signify the eternity of

the Word, and that He is not foreign but proper to the

}"ather's Substanc

. For when saw anyone light without

radiance? or who dares to say that the impress can be

different from the subsistence? or has not a man lost his

mind himself who even entertains the thought that God

was ever vV ord-less anù WisdOlll-Iess?


v2


.


292 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATRANASIUS


CHAP. XIX.


145. For such illustrations and such ÏInages has

Scripture proposed, that considering the inability of

human nature to cOinprehend God, we Inight be able to form

ideas even from these, however poorly and dÜnly, as far as

is attainable. And as the creation is all-sufficient for the

knowledge of the being of a God and a Providence (for by

the greatnes.

 and beauty of the creatures lyroportioJZally the

lIfaker of them is seen), and we learn frmn them without

asking for voices, but hearing the Scriptures we believe, and

surveying the very order and the harIllony of all things, we

acknowledge that He is l\iaker and Lord and God of aU,

and apprehend His Inarvellous providence and governance

over all things; so in like Inanner about the Son's God-

head, what has been above said suffices, and it becomes

superfluous, or rather it is very mad to doubt about it, or to

ask in an heretical way, Mow can the Son be frmn eternity?

or how can He be from the Father's Substance, yet not a

part? since what is said to be of another, is a part of him;

and what is divided, is not whole. We have already shown

the shallowness of such questions, but the exact considera-

tion of these passages then1selves and the force of these

illustrations will seJ've still further to expose them.

146. POl' we see that a rnan's reason continues, and is froll1

him and belongs to his substance whose reason it is, and does

not admit a before and an after. So again we see that the

radiance from the sun is proper to it, and the sun's sub-

stance is not divided or impaired; but its substance is

whole, and its radiance perfect and whole, yet without im-

pairing the substance of light, but as a true offspring from

it. We understand in like manner that the Son is not

frmll without, but begotten from the Father, and while the

:Father remains whole, the Impress of His Subsistence is

everlasting, and preserves the Father's likeness and un-

varying Image, so that he who sees Him, sees in Him the

Subsistence too of which He is the Impress. And from


AG AINST ARIANISl\t.


293


the action of the Iln p ress we understand the true ED. BEN.

ü.

 32-34.

Godhead of the Subsistence, as the Savióur Him-

self teaches when He says, The Father who dZl'elleth in .1J[e,

He doeth the works which I do; and I and the Father are one,

and I in the Father and the Father in .A/e. Therefore let this

Christ-opposing heresy attempt first to mutilate the examples

found in things created, and say, "Once the sun was with-

out his radiance," or, "Radiance is not proper to the sub-

stance of light," or, "It is indeed proper, but it is a part

of light by mutilation;" and then let it lllutilate Reason,

and pronounce that it is foreign to Mind, or that once it

was not, or that it is not proper to its substance, or that it

is by mutilation a part of mind. And so of His Impress

and the Light and the Power, let it mutilate these as

in the case of Reason and Radiance; and instead let it

imagine what it will. But if such extravagance be impos-

sible even for them. are they not greatly beside themselves,

presulllptuously intruding into what is higher than created

things and their own nature, and essaying impossibi-

lities ?

147. For if, in the case of these created and bodily

things, offsprings are found which are not parts of the sub..

stances from which they are, and subsist without injury

to them, or impairing the substances of their originals, are

they not mad again in seeking and conjecturing parts and

passions in the instance of the immaterial and true God, and

predicating mutilation of Him who is beyond passion and

change, thereby to perplex the ears of the simple and to

pet'vert them from the Truth? for who hears of a son but

conceives of that which belongs to the father's substance?

who heard, in his first catechising, that God has a Son and

has Inade all things by His proper Word, but understood

it in that sense in which we now mean it? who, on the

rise of this odious heresy of the .A.rians, was not at once

startled at what he heard, as strange, and a second sowing


294 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XIX. beside that Word which has been sown from the

beginning? For what is sown in every soul from

the beginning is that God has a Son, the Word, the 1Yisdom,

the Power, that is, His Image and Radiance; from which

it at once foHows that He is always; that He is from the

Father; that He is like Him; that He is the eternal offspring

of His substance; and there is no idea inyolved in these

of creature or work. But when the man who is an enemy,

while men were sleeping, made a second sowing, of "He

is a creature," and "There was once when He was not,"

and "How can it be?" thenceforth the wicked heresy of

Christ's enenlies rose as tares, and forthwith, as bereft of

every orthodox thought, as robbers, they are going about 4 and

venture to say, "How can the Son always exist with the

Father?" for men come of men and are sons, after a time;

and the father is thirty years old when the son begins to

be, being begotten; and in short of every son of man it

is true that he was not before his "generation." And

again they whisper, "How can the Son be Word, or the

Word be God's Image? for the word of men is cOIn posed

of syllables, and only signifies the speaker's will, and then

is over and is lost."

148. They then afresh, as if forgetting the proofs which

have been already urged against them, thus argue. But

the word of truth confutes them as follows:- If they were

disputing concerning any man, the.n let them exercise

reason in this hUlnan way, both concerning his word and

his son; but if concerning God who created man, no longer

let them entertain human thoughts, but others which are


4 1T'EpLepyá

oVTar., Edd. Col. Ben.

and Patav. This seems an error

of the press for 7rEPLÉpxovTaL.

The Latin translat.es, "circumire

cæperunt..' Vid. supr. Nic. p. 29,

Dote, also 7rEPLÉPXOVTaL, infr. Disc:

D. 192, init. p. 3

9, (Orat. ii.

 62,)

ãv(t) lCaì lCáTW 71'EPLtovTEç,chap.30init.


ãV(r) lCal. lCàT(r) 1T'Ep"iíOVTE!; ()pv)\Ov(n,

ApoI. contr. Ar.

 11 init. 7rEpf..-

TpÉxovrn, de Fug.

 2, 1T'EpHþÉpovrn,

infr.

 43, 1T'EpLTpOXá

HV, Theod.

Hist. i.3, p. 730. Vid. a.lso 7rEpurer'if..,

i. Petro v. 8. For 1T'Epf.epyía, &c.,

vid. infr. Disc. ch. 24 and ch. 29.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


2Ð5


above human nature. For such as is the parent, ED. BEN.

ii.

 34-35.

such of necessity is the offspring; and such as is

the Word's Father, such must be also His Word. Now man,

begotten in time, in time also himself begets the child; and

whereas from nothing he came into existence, therefore his

word also is over and continues not. But God is not as man,

as Scripture has said; but is existing and is ever; there-

fore also His Word is existing and is everlastingly with

the Father, as radiance from light. And man's word is

composed of syllables, and neither lives nor operates any

thing, but is only significant of the speaker's intention,

and does but go forth and go by, no more to appear, since

it was not at all before it was spoken; wherefore, I say,

the word of man neither lives nor operates anything, nor

in short is man. And this happens to it, as I said before,

because man who begets it has his nature out of nothing.

But God's Word is not merely pronounced,5 as one lllay

say, nor a sound of accents, nor by His Son is meant His

command; but as radiance from light, so is He perfect

Offspring from perfect. Hence He is God also, as being

God's Image;' for the TVord was God, says Scripture. And

man's words avail not for operation; hence man works not

by means of words but of hauds, for they have existence,

and man's words have no stay. But the Word of God, as

the A postle says, is living and powerful, and sharper than

any two-ed,r;ed sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of

soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a dis-

cerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is

there any creature that is not manifest in His sight; but all

things are naked and opened unto the eyes of HÙn with whom

we have to do. He is then Framer of all, and without Him was

made not one thiny, nor can anything be lnade without Him.

149. Nor Inust we ask why the Word of God is not such


II V id. A pp. 1rporþopucú

'.


296 'fHREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XtX. as onr word, considering God is not such as we,

as has been before said; nor again is it right to

seek how the 'V ord is from God, or how He is God's Radiance,

or how God begets, and what is the manner of His begetting.

For a nlan must be beside himself to venture on such points;

since a thing ineffable and proper to God's nature, and

known to Him alone and to the Son, this he demands to

have explained in words. It is an one as if they sought

where God is, and how God is, and of what nature the

Father is. But as to ask such questions is Ï1npious, and

argues an ignorance of God, so it is not penTIitted to ven-

ture such questions concerning the generation of the Son

of God, nor to measnre God and His Wisdom by our own

nature and infirmity. Nor is a person at liberty on that

account to swerve in his thoughts frOIll the truth, nor, if

anyone is perplexed in such inquiries, ought he to dis-

believe . what is written. For it is better in perplexity to

be silent and believe, than to disbelieve on account. of the

perplexity: for he who is perplexed may in some way

obtain mercy, because, though he has questioned, he has


ret kept quiet; but when a man is led by his perplexity

into forming for himself doctrines which beseem not, and

utters what is unworthy of God, such daring incurs a sen-

tence without mercy. For in such perplexities divine

Scripture is able to afford him smne relief, so as to take

rightly what is written, and to dwell upon a human word

as an Illustration: that, as it is proper to us and is frOlTI us,

and not a work external to us, so also God's ",V ord belongs

to I-lim and is from Him, and is not a thing made; and

yet is not like the word of man, or else we ITIUSt suppose

God to be man.

150. For observe, lnany and various are men's word



which pass away clay by day; because those that COlne

first continue not, but vanish. Now this happens because

their authors are men, and have their fit seasons which


AG AINST ARIANIS

I.


297


P ass away, and motive thoughts which are 'succes- ED. BRN.

ii.

 36-37.

sive; and what strikes them first and second, that

they utter; so that they have many words, and yet after

them all nothing at all remaining; for the speaker ceases,

and his word forthwith perishes. But God's Word is one

and the same, and, as it is written, The Word of God endureth

for ever, not changed, not antecedent or posterior -to Itself,

but existing the san1e always. For it was fitting, whereas

God is One, that His Image should be One also, and His

Word One, and One His Wisdom. Wherefore I am in

wonder how, whereas God is One, these men introduce,

after their private notions, many images and wisdoms and

words, and say that the Father's proper and natural

Word is other than the Son, by whom He even made the

Son, and that He who is really Son IS but notionally called

Word, as vine, and way, and door, and tree of life; and

that He is called 'Visdom also only In name, the proper

and true Wisdom of the }'ather, which co-exists ingenerately

with Hinl, being other than the Son, by which He even

made the Son, and named IIÎ1n 'Visdom as partaking of it.

151. To this they have not only given speech, but .A..rius

has put it into form in his Thalia, and the Sophist Asterius

has written, what we have stated above, as follows: "Blessed

Paul said not that he preached Christ, the Power of God

or the Wisdom of God, but without the addition of the

article, God's Power and God's IVisdom, thus preaching

that the proper power of God HiInself which is natural

to fIim, and co-existent in Him ingenerately, is something

else generative indeed of Christ, and creative of the

whole world, concerning which he teaches in his Epistle

to the Rornans thus,-The invisible things of Him from the

creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the

things that are made, even His eternal Power and Godhead.

For as no one wonld say that the Godhead there mentioned

was ChrIst and not the Father Himself, so, as I think, His


298 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CHAP. XIX. eternal PouJer and Godhead also is not the Only

Begotten Son, but the Father who begat Him."

And he teaches that there is another power and wisdom of

God, manifested through Christ. And shortly after, the

SaIne Asterius says, " However, His eternal power and wisdom,

which Truth argues to be unoriginate and ingenerate, this

certainly must be one and the same. For there are

many wisdoms which are one by one created by Him, of

whom Christ is the first-born and only-begotten; all how-

ever equally depend on their possessor. And all the

powers are rightly called His who created and uses

them: as the Prophet says that the locust, which came

to be a divinely inflicted punishment of human sins, was

called by God Himself not only a power, but a great

power; and blessed David in very many of the Psalms

invites, not the Angels alone, but the Powers to praise

God. "

152. N ow are they not wOl"thy of all hatred for merely

uttering this? for if, as they hold, His Sonship does not

mean that He is begotten of the Father and belongs to

His Substance, then as they call Him Word only because

of things rational, and WisdoTIl because of things gifted

with wisdom, and Power because of things gifted with

power, surely in like manner He must be named Son as

one of a company, because of those who are Inade sons;

and perhaps because there are things existing, He has the

gift of existence, that is in our notions ollly.6 And then

after aU what is He really? for He is none of these Him-

self, if they are but His names: and He has but a sem-

blance of being, and is decorated with these names 7 for

our sakes. But rather this is some devil's recklessness,

or worse, to be willing enough that they should truly

subsist themselves, yet to think that God's 'V ord is but in


8 Vid. Append. 17rívow.


., Vid. òvópara.


AGAINST ARIAN IS

f.


299


name. Is not this portentous, to say that "\Visdom ii


'3


9.

co-exists with the Father, yet to deny that this is

the Christ, but to hold that, whereas there are many created

powers and wisdoms, one of them is the Lord, whom they

go on to compare to the caterpillar and locust? and are they

not unscrupulous, who, when they hear us say that the Word

of God co-exists with the Father, forthwith mutter, "Are

you not speaking of two Ingenerates ?" although in speak-

ing thenlsel ves of "His Ingenerate Wisdom," they do not

see that they have already incurred themselves the charge

which they so rashly urge against us. Moreover, what

folly is there in that thought of theirs, that the Ingenerate

"\Visdom co-existing with God is God Himself! for what

co-exists does not co-exist with itself, but with some one

else, as the Evangelists 'say of the Lord, that He was "in

company with" His disciples; for He was not together with

Himself, but with His disciples ;-unless indeed they would

say that God is of a compound nature, having wisdom a

constituent or complement of His Substance, ingenerate

as well as HÍlnself, which Inoreover they pretend to be

the framer of the world, that so they may deprive the

Son of the framing of it.. For there is nothing they

would not maintain, sooner than hold true doctrine con-

cerning the Lord.

153. For where at all have they found in divine Scrip-

ture, or fronl whom have they heard, that there is another

Word and another \Visdom besides this Son, that they

should frmne to thenlselves such a doctrine? True, indeed

it is written, Are not lJly 'Words like fire and like a hammer

that breaketh the rock in pieces? and in the Proverbs, I will

rnakf known My words 'Unto you; but these are precepts

and comnlands, which God has spoken to the sacred

writers through Iris proper and only true 'V ord, concern-

ing which the l}sahnist said. I have rrfraìned 'my feet from

every evil way, that I m.ll!} keep Thy words. Such words


300 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CnAP. XIX. accordingly the Saviour signifies to be distinct from

Himself, when He says in His own person, The

words which I have sjJ07cen unto you. For certainly such

words as these are not offsprings, nor was it such words

as these that framed the world, nor were they so many

images of the One God, nor so many who have become men for

us, nor as if from lnany such there were one who has become

flesh, as John says; but it .is on the ground of there being one

only vVord of God that those good tidings are heralded by John,

The Word was made flesh, and all tltings were made by Him.

154. \Vherefore of IIim alone, our Lord Jesus Christ,

and of His oneness with the Father, are written and set

forth the testimonies, both of the Father signifying that

the Son is One, and of the sacred writers, who have re-

ceived this doctrine and declare that the Word is One, and

that He is Only- Begotten. And His works also are set

before us; for all things, visible and invisible, have bécn

brought into being through HÜn, and without Hint was

made not one tiling. But concerning some one or anyone

else they have not a thought, not framing to themselvcs

words or wisdoms, as to which neither name nor deed are

signified by Scripture, but are spoken of by these men only.

For it is simply their invention and Christ-opposing sur-

mise, and they wrest the true sense of the name of the

'Vord and the \Visdom, and framing to themselves others,

they deny the true Word of God, and the real and only

\Visdom of the Father, and thereby rival the Manichees.

For they too, when they behold the works of God, deny

Him who is the only and true God, and frame to themselves

anotller, whom they can show neither by his work, nor in

any testimony drawn from the divine oracles. If then

neither in the divine oracles is found another wisdom, sup-

posing this Son is put aside, nor frOll1 the fathers have we heard

of any such, yet they have confessed and written of the

'Yisdom co-existing with the Father ingenerately, proper to


AGAINST ARIANISlil.


SOl


l-Iim, and the Framer of the world, this Framing ED. BEN.

ii.

 39-40.

'\Tisdom must be the Son, who therefore, even ac-

cording to theIn, will be eternally co-existent with the Father.

For He is Framer of all, as it is written, In Wisdom hast

Thou made them all.

155. Nay, Asterius himself,s as if forgetting what he

wrote before, afterwards, in Caiaphas's fashion, involun-

tarily, when urging the Greeks, instead of naming many

wisdoms, or the caterpillar, confesses but one, in these

words: "God the 'V ord is one, but n1any are the things

rational; and one is the substance and nature of 'VisdOlll,

but many are the things wise and beautiful." And soon

afterwards he says again: " 'Vho are they whOln they

honour with the title of God's children? for they will

not say that they too are words, nor maintain that there

are many wisdoms. For it is not possible, whereas the

'Y ord is one, and 'Yisdom has been set forth as one, to

distribute to the multitude of children the Substance of the

'V ord, and to bestow on them the appellation of WisdOln."

It is not then at all wonderful that the Arians should

battle with the truth, when they have collisions with their

own principles and conflict with each other, at one time

saying that there are lnany wisdolns, at another maintain-

ing one; at one time classing \VisdOln with the caterpillar,

at another saying that it co-exists with the Father and is

proper to Hin1; now that the Father alone is ingenerate,

and then again that His vYisdom and His Power are

ingenerate also. And they battle with us for saying that

the \V ord of God is ever, yet forget their own doctrines,

and say themselves that Wisdom co-exists with God in-

generately. Thus they deny the true "TisdOln, and invent

one which exists not, as the Manichees, who make to

themselves another God, after denying HiIn that is.

156. But let the other heresies and the Manichees also

8 Vid. Append. Asterius.


802 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XIX. know that the Father of the Ohrist is One, and

is Lord and l\Iaker of the creation through Jlis

proper ,V ord. And let the Ariomaniacs know in particular,

that the VV ord of God is One, being the only Son proper

and genuine from His Substance, and having with His

Father the oneness of Godhead indivisible, as we have said

many times, being taught it by the Saviour Himself. Since,

were it not so, wherefore through. Him does the Father

create, and in Him reveal HiInself to whOIn He will, and

illumiuate them? or why too in the baptismal consecration

is the Son named together with the Father? For if they

say that the Father is not all-sufficient, then their answer

is impious; but if lIe be, for this alone is lawful to say,

what is the need of the Son whether for framing the

worlds, or for the Holy Bat,h? And what fellowship is there

between creature and Creator? or why is a thing, that is

made, classed with the Maker in the consecration of all of

us? or why, as you hold, is faith in one Creator and in

one creature delivered to us? for if it was that we might

be joined to the Godhead, what need of the creature? but

if that we might be united to the Son, Himself a creature,

superfluous, according to you, is this naming of the SOIl in

Baptism, for God who made Him a Son is able to Inake

us sons also. Besides, if the Son be a creature, the nature

of rational creatures being one, no help will come to

creatures from a creature, since all need that grace which

comes frOln God.

157. We said a few words just now on the fitness that

all things should have been made by Him; but since the

course of the discussion has led us also to Inention IIoly

Baptism, it is necessary to state, as I thiuk and believe,

that the Son is named with the Father, not as if the

Father we

'e not all-sufficient, nor as if without meaning,

and by accident; but, since He is God's Word and proper

'Visdom, and, being IIis Radiance, is ever with the }'ather)


AG AINST ARIANISM.


803


therefore It IS Ün p oHsible , if the Father bestows ED. BEN.

ii.

 41-42.

grace, that He should not give it in the Son, for

the Son is in the Father as the radiance in the light. .E'or,

not as if in need, but as a Father, God in His own Wisdom

hath founded the earth, and 111ade all things in the tVord

which is from Him, and in the Son confirms the Holy Bath.

For where the Father is, there is the Son, and where the

light, there the radiance; and as, what the Father worketh,

He worketh through the Son, and the Lord HÌInself says,

"What I see the Father do, that I do also," so also when

baptism is given, whom the Father baptises, hÍln the Ron

baptises; and whom the Son baptises, he is consecrated in

the Holy Ghost. And again as when the sun shines, one

might say that the radiance illuminates, for the light is

one and indivisible, nor can it be separated off, so where

the Father is or is nanled, there plainly is the Son also;

and is the Father nanled in Baptism? then must the Son

be named with Him. Therefore, when He luade His

promise to the sacred writers, He thus spoke: I and tlte

Father will come and make Our abode in him; and again,

that, as I and :Pltou are One so they may be one in Us. And

the grace given is one, given from the Father in the Son,

as Paul writes in every Epistle, Grace unto you and peace

from God our F(tther (end the Lord Jesus Ghrist. For the

light must be with the ray, and the radiance must be

contemplated together with its own light.

158. 1Vhence the Jews, in that they deny the Son as well

as these men, have not the Father either; for they first left

the Fountain of Wisdom, as Baruch reproaches them, and

then put from them the WisdOln springing frOlIl it, our I.Aord

Jesus Christ, (for Gkrist, says the Apostle, is God's Power

and God's Wisdom,) when they said, JVe have no king but

Gæsar. The Jews then have the penal award of their

denial; for their city as well as their reasoning came to

nought. And these two hazard the fulness of the mystery,


.


304 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XIX. I mean BaptisIll; for if the consecration is given

to us into the NaTlle of Father and Son, and they

do not confess a true Father, because they deny what is fronl

HiIl1 and is like 9 His Substance, and deny also the true Son,

and name for thmllselves another of their own framing as

created out of nothing, is not the rite adlninistered by them

altogether empty and unprofitable, nlaking a show, but in

reality being no help towards piety? For the Arians do

not baptise into Father and Son, but into Creator and

creature, and into Maker and work. And as a creature is

other than the Son, so the Baptism, which is supposed to

be gi ven by them, is other than the truth, though they

pretend to name the Name of the Father and the Son.

because of the words of Scripture. For not he who

simply says, "0 Lord," gives Baptism; but he who with

the Na1ne has also the right faith. On this account

therefore our Saviour also did not simply command to

baptise; but first says, Teach; and then "Baptise into

the Name of Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost;" that

the right faith lnight follow upon learning, and together

with faith might come the consecration of Baptism.

159. There are many other heresies too, which use the

words only, but without orthodoxy (as I have said,) and the

faith which saves, and in consequence the water which they

administer is unprofitable, as deficient in a pious meaning;

so that he who is sprinkled by them is rather polluted by

impiety than redeemed. 10 So Gentiles also, though the

name of God is on their lips, incur the charge of Atheism,

because they know not the real and very God, the Father


9 Viti. supr. note on p. 181.

JO The primá facie sense of TI.

158, 159 is certainly unfavorJr-

able to the validity of heretical

baptism; vid. the subject con-

sidered at length in Note G. on

Tertullian, O. Tr. vol. i. p. 280,

also Coust. Punt. Rom. Ep. p.

227. V OS8. de .Bapt. Disp. 19


and 20. Forbes, Instruct. Theol.

x. 2. 3, and 12. Hooker's Eccl.

Pol. v. 62,

 5-11. On Arian

Baptism in particular vid. Jab-

lonski's Diss. Opusc. t. iv. p. 113.

Vid. for a Catholic explanation,

Nat. Alex. sæc. 3. I. H. Sbalarea

Hapt. Hær.


AGAI:NST ARIANISM.


305


of OUf I

ord Jesus Christ. So

lanichees and ED. BEN.

it.

 42-43.

Phrygians, and the disciples of the Samosatene,

though using the N aInes, nevertheless are heretics, and the

Arians follow in the same course, though they read the

words of Scripture, and use the Names, yet they too mock

those who receive the rite from them, being more impious

than the other heresies, and advancing beyond them, and

making them seem innocent by their own recklessness of

speech. For these other heresies lie against the tll1th in

some certain respect, either erring concerning the Lord's

Body, as if He did not take flesh of Mary, or as if lIe

simply did not die, or become man, but only appeared, and

was not truly, and seemed to have a body when He had not,

and seemed to have the shape of man, as visions in a dream;

but the Arians are openly impious against the Father Him-

self. For hearing from the Scriptures that His Godhead

is represented in the Son as in an image, they blaspheme,

saying that it is a creature, and everywhere concerning

that Image they carry about with them the lllocki ng

word, "He was not," as mud in a wallet,! and spit it forth

as serpents their venom. 2 Then, whereas their doctrine js

nauseous to all men, forthwith, as a support against Its

fall, they prop up the heresy with human patronage, 3 that

the simple, at the sight or even by the fear of this, may

overlook the mischief of their perversity.

160. Right indeed is it to pity their dupes; well is it to

weep over them, for that they sacrifice their true interest

for the present prospect of ease and pleasure, and thereby


1 Instead of bread, a proverb.

2 W!; ÖCPL!; ròv ióv, also Ep. Æg.

19, Rist. Ar. 66. And so Arians

are dogs (with allusion to 2 Pet.

ii. 22), Hist. Ar. 29, lions, Rist.

Ar. 11, wolves,Ap.c.Arian. 49, &c.,

&c. In many of these instances the

allusion is to Scripture. On

names given to heretics in gene-


ral, vid. the Alphabetum bestial.

itatis hæreticæ ex Patrum Sym-

bolis in the Calvinimsus bestiarum

religio attributed to Raynaudus,

and printed in the Apopompæus

of his works. Vid. infr. foot note

p. 379.

S Vid. Use oj Force.


w


306 THHEE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CHAP. XIX. forfeit their future hope. In thinking to be

baptised into the name of one who exists not,

they will receive nothing; and ranking themselves with a

creature, from the creation they will have no help, and be-

lieving in one unlike and foreign to the Father in sub-

stance, to the Father they will not be united, not possessing

His proper Son by nature, who is from Him, who is in the

Father, and in whonl the Father is, as He Himself has s

id;

but being led astray by them, the wretched men henceforth

remain destitute and stripped of the Godhead. For thi8

phantasy of earthly goods will not follow them upon their

death; nor when they see the Lord wholn they have denied,

sitting on His Father's throne, and judging quick and dead,

will they be able to call to their help anyone of those who

have now deceived them; for they shall see them as well

as themselves before the judgment-seat, repenting of their

deeds of sin and impiety.


CHAPTER XX.


Answer to objections from Scripture; sixthly, Proverbs

viii. 22.


161. WE have gone through thus much before the passage

in the Proverbs, resisting the falsehoods to which the hearts

of these men have given birth, in order that they may know

that the Son of God ought not to be called a creature, and

may learn rightly to read what admits in truth of a sound

explanation" For it is written, The Lord created Jle a be-

ginning of His ways, for His works;:> since, however, these

are proverbs, and are expressed in the way of proverbs,

we nlust not expound them nakedly in their first sense,


4 Vid. App. òp9óç.

fj Athanasius follows the Sept.

in translating the Hebrew T1Jp


by ËICTUTE, created, as it is also

translated in Gen. xiv. 19, 22.

Such too is the sense given in the


AGAINST ARIANISl\[.


807


but we must in q uire into the person spoken of

 ED. BEN.

Ii.

 43-44.

and thus religiously put its true sense upon it. For-

what is said in proverbs is not said plainly, but is con-

veyed latently, as the Lord HiInself has taught us in thé

Gospel according to John, saying, These things have I spoken

unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh when I shall no

more speak unto you in proverbs, but openly. Therefore it

is necessary to unfold the sense of what is said, and to

sepk it as something hidden, and not nakedly to expound

as if the meaning were spoken plainly, lest by a false in-

terpretation we wander from the truth.

162. If then wha.t is written be about an Angel, or any

other of things created, as concerning one of us who are mere

works, let created me be said. But if it be the Wisdom of

God, that speaks concerning Itself, in whom all things

which have a being have been framed, what ought we to

understand but that He created means nothing contrary to

"He bcgat"? Nor, as forgetting that it is Creator and

Framer, or ignorant of the difference between the Creator

and the creatures, does It number Itself among the crea-

tures; but it signifies a certain sense, as in proverbs, not

plainly but latent, which It inspired the sacred writers to

use in prophecy, while soon after It doth Itself give the

meaning of He created in other but paralJel expressions,

saying, TVisdom hath made Herself a house. Now it is plain

that our body is "\Visdom's house, which It took on Itself

. to become Inan ; hence the words are parallel to John's, The

}Vord was mode flesh; and by Solomon Wisdmn says of


Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic ver-

sions, and by the great majority

of primit.ive writers. On the

other hanel, Aquila translates

iICTi]craro, and so read Basil, contr.

Eunom. ii.

O, fin. Nyssen CQnt,r.

EUDom. i. p. 3.1. J eroma in 1sa.

xxvi. 13, and the V lligate trans-

lates possedit. nJp is translated

"gotten," Gen. iv. 1. after the


Sept. and Vulg. in the sense of

generation, vid. also Deut. xxxii.

6. The Hebrew sense is appealed

to by Eusebius, Eccl. Theol. iii. 2,

3. Epiphanius, Hær. lxix. 25,

and Jerome in Isa. xxvi. 13.

Vid. Petav. Trin. ii. 1. Huet.

Origen, ii. 21,

3. C. B. Michael.

5n lac. Provo


w2


.


308 THREE DISCOURSES OF A'l'HANASIUS


CHAP. XX. Itself with cautious exactness, not "I am a crea-

ture," but only The Lord hath created },[e a

be!Jinning of His 'ways for His works, yet not" created

Ie

that I might have being," nor again "because I have a

creature's beginning and generation."

163. For in this passage, not as signifying the Substance

of His Godhead, nor His own everlasting and genuine

generation from the Father, has the "\Y ord spoken by

Solomon, but on the other hand signifying His manhood

and economy towards us. And, I repeat, He has not said

"I am a creature," or "I became a creature," but only

He created. For the creatures, having a created substance,

are brought into being and are said to be created, and in

short the creature is created; but this mere term He created

does not necessarily signify the substance or the genera-

tion, but indicates something else as attaching to Him of

whom it speaks, and not simply that He who is said to be

created is at once in His Nature and Substance a creature.

And this difference divine Scripture recognises, saying

concerning the creatures, The earth is full of Thy creation,

and the creation itself groaneth together and travaileth 10-

gether j and in the Apocalypse he says, And the third part

of the creatures in the sea died which had life; as also Paul

says, E'l}ery creature of God is good, and nothing is to be

refused if it be received with thanksgiving; and in the book

of'Visdom it is written, Having furnished man through Thy

wisdom, that he should have dominion OVfff the creatures which

Thou hast made. And these, being creatures, are also

said to be created, as we may further hear from our

Lord, who says, He who created them, made them male and

female; and from Moses in his Song, who writes, Ask now

of the days that are past, which were before thee since the

day that God creatpd man upon the earth, and from the one

side of heaven unto lite other. And Panl, in his Epistle to

the Colossians, JVho is tke Image of the Invisible God, tho


AGAINST ARIANISM.


309


First-born of evM"Y creature, for in Ifim were all ED. BEN.

Ïi.

 45-46.

III in.fJs creatfd that are in heal-'en, and that are on

earth, visible and int'isible, whether they be thrones or

dominions, or principalities or pouJers; all things were

created through Him, and for Him, and He is before all.

164. That to be called creatures, then, and to be created

belongs to things which have by nature a created sub.

stance, these passages are sufficient to remind us, though

Scripture is full of the like; on the other hand, that the

single word He created does not simply denote the sub-

stance and mode of generation, David shows in the Psahn,

This shall be written for another generation, and the peopttl

that is created shall praise the Lord; and again, Create in

me a clean heart, 0 God; and Paul in his Epistle to the

Ephesians says, H(eving abolished the law of commandments

contained in ordinances, for to create in Himself of two one

new man; and again, Put ye on the new man, which (ifter

God is created in righteousness and true holiness. For neither

David spoke of any people being created in substance, nor

prayed to have another heart than that he had, but llleant

renovation according to God and renewal; nor did Paul

signify certain two beings created according to substance in

the Lord, nor again did He counsel us to put on any other

lnan; but he called the life according to virtue the man

(ifler God, and by the crueted in Christ he meant the' two

people who are renewed in Him. Such too is the language

in Jermnias: The Lord hath created a new salvation for a

plctntation, in which salvation men shall walk to and fro; 6

and in thus speaking, he does not mean any substance ot

a creature, but prophesies of the renewal of salvation among

lnen, which has taken place in Christ for us.

165. Such then being the difference between "the crea-


6 Vid. also Expos. F.

 3, where

he notices that this is the version

of the Septuagint, Aquila.'s being

"The Lord hath created a new


thing in the woman. It The author-

ised verSIOn is "a new thing in the

earth, 3. woman shall compass a

man," with the Hebrew, as i::t


310 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANRIUS


CHAP. XX tures" and the mere word He created, if Jon

find anywhere in divine Scripture the Iiord called

"creature," produce it and n1ake the lnost of it; but if it

is nowhere written that He is a creature, only He HÜnself

says about HÏlnself in the Proverbs, The Lord !tath created

i1Ie, shame upon you both on the ground of the broad

distinction aforesaid, and again for that the diction is mani-

festly that of proverbs; and accordingly let He created be

understood, not of His being a creature, but of that human

nature which is attached to Him, for to this belongs creation.

Indeed, is it not evidently unfair in you, when David and

Paul say He created, then indeed to understand not the sub-

stance and the generation, but the renewal; yet, when the

Lord says He created

 to number His substance among the

creatures? and again, when Scripture says, Wisdom hath

built her an house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars, to

understand house allegorically, but yet to take He created as

it stands, and to fasten on it the idea of creature ? and neither

His being Framer of all has had any weight with you, nor

ha ve you feared His being the sole and proper Offspring

of the Father, but recklessly, as if you had enlisted

against Him, do ye fight, and think less of Him than of mel1. 1

166. For the very passage proves that it is only an

invention of your own to call the Lord a creature. For the

Lord, knowing His own Substance to be the Only-begotten

'Visdom and Offspring of the Father, and other than things

made who are by nature creatures, says in love to man,

Thp Lord hath created Jfe a bpginning of His 't()ays, as if to

say, "My Father hath prepared for 1\1"e a body, and has

created 1\fe for men in behalf of their salvation." For,

as when John says, The TJTord 'Was made flesh, we do not


the Vulgate. Athan. has preserved

Aquila's version in three other

places. in Psalm xxx. 12, lix. 5,

lxv. 18.

., Thus with us the Queen is said


to "create" peers; and at Rome

Cardinals of the Pope's making are

called his" creatnræ." "Creatores,"

says Ducange, are those "qui ad

publica munera alios llominant."


AGAINST ARIANISM.


311


conceIve the whole "\V ord IIimself to be flesh but .

D. BEN.

, 11.

 46-41.

to have put on flesh and becOlue man, and on

hearing, Christ hath become a curse for us, and He hath

made Him Sill for us who knew no sin, we do not siniply

conceive this, that whole Christ has becOllle curse and sin,

but that He has taken on Him the curse which lay against

us, (as the A postle has said, Has redeemed us from the curse,

'1nd Juts carried, as Esaias has said, our sins, and as Peter has

wr

tten, has borne them in the body on the wood;) so, if it is

said in the Proverbs He created, we must not conceive that the

whole W ol'd is in nature a creature, but that He put on the

created body and that God created Him for our sakes, prepar-

ing for Him the created body, as it is written, for our sakes, that

in IIiIn we might be capable of being renewed and made gods.

167. 'V hat then has deceived you, 0 senseless, to call the

Creator a creature? or whence did you purchase for you

this new thought, to lnake a brag of? For the Proverbs

say He created, but they call not the Son creature, but

Offspring; and, according to the distinction in Scripture

aforesaid of He created and "creature," they acknowledge,

what is by nature proper to the Son, that He is the Only-

begotten "\Visdom and Framer of the creatures; and when

they say He created, they say it not in respect of His

Substance, but signify that He \Vas becoming a beginning

of many ways; so that He created is in contrast with Off-

spring, and His being the Beginning of ways 8 in contrast with

His being the Only-begotten Word. For if lIe is Offspring,

how call ye Rim creature? for no one says that he begets

what he creates, nor calls his proper offspring creatures;

and again, if He is Only-begotten, how becomes He

beginning of the ways? for of necessity, if He was created a


8 åpX?]V õòwv, and so in Justin's

Tryph. 61. The Bened. Ed. in

loco refers to a similar applica.tion

of the word to our Lord in 'l'atian

contr. Gent. 5, Athenag. Ap. 10,


Iren. Hær. iv. 20. n. 3, Origen in

Joan. tom. i. 39, Tertull. adv.

Prax. 6, and Ambros. de Fid.

iii. 7.


312 THHEE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XX. beginning of all things, He is no longer alone, as

having those who were made after Him.

168. For Reuben, when he becalne a beginning of

children, was not only-begotten, but though in time indeed

first, still in nature and relationship one among those who

caIne after him. Therefore, if the 'tV ord also is a beginning

of the ways, He must be such as the ways are, and the ways

must be such as the Word, though in point of time He

be created first of them. For the beginning too of a

body politic is such as are the other constituent parts of

the body, and the other parts too being joined to it,

lnake the polity whole and one, as the many members of

one body; nor does one part of it make, and another

COlne to be made and is subject to the former, but the

whole state equally has its government and constitution

from its maker. If then the Lord is in such sense created

as a beginning of all things, it would follow that He and

all other things together make up the unity of the creation,

and He neither differs from others, though He became the

beginning of all, nor is He Lord of them, though older in

point of time, for He has one and the same constitution

and ruler as the rest.

169. If then the "\V ord be a mere creature, as you hold,

how can He be created sole and first at all, so as to be

beginning of all? when it is plain frOln what has been said

that among the creatures nothing is of a constant nature and

of prior formation, but each has its generation with all the

rest, however it may excel others in glory. For as to the

separate stars or the great lights, not this appeared first

and that second, but in one day and by the same cominand,

they were all called into being. And such was the gene-

l'ation of the quadrupeds, and of birds, and fishes, and

cattle, and plants; such too was that of the human race

after God's Image; for though Adam only was fornlCd

out of the earth, yet in him were the conditions of the


AGAINST ARIANISM.


313


succession of the whole race. And fron1 the visible ED. BEN.

Ïi.

 48-49.

creation of the world, we clearly discern that llis

invisible things also, being understood by the things that {t're

made, do not stand each by itself; for it was not first one

and then another, but all at once were constituted after their

kind. For the Apostle did not number individually, and

say" whether Angel, or Till'one, or Dominion, or Authority,"

but he mentions together all according to their rank,

'whether Angels, or Archangels, or Principalities: for in this

way is the generation of the creatures. If then, as I have

said, the "\V ord were creature, He must have been brought

into being, not first of them, but together with all the

other Powers, though in glory He excel the rest ever so

much. For so we find it to be in their case, that at once

they came to be, with neither first nor second, and they

differ from each other in glory, some on the right of the

throne, some all round, and some on the left, but one anù

all praising and standing in service before the Lord.

170. Therefore, if the "\V ord is a creature, He would not

be what I hold Him to be, the First and the Son;

this, however, He can be, because, though He is the First,

it is not in point of substance that He is first; otherwise,

then, certainly, as being the Beginning of all, He is simply

in the number of all. But if He is not such a beginning,

then neither is He a creature; and indeed it is very plain

that the "\V ord of God could not have been a beginning at

all towards us, unless He had been more than a beginning

in Himself. 9 As I have said of Him, He differs in substance


9 He says that no one is really

"a beginning" of creatures who

is not a creature; yet such a title

can and does belong to the Word.

It is the name of an office which

the Eternal Word alone can fill.

His Divine Sonship is both su-

perior and necessary to the office

of a "Begiuning." It includes a

start as well as a commencement.


Hence it is both true (as he

says) that "if the Word is a

creature, He is not a beginning; "

and Jet that that "beginnin

,"

which by a condescension He

began, is "in the number of the

creatures. '0 Though He becomes

the "beginning," He is not "a

beginning as to His subðtance."


314 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CHAP. XX. and nature from the creatures, and is other than

they; whereas of the only and True God, He is the

Likeness and Image, and the only one such. Hence He is not

classed with creatures in Scripture, but David rebukes those

who dare even to think of IIÜn as such, saying, Who among

the gods is like 'Unto the Lord? and Who is like unto the Lord

among the sons of God? and Baruch, This is our God, and

another shall not be reckoned with Him. For the One creates,

and the rest are created; and the One is the proper Word

and 'Visdom of the Father's Substance, and through thIS

Word things which came to be, which before existed not,

were made. Your famous assertion then, that the Son is

a creature, is not true, but is your phantasy only; nay,

Solomon convicts you of having these many times misin-

terpreted him. For he has not called Him creature, but

God's Offspring and Wisdoln, saying God in Wisdom hath

established the earth, and Wisdom ltalh built her an house.

171. And the very passage in question proves your im-

piety: f01" it is written, The Lord created jle for the works:

where, observe, He does not say, "in order that I might

make the works," but speaks of them as already made. It

follows, unless His "creation" is an event later than His

original existence, that the works are olde1" than He is, and

He found them in existence on His coming into being, and

that He was also brought into being f01" their sake. And if

so, how is He before all things notwithstanding? and how

were all things made through Him and consist in Him?

for b8hold, you say that the works consisted before Hin1,

for which He is created and sent. But it is not so; perish

the thought! false is the supposition of the heretics. For

the Word of God is not creature, but Creator; and says

in the manner of proverbs, He created Me only when He

put on created flesh.

172. And something besides may be understood from the

passage itself; for, though He be Son and have God for His


AGAINST ARIANISM.


315


Father ( for lIe is His l )ro l :>er Offs p rin g ) Y et here .

D. BEN.

, , 11.

 50-51.

lIe nalnes the Father Lord; not that lIe was ser- --

'\Tant, buL because He took a servant's form. For it became

Him, on the one hand being the Word from the Father, to

call God Father; for this is proper to son towards father;

on the other, having come to finish the work, and taken a

servant's form, it became Him to name the Father Lord.

Aud this difference 1-Ie Himself has taught by an apt dis-

tinction, saying in the Gospels, I thank Thee, 0 Father, and

then, Lord of heaven and earth. For He caBs God His

Father, but of the creatures He names Him Lord; as show-

ing clearly from these words, that, when He. put on the

creature, then it was He called the Father Lord. And in

the prayer of David the Holy Spirit ma.rks the same distinc-

tion, saying in the Psalms, Give Thy strength unto Thy Child,

and help the Son of Thine hand1naid, and, though the word

child sometimes means" servant" as well, it must be recol-

lected that Isaac is in one place called Abraham's child, and

the son of the Shunamite young child. Child then and Son

of Thy handmaid are placed in contrast; the natural and

true child of God with created nature. The one, as Son, has

the Father's mIght, but the rest are in need of salvation.

Reasonably then, we being servants, when He became as

we, He too cans the Father Lord, as we do; and this He

did from love to man, that we too, being servants by

nature, and receiving the Spirit of the Son, Inight have

confidence to call Him by grace Father, who is by nature

our Lord. But as we, in calling the Lord Father, do not

deny that servitude which is by uature, (for we are His

works, and it is He that hath made us, and not we ourselves,)

so when the Son, on taking the servant's form, says,

The Lord hath created Me a beginning of His ways, let them

not deny the eternity of His Godhead, and that in the be-

ginning 'was the Word, and all things were made by Him,

and in Him all things were created.


316 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAPTER XXI.


Answer to objections from Sc'ripture; sixthly, Proverbs

viü. 22.


OUAP. XXI. 173. FOR the passage in the Proverbs, as I have

said before, signifies, not the Substance, but the

manhood of the 'V ord; for if He says that He was created

for the works, He thereby shows His intention of signifying,

not His Substance, but the Economy which took place for

His works, which comes second into existence. For things

which are in formation and creation are n1ade specially that

they may be and may exist, and next they have to do what-

ever the Word bids them, as lnay be seen in the case of

things generally. For Adam was made, not that he lnight

work, but that first he might be man; for it was after

this that he received the command to work. And N oe

came into being, not because of the ark, but that first he

might exist and become a man; for after this he re-

ceived COlnmanùment to prepare the ark. And the like

will be found in every case on inquiring into it;-

thus the great l\Ioses first was born a man, and next was

entrusted with the government of the people. Therefore

here too we 1I1Ust suppose the like; for thou seest, that the

Word is not created in order to be, but I'll the beginning

was the Word, and lIe is afterwards created for the 'works

and the economy towards them. For before the works were

made, the Son was ever, nor was there yet need that lIe

should be created; but when the works were created aud

need arose afterwards of the Economy for their restoration,

then it was that the Word took upon Himself this conde-

scension and assimilation to the works; which He has

shown us by the word He created. And through the

Prophet Esaias, willing to signify the like, He says again:

And now thus saith the Lord, who formed J.lle from tlte womb


AGAINST ARIANISM.


31í


to "h . e His sf!rt'ant, to gather together J arob unto ED. BEN.

i.

 51.

Him and Israel, I shall be brought together and be

glorijied before the Lord.

174. See here too, He is formed not that He may have

being, but in order to gather together the tribes, which

were in existence before He was formed. For as in the

former passage stands He created, so in this He formed;

and as there for the 'works, so here to gather together; so

that in every point of view it appears that He created and

He forntr!d are said after the TVord was, and in order not

to His having existence, but to His undertaking an office.

For, as before that forming the tribes existed, for whose

sake He was formed, so does it appear that the works

existed, for which He was created. And when in the

beginning wa.s the HTord, not yet were the works, as I have

\;aid before; but \vhen the works were made and the need

req nired, then He created was said; and as if some son,

when servants were lost and in the hands of the enemy

by their own carelessness, and need was urgent, were sent

by his father to succour and recover them, and on setting

out were to put over him the like dress with them, and should

fashion himself as they, lest the capturers, recognising 10

him as the master, should take to flight and prevent his

descending to those who were hidden under the earth by

them; and then were anyone to inquire of him why

he did so, were to make answer, "My. father thus formed

and prepared me for his works," while in thus speaking,

he neither implies that he is a servant nor one of the

works, nor speaks of the beginning of his generation, but of

the subsequent charge given him over the works,-in the


10 Vid. the wen-known p?"ssage

in S. Ignatius, ad Eph. 19, where

the Evil Spirit is said to have been

ignorant of the Virginit.y of 1\lary,

and of the Nativitv and the Deat h

of Christ; Orig. Horn. 6, in Luc.


:Basil (if Easil) Horn. in t. 2, App.

p. 598, ed. Ben. and Jerome ip

:Matt. i. 18, who quote it. Vid.

also Leon. Serm. 22, 3. A l1gnst.

Trin. ix. 21. Clement, Ec1og.

Proph. p. 1002, ed. Potter.


318 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XXI same way the Lord also, having put over Him

our flesh, and being found in fashion as a man, if

He were questioned by those who saw Him thus and marvelled,

would say, The Lord created },[e the beginning of His ways

for His works, and He formed 11Ie to gather to,qether Israel.

175. This again the Spirit foretells in the Psalms, saying,

Thou didst set HÙn over the Works of Thine hands; which

elsewhere the Lord signified of Himself, I am set as King

by Him upon His holy hill of Sion. And as, when He.

shone in the body upon Sion, He had not His beginning

of existence or of reign, but being God's "\V ord and ever-

lasting ICing, He vouchsafed that His kingdom should

shine in a hlunan way in Sion, that redeeming them anù

us from the sin which reigned in them, He might bring

them under His Father's ICingdom, so, on being set for

the works, He is not set for things which did not yet exist,

but for such as already were and needed restoration. He

created, then, and He formed and He set, have the salnc

meaning, not denoting. the beginning of His existence,

nor His substance as created, but that beneficent renova-

tion which He brought about for us. Accordingly,

though He thus speaks, yet He also taught us that He

Ilimself existed before this, when He said, Bifore Abraham

was made, I am; and JVhen He prepared the heavens, I was

present with Him; and I was with Him disposing all things.

And as He Himself was before Abraham was made, and

Israel was made after Abraham, and plainly He exists

first and is formed afterwards, and His forming signifies,

not His beginning of being, but His taking manhood,

wherein also He collects together the tribes of Israel; so,

as being always with the Father, He Himself is Framer of

the creation, and lEs works are evidently later than Him-

self, and He created signifies not His beginning of being,

but the economy which took place for the works, which

He fulfilled in the flesh. For it became Hiln, as being


AGAINST ARIÅNIS

I.


319


other than the works , na y rather their Framer, to ED. BEN.

ii.

 52-54.

take upon Himself their renovation, that, whereas

He is created for us, all things may be now created in

Him. For when He said He created, He forthwith added

the reason, nan1Ìng the works, that His creation for the

works nlight signify His becoming man for their renova-

tion.

176. And this is usual with divine Scripture; 1 for when it

signifies the fleshly generation of the Son, it adds also the

cause for. which He became man; but when He speaks or

His servants announce anything of His Godhead, all is said in

simple diction, and with an absolute sense, and without reason

being involved. For He is the Father's Radiance; and as

the Father exists, but not for any reason, neither must we

seek the reason of the existence of that Radiance. Thus

it is written, In the beginning was the JVord, and the Word

was w.ith God, and the Word was God; and the wherefore it

assigns not; but when the TVord was made flesh, then it

adds the reason why, saying, And dwelt among us. And

again the A postle says, Who being in the form of God, but

he has introduced no reason, till, He took on Hint the form

of a servant; for then he continues, He humbled Himself

unto death, even. the death of the cross; for it was for

this that He both became flesh and took the form of a

servant. And the Lord HÜnself has spoken many things

in proverbs; but when giving us notices about Himself,

He has spoken absolutely: I in the Father and the Father

in lrfe, and I and the Father are one, and He that hath seen

Jfe, hath seen the Father, and I am the Light of the world,

and I am the Truth; not setting down in each case the

reason, nor the wherefore, lest He Himself should seem

second to those things for which He was made. Eise, that

rcason, without which He had not been b1'ought into


) mOt; ir:rTì Tÿ Of{q, ypmþV. and infr. iØo{,' ixovl1TJç, anrl Orat. iv.

 27,

p.

51, p. 380. And Tik ypaøik 33 j and elsewhere.


320 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XXI. being, would needs take precedence of Him. Paul,

f or instance, separated as an Apostle for the Gos}Jel,

which the Lord had promised afore by. the Prophet.

, was

thereby made subordinate to the Gospel, of which he was

made minister, and John, being chosen to prepare the Lord's

way, was made subordinate to the Lord; but the Lord,

not being n1ade subordinate to any reason why He should

be 'V ord, save only that He is the Father's Offspring and

Only-begotten Wisdom, when He becomes man, then assigns

the reason, wherefore He is about to bear flesh.

177. For the need of man precedes His becoming man,

apart from which He had not put on flesh. And what

the need was for which He became man, the Lord Him-

ßeIf thus signifies, I came down from heaven not to do Mine

own will, but the will of Him that sent Me. .And this is the

will of Him which hath sent Me, that of all which He hath

given Me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again

at the last day. .And this is the will of My Father, that

everyone which seeth the Son and believeth on Him may have

everlasting life, and I will raise Him up at the last day.

And again: I am come a light into the world, that whosoever

believeth on },[e should not abide in darkness. And again

He says: To this end 'loas I born, and for this cause came

I into the world, that I should bem

 witness unto the

truth. And John has written: For this '/J)as manifested the

Son of God, that He might destroy the works of the devil.

To give a witness then, and for our sakes to undergo

death, to raise man up and undo the works of the devil,

the Saviour came, and this is the reason of His incarnate

presence. For otherwise a resurrection had not been, un-

less there had been death; and how had death been, unless

He had had a 1I1ortal body?

178. This the Apostle, learning from Him, thus sets forth:

Forasmw;h then as the children are partalwrs of flesh and

blood, He aùo Himself l'lkewise took part of the same; that


AGAINST ARIANIS

I.


821


thro ug h death He m(qht destroy him that had the ED. BEN.

Ii.

 54-55.

rower of death, that is, the devil, and dfliver them

who through fear of death were all their life-time subject to

bondage. And, Since by man came death, by man came also

the resurrection of the dead. And again, For what the Law

could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God,

sendÙ

!J His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for

sin condemned sin in the flesh; that the righteousness of the

Law might be fulfillpd in us, who walk not (ifter the flesh but

rifter the Spirit. And John says, For God sent not His Son

into the world to condemn the world, but that the world

through Him might be saved. And again, the Saviour ha.s

spoken in His own person, For judgment am I come into tltis

world, that they who see not might see, and that they which

see might be made blind. Not for Himself then, but for our

salvation, and to abolish death, and to condmnn sin, and to

give sight to the blind, and to raise up all from the dead,

therefore has He come; but if not for Himself He has

come, but for us, by consequence not for Himself but for

us is He created. But if not for Himself is He created, but

for us, then is He not Himself a creature, but, as having

put on our flesh, He uses such language.

179. And that this is the sense of the Scriptures we may

learn from the Apostle, who says in his Epistle to the

Ephesians, Having broken down the middle wall of partition

between us, having abolished in His flesh the enmity, even the

lrlW of commandments contained in ordinances, to create in

Himself of tZl'ain one new man, so making peace. But if in

Him the twain are created, and these are in His body,

reasonably then, bearing the twain in Himself, He is as if

Himself created; for those who were created in IIin1self

hath He made one, and He was in them, as if they. And

thus, the two being created in flinl, lIe may say suitaLly,

'l'he Lord hath created lJfe. For as hy receiving Ollr ill-

fil'mities, He is said to be infirm Hin1self, though not HÜn-

x


.


322 THREE DISCOURSRS OF ATHANASIUS


CHAP. XXI. self infirm (for He is the power of God, and as

He became sin for us and a curse, though not having

sinned Himself, but because He Himself bare our sins and

our curse), so, by creating us in Himself let HiIn say, He

created }'le for the works, though not Himself a creature.

180. For if, as they hold, the Substance of the Word

being of created nature, therefore it is that He says, The Lord

created J.11 e, as being a creature, He was not created for us ;

but if He was not created for us, we are not created in Him;

and, if not created in Him, we have Him not in ourselves but

externally; as, for instance, as receiving instruction from

Him as from a teacher. And, it being so with us, sin has not

lost its reign over the flesh, being inherent and not cast out

of it. But the A postle opposes such a doctrine a little

before when he says, For we are His workmanship, created

in Christ Jesus; and if in Christ we are created, then it

is not He of whom creation is predicated, but of us in Him;

and the words He created are for our sake. For because of

our need, the Word, though being Creator, bore to receive

appellations which are used of things under creation; which

are not proper to Him, as being the Word, but are ours who

are created in Him. And as, since the Father is always, so is

tlis 'V ord, and as being always, says, I was daily His delight,

reJoicing always before Him, and I am in the Father and the

_Father in }'Je; so, when for our need He became man, con-

sistently does He use our language, as ourselves, The Lord

hath created Jle, that by His dwelling in the flesh, sin

might perfectly be expelled from the flesh, and we might

have our mind free. For what ought He, when made man,

to say? "In the beginning I was man?" this were neither

suitable to Him nor true; and as it beseemed not to say

this, so it is natural and proper in the case of man to say,

He created and He made Him.

181. On this account then the reason is added of He created.,

nalnely, the need of the works; and where the reason is


AGAINST ARIANISM.


328


added, that reason happily explains the passage. i1

r5

:i.

Thus here, when He says He created, He sets

down the reason, the wm

k.s; on the other hand, when He

signifies absolutely IIis generation from the Father, straight-

way He adds, Before all the hills He begets Jle; but He does

not add the" wherefore," as in the case of He created, when

He says, for the works, but He says absolutely, He begets

life, as in the passage, In the beginning was the JVord. For,

though no works had been created, still the TVord of God

was, and the JVord was God. And His becoming man would

not have taken place, had not the need of men becoine a

cause. The Son then is not a creature.


CHAPTER XXII.


Answer to objrctions from Scrlpture; sixthly, Proverbs

viii. 22.

182. FOR had He been a creature, He had not said, He

bpgets jle, for the creatures are from without, and arc

works of the Maker; but the Offspring is not from with-

out as a work, but from the Father, and belongs to I-lis

Substance. "\Vherefore they are creatures, but He God's

"\V ord and Only-begotten Son. Certainly,

Ioses did not

say of the creation, "In the beginning He begat;" nor

"In the beginning" was, but In the beginning God crpated

the heaven and the, earth. N or did David say in the Psalm,

Thy hands have" begotten me," but made me and fashioned

me, everywhere applying the word made to the creatures,

but to the Son contrariwise; for He has not said" I made,"

but I begat, and He begets Jle, and J{y heart has burst U'ith

a good Word. And in the instance of the creation, In the

beginning He made; but in the instance of the Son, In the

beginning was the fVord.

183. Ahd there is this difference, that the creatures are

x2


.


324 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


On. XXII. made npon and after the beginning, and have a

beginning of e

istence connected with an interval;

wherefore also what is said of them, In the beginning He madp,

is as much as saying of them, "FrOlTI the beginning He

made : "-as the Lord, knowing w hat He had made, has

taught, when He shaIned the Pharisees, with the words, 11 e

who made them from the beginning, made them ?nale and female;

for from some beginning, when they were not yet, were the

works brought into being and created. This too the floly

Spirit has signified in the Psalms, saying, 'if/Wll, Lord, at

the be!Jinning hast laid the fouJldation of the earth; and again,

o think upon Thy congregation which

l'hou hast purchased

from the beginJ71

ng; now it is plain that what takes place at

the beginning has a beginning of creation, and that fronl

some beginning God purchased His congregation. And

that In the beginning He made, from His saying made, means

"began to make," illoses himself shows by saying, after the

completion of all things, And God blessed the seventh day

and sanctified it, because that in it He had 'rested from all

His work 'Which God began to make. 'rherefore the creatures

began to be ]nade; but the Word of God, not having that

from which a beginning comes, did not begin to be, nor

begin to come to be, but was ever. And the works have their

beginning in their making, and their beginning precedes

their coming to be; but the "\V ord, not being of things

which come to be, rather comes to be Himself the Fralner

of those which have a beginning. And the being of things

made is measured by their becoming, and from some begin-

ning doth God begin to 11lake theJn through the "\V ord,

that it may be known that they were not before their gene-

ration; but the Word has His being in no other begin-

ning-that is, origin-than the Father, whom they allow to

be unorigiuate, so that lIe too exists unoriginately in the

Father, being Iris Offspring, and not Ilis creature. Thus

does divine Scripture recognise the difference between the


AGAINST ARIANISM.


325


Offspring and things made, and show that the ED. BEN.

Ïi.

 .57-.58.

Offspring is a Son, not begun from any beginning,

but eternal; but that the thing made, as an external work

of the 1\Iaker, began to come into being. John therefore,

delivering divine doctrine about the Son, and knowing the

difference of the phrases, said not, " In the beginning became"

or "was made," but In the beginning was the JVord; that

we might understand "Offspring" by was, and not account

of IIirn by intervals, but believe the Son always and eter-

nally to exist.

184. And with these proofs, why, 0 Arians, misunder-

stand the passage in Deuteronomy, and thus venture a fresh

act of impiety against the Lord, saying that "He is a

work," or "creature," or indeed "offspring"? for offspring

and work you take to mean the same thing; but here too yon

shall be shown to be as unlearned as you are i1npious. Your

first passage is this, Is not He thy Fcttlwr that hath bought

thee 'I hath He not made thee and created thee? And shortly

after in the sanIe Song he says, Of the God that begat thee

thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that nou1"ished

thee. Now the nleaning conveyed in these passages is very

rCluarkable; for he says not first He begat, lest that ternl

should be taken as indiscriminate with He made, and these

men should have a pretence for saying ":àfoses tells us

indeed that God said from the beginning, Let us make

man, but he soon after says hiInself, Of the God that begat

tltee thou art unmindful, as if the terms were indifferent;

for offspring and work are the same." Not so, for after the

words bought and 'made, he has added last of all begat, that

the sentence might carry its own interpretation; for in the

word made he accurately denotes what belongs to men by

nature, naInely, to be works and things made; but in the

word begat he shows God's loving-kindness exercised towards

men after He had created them. And since they were un-

grateful upon this, thereupon Moses reproaches theIn, sayiug'


826 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATH.ANASIUS


Cn. XXII. first, Do ye thus requite the Lord' and then adds,

Is not He thy Father that hath bought thee?

Hath He not made thee and created thee? And next he

says, They sac

'ijiced unto devils, not to God, to gods whom

they knew not, to new gods whom your fathers knew not; of the

God that begat thee thou art unmindful. For God not only

created them to be men, but called them to be sons, as

having begotten them. For the term begat is here as else-

where expressive of a son, as He says by the Prophet, I have

begotten sons and exalted them; and generally, when Scripture

wishes to signify a son, it does so, not by the term created,

but undoubtedly by the term begat.

185. And this John seems to say, He gave to them power

to become children of God, even to them that believe on His

Name; which were begotten not of blood, nor of the will of

the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And here too

a cautIous distinction is appositely observed, for first he

Bays become, because they are not called sons by nature but

by adoption; then he says were begotten, because like the

J ew

 they had altogether received the name of son, though

the chosen people, as says the Prophet, rebelled against

their Benefactor. And thIS is God's kindness to man,

that of whom He is

Iaker, of them according to grace

He afterwards becomes Father also; that is, becomes such

when men, His creatures, receive into their hearts, as the

Apostle says, the Spirit

f His Son, crying, Abba, Father.

And these are they who, having received the 'V ord, gained

power from Him to become sons of God; for they could

not become sons, being by nature creatures, otherwise

than by receiving the Spirit of the natural and true Son.

Wherefore, that this might be, The TVord became flesh, that

He might make man capable of godhead.

186. This same meaning may be gained also from the

Prophet

falachi, who says, Hath not One God created us 1

Have we not all one Father? for first he puts oreated, next


AGAINST ARIANISM.


327


Father, to show, as the other writers, that from ii

f5:!::Ô.

the beginning we were creatures by nature, aud

God is our Creator through the 'V ord; but afterwards we

were made sons, and thenceforward God the Creator becomes

our Father also. Therefore, the word Father has a relation

towards a Son, and a Son, and not a creature, is related

towards a Father. This passage also proves, that we

are not sons by nature, but it is the Son who is in us; and

again, that God is not our Father by nature, but of that

Word in us, in whom and because of whom we cry, Abba,

Father. And so in like manner, the Father calls them

sons in whomsoever He sees His own Son, and says, I

vegat; since begetting is significant of a Son, and nmking

is indicative of the works. And thus it is thaCi we are

not begotten first, but made; for it is written, Let Us

make man; but afterwards on receiving the grace of the

Rpirit, we are said thenceforth to be begotten also; just

as the great J\;Ioses in his Song with an apposite rneaning

says first He bought, and aftenvards He begat; lest, hearing

He begat, they might forget that nature of theirs which

was from the beginning; but that they n1Ïght know that

from the beginning they are creatures, but when accord-

ing to grace they are said to be begotten, as sons, still no

less than before are men works accordjng to nature.

187. And that creature and offspring are not the sanIe,

but differ frOlll each other in nature and the signification

of the words, the Lord HiInself shows even in the Proverbs,

for having said, The Lord hath created J.1Ie a beginning oj

His ways; He has added, But before all the hills He begltf

lIfe. If then the Word were by nature and in If is

Substance a creature, and there were no difference between

offspring and creature, He would not have added, He begat

Jle, but had been satisfied with He created, as if that term

implied He begat; but, as the case stands, after saying, He

created ]lle a beginning of His waljS for His works, He has


328 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CII. XXII. added, not sÍInply bet/at JIe, but has connected it

-- with the conjunction But, as guarding thereby

the term created, when lIe says, Bitt brfore all the hills He

begat Me. For begat Me succeeding in such c10se connection

to created ]JIe, makes the lneaning one, and shows that created

is said with an object; not so begat life, which is therefore

prior to created Me. For as, if He had said the reverse, "The

Lord begat Me," and went on, "But before the hiUs He

created Me," created had certainly preceded begat; so having

said first created, and then added But befolre all the hills He

begat life, He necessarily shows that begat preceded created.

For in saying, Before all He begat JIe, He intÌlnates that

He is other than all things; it having been shown to be

true in an earlier place in this book, that no one creature

was made before another, but all things that were made

subsisted at once together upon one and the same com-

maud. Therefore neither do the words which follow

created also follow begat Jle; but in the case of created is

added begin JlÙtg of ways, but of begat i1Ie, He says not,

"He begat Ine as a beginning," but before all He begat

Me. But lIe who is before all is not a beginning of all,

but is other than all; but if other than all, (in which

" all" the beginning of all is included,) it follows that He

is other tban the creatures; and it becomes a clear point,

that the Word, being other than all things and before aU,

afterwards is created a beginning of the ways for works,

because He becmne luan, that, as the Apostle has

aid, He

who is the Beginning and First-born from tlte dead, in all

things might have the pre-eminence.

188. Such then being the difference between created and

begat life, and between beginning of 'ways and before all,

God, being Creator fir

t, next, as has been said, becomes

Father of men, because of His 'V ord dwelling in

them. But in the case of the Word the reverse; for

God, being His Father by nature, becomes afterwards both


AGAINST AIUANISM.


829


Ilis Crf'ator and

Iaker, when the 'V ord puts on iI

f60

:i.

that flesh which was created and nlade, aud becomes --

man. :h"'or, as nlell, receiving the Spirit of the Son, become

children through Him, so the 'V ord of God, when He

HiInself puts on the flesh of man, then is said both to be

created and to have been made. If then we are by nature

sons, then is He by nature creature and work; but if we

becon1e sons by adoption and grace, then has the 'V ord also,

when in grace towards us He became man, said, The Lord

hath created J1 e.

189. And now I come to that further truth which is implied

in His being "beginning of ways." When He put on a

created nature and became like us in body, reasonably was

He therefore called both our Brother and First-born. For

though it was after us that He was made man for us, and

our brother by similitude of body, still He is therefore

called and is the First-born of us, because, all men being

lost according to the transgression of Adam, His flesh

before all others was saved and liberated, as being the

"V\r ord's Body; and henceforth we, becoming incorporate

with It, are saved after Its pattern. For in It the I

ord

becomes our guide to the ICingdom of Heaven and to His

own Father, saying, I am the Way and the Door, and

"through Me all must enter." Whence also is He said

to be First-born from the dead, not that He died before us,

for we had died first; but because having undergone death

for us and abolished it, He was the first to rise, as man,

for our sakes raising His own Body. Henceforth He

having risen, we too, from HiIn, and because of lIÜn, rise

in due course from the dead.

1

O. But if He is also called First-born of the creation,

still this is not as if He were levelled to the creatures, and

only first of them in point of time, (for how should that

be since He is Only-begotten?) but it is because of .the

Word's condescension to the creatures, according to which


330 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Cn. XXII. He hath become the Brother of many. For thû

term Only-begotten is used where there are no

brethren, but First-born is used because of brethren. Ac-

cordingly it is nowhere written of Hiln in the Scriptures,

"the first-born of God," any more than "the creature of

God;" but it is by Only-begotten and Son and TVord and

TVisdom, that He is related and belongs to the Father. Thus,

TVe have seen His ,qlory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of

the Father; and God sent His Only-bpgotten Son; and 0

Lord, Thy }Vord endureth for ever; and In the beginning was

the Word, and the Word was with God; and Christ the

Power of God and the Wisdom of God; and This is

J[ y beloved Son; and Thou art the Chn;st, the Son of

the Lit'ing God. But First-born, if used of Him, implied the

descent to the creation; for of it has He been called first-born ;

and He created Me implies the Son's grace towards the works,

for for them is He created. If then He is Only-begotten,

as indeed He is, First-born needs some explanation; but if

lIe be literaUy First-born, then He is not Only-begotten.

For the same cannot be both Only-begotten and First-

Lorn, except In different relations ;-that is, Only-begotten,

because of His generation from the Father, as has been

said; and First-ùorn, because of His condescension to the

creation and the brotherhood which He has nlade with

nlany. Certainly, those two terms being inconsistent with

each other, one should say that the attribute of ùeing Only-

ùegotten has justly the preference in the instance of the

Word, in that there is no other Word, or other 'VisdOln,

but He alone is very Son of the Father.

191. l\Ioreover, as was before said, not under circunl-

stances which account for it, but absolutely, it is said of

Him, the Only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the

Father; but the word First-born has the creation as a

circumstance to account for it, for Paul proceeds to say,

For in Him all thin!/s were created. But if aU the creatures


AGAINST ARIANISM.


331


were created in HiIn, He is other than the creatures, ED. BEN.

ii.

 62- 63.

and is not a creature, but the Creator of the crea-

tures. Not then because lie was frOln the Father was He

called First-born, but hecause in Him the creation came into

being; and as before the creation He was the Son, through

whom was the creation, so also before He was called the

First-born of the whole creation not the less was the Word

Himself with God and the Word was God.

192. Yet they go about saying, "If He is First-born of

all creation, it is plain that He too is one of the creation."

Men without understanding! if He is siInply First-born of

tlte whole creation, as we say, then He is, by the contrast in-

volved in the word "whole," other than the whole creation;

for He says not "He is First-born by comparison as being

above the rest of the creatures, and thereby among them

and one of them," but it is written, of the whole creation,

in order that IIe may appear other than the creation itself. 2

Reuben, for instance, is not said to be first-born of all the

children of Jacob, which would imply his being external

to them, but of Jacob hiInself and his brethren; lest he

should be thought to be sonle other beside the children of

Jacob. If then the Word also were one of the creatures,

Scripture would have said that He was First-born of other


:l Here the Greek idiom must

be kept in view, which differs

from the English. As the English

comparative, so the Greek super-

lative implies or admits the exclu-

sion of the subject of which it is

used, from the things with which

it is contrasted. Thus" Solomon

is wiser than the heathen," im-

plies of course that he was not a

heathen: but the Greeks can

say, "Solomon is wisest of the

heathen," or according to Milton's

imitation, "the fairest of her

daughters Eve." Vide as regards

the very word 7rPWTOt;;, John i. 15;

and supr. p. 288, [ii.

 30, ed. Ben.]


also 1rXf.íUT1}V 11 Ëp1rpou6f.v i

ovuíav

3 Machab. vii. :H. As in the

comparative, to obviate this ex-

clusion, we put in the word other

(ante alios immanior omnes). so

too in the Greek superlativp, " So-

crates is wisest of all the heathen."

Athanasi us then says in this

passage, that "first-born of

creatures" implies that our Lord

was not a creature, whereas it is

not said of Him "first-born of

brethren," lest He should be ex-

cluded from men, but "first-born

among brethren," where among

is equivalent to other.


332 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANARIUS


CR. XXII. crratnrcs; as speaking of His manhood, the Apostle

says among many brPlhren. But now the sacred

writers saying that He is Ftrst-vorn of the whole cTeation, the

Son of God is plainly shown to be other than the whole creation

and not a creature. For if He is a creature, He will be

First-born of Himself. How then is it possible for Hinl to

be before and after Himself? next, if He is a creature, and

the whole creation through Him came into existence, and in

Him consists, how can He both create the creation and be

one of the things which are in Him created?

193. Such a notion being simply extravagant, it is

certain that He is First-born among many brethren in His

relation to the flesh, and First-born from the dead, because

the resurrection of the dead is from Him and after Him;

and First-born of the whole creation, because of the Father's

love to man, which brought it to pass that in His

V ord

not only all thÙ

gs consist, but that the creation itself, of

whieh the Apostle speaks, waiting for the manifestation of

tlte sons of God, shall be delÙ'ered one time from the bondage

of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

Of this creation thus set free, the Lord will be First-born,

both of it and of all those who become its children, that

by H is being named first, those that come after Him may

abide, as all depending on the Word as a beginning.

194. And I think that these Inen themselves will be

shamed by this consideration: if the case stands not as we

have said, but as they would rule it, viz., that He is First-born

of the whole creation as being in His substance a creature

among creatures, let them reflect that they will be con-

ceiving of Him as brother and fellow of the things without

reason and life. For of the whole creation these also are

IJarts; and the .First-born, in the sens

 they wish to take

the word, must be first indeed in point of time, but only in

this respect, being in kind and sin1ilitude the sanle with all.

How then can they say this without exceeding all rneasures


AGAINST ARIANISM.


838


of im p iet y ? For it is evident to all, that neither ED. BEN.

ii.

 63-64.

for HiInself, as if a creature, nor as having any

connection according to substance with the whole creation,

has He been called First-born of it; but because the Word,

when at the beginning He framed the creatures, condescended

to things which were to have a beginning, or to be made,

that it might be possible for then1 to come into being. 3

For they could not have endured His absolute nature and

His splendonr from the Father, unless, condescending by the

Father's love for man, He had supported them and taken

hold of them and brought them into substance; and next,

because, by this condescension of the Word, the creation too

is Inade a son through Him, that lIe might be in all respects

First-born of it, as has been said, both in creating the world,

and also in being brought into it for the sake of all therein.

For so it is written, lYhen He bringeth the First-born into

the world, He saith, Let all the Angels of God UJorship Him.

Let Christ's eneIuies hear and tear themselves in pieces

because it is His cOIning into the world which gives lIiln

the nalne of .Pirst-born of all; and thus the Son is the

Father's Only-begotten, becausc He alone is frOln the

:Father, and He is the Fir:it-born of creation, because of

this adoption in Hinl of all creatures as sons. 4

195. And as He is First-born aIl10ng brcthrcn and rose

from the dead, the fir.st fruits of them that slept; so, since

it became Him in all thÙzgs to be first, therefore He is

created a Beginning of 'Ways, that we, setting out thereon

and entering through Him who says, I am the JVay and


3 He does not here say with

Asterius that God couid not

create man immediately, for the

\Vord is God, but that He did not

create him without at the same

time infusing a grace or presence

from Himself into his creature

so as to enablo it to en\.luro His

external plastic hand; in other

words, that it was created in 1lim,


not as something- external to Him

(in spite of the distinction between

òLà and iv, in lllud S1tper omnia).

4 Only-begotten, when predi-

eated of the Son, is a word of

nature, and First-born a term of

office. Hence the former was

His from eternity, t.he Jatter only

from cl"eation.


334 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CH. XXII. the Door, and partaking of the knowledge of the

Father, may also hear the words, Blessed are the

undo/f,led in the TJTay, and Blessed are the pure in heart, for

they shall see God. And He is Beginning oj ways, because

when the first way, which was through Adan1, was lost, and

in place of paradise we deviated into death, and heard the

word, Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return, there-

fore the Word of God, who loves man, puts on Him created

flesh at the Father's will, that whereas the first man had

Inade it dead through the transgression, lIe Hirnse1f n1Ïght

quicken it in the blood of His proper Body, and might open

for us a 'll'ay new and lit'ing, as the Apostle says, through

the

'eil, that is to say, His flesh. This he signifies else-

where thus, Wherefore if any man be in Ohrist, he is a

new creation; old things are passed away, behold, all things

are become new. But if a new creation has taken place,

some one must be first of this creation; mere man then,

made of earth only, such as we are become from the

transgression, could not be he. For in the first crea-

tion men had become unfaithful, and through them that

first creation had been lost; and there was need of some

one else to renew the first, and to preserve what was

renewed.

196. Therefore from love to man none other than the

Lord, the beginnin.q of the new creation, is created as the

TVay, and consistently says, The Lor"d created J[e a beginning

of ways for His works; that man might no longer pass his

lifetime according to that first creation, but, there being a

beginning of a new creation, and in it the Christ a bp-

ginning of ways, we might fonow Him henceforth, while lIe

says to us, I am the "fVay: as the blessed Apostle teaches

in his Epistle to the Colossians, saying, He is the Head of

the body, the Ohurrh, who is the Beginning, the First-born

rorn the dead, that in all things He might have the JJre-

eminence. For if, as has been said, because of the resur-


AGAINST ARIANISM.


835


rljction from the dead, He is called a beginning, ED. BEN.

ii.

 64-66.

and then a resurrection took place when He, bearing

our flesh, had given Himself to death for us, it is evident

tha.t His words, He created jJ[e a beginning of ways, is in-

dicative not of His substance, but of His bodily presence.

For, as death belonged to the body, so in like manner to

the bodily presence are the words proper, The Lord created lIe

a beginning of His ways. For since the Saviour was thus

created according to the flesh, and had becOlne a beginning

of things to be. new created, and possessed the first fruits of

our race, viz., that human fe3h which He took to Himself,

therefore aftel

 Him, as is fit, is created also the people to

come, David saying, This shall be written for another genera-

tion, and the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord.

And again in the twenty-first Psahn, They shall come, and

the heavens shall declare His righteousness, unto a people that

shall be born whom the Lord hath made. For we shall no

more hear, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt

surely die; but, Where I am, there ye shall be also; so that

we may say, JVe are His workmanship, created unto good

works.

197. And again, since God's work, that is, man, though

created perfect, has become wanting through the trans-

gression, and dead in sin, and it was unbeco ning that the

work of God should remain imperfect, (hence all the

saints beseech concerning this, for instance in the hun-

dred and thirty-seventh Psalm, saying, The Lord shall make

good His loving-kindness towards me; despise not then the

works of Thine own hands;) therefore the perfect Word of

God puts around Him an in1perfect body, and is said to

be created for the works; that, paying thè debt in our

stead, He might, by Himself, perfect what was wanting to

man. Now immortality was wanting to him, and the way

to paradise. 'This then is what our Savionr says, I hare

vlorified Thee on the earth, I have perfected the work which


336 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


CH. xxn. Tholl gavest Jle to do; and again, The 1Cork.c; which

--- the Father hath given Jle to peJfornz, the same works

that I do, bear witness of JIe; but the works He here says

that the Father had given Him to perfect, are those for

which fIe is created, saying in the Proverbs, The Lord hath

created jJfe a beginning of His ways, for His works; for it

is all one to say, The Father hath given .1}[e the works, and

The Lord hath created jJ[e for the works.

198. When then received He the works to perfect, 0

God's enemies? for this also will throw light on He

crfated. If ye say, "..A..t the beginning when He brought

them into being out of what was not," this is not true;

for they were not yet made; whereas He appears to speak

as undertaking what was already in being. Nor is it pious

in answer to refer to a time previous to the 1V ord's

becoming flesh, lest fIis cOIning should thereupon seem

superfluous, since for the sake of these works that coming

took place. Therefore it remains for us to say that when

He became luan, then He took the works. For then He

perfected them, by healing our wounds and vouchsafing to

us the resurrection frOln the dead. But if, when the

'V ord becåme flesh, then were committed to Him the works,

plainly when He became man, then also is He created for the

works. Not of IIis substance then is this phrase " He created"

indicative, as has many times been said, but of His bodily

coming into being. For then, because God's works were

become - imperfect and lnntilatcd frOlll the transgression, He

is said in re

pect to the body to be created; that by per-

fecting them and making them whole, He might present

the Church unto the Father, as the A postle says, not having

spot or wrinkle or any such t"ing, but holy and 'If'ithout blemish.

l\Iankind then is perfected in Him and restored, as it was

made at the beginning, nay, with greater g"l"ètce. For, on

rising frOlll the dead, we shall no longer fear death, but

shall ever reign in Christ in the heavens.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


887


199. And this has heen done, since the proper iE

.6:


8.

'V ord of Gorl Himself, who is frOln the Father, has

pnt on the flesh, and become man. For if, heing a creature,

lIe had become man, man had reluained just what he was,

not joined to God; for how had a work been joined to the

Creator by a work? or what succour had come from like to

like, w hen one as well as the other needed it? Aud how,

were the Word a creature, had He power to undo God's

sentence, and to remit sin, whereas it is written in the

Prophets that this is God's doing? For who is a God like

unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by transgres-

sion? For whereas, God having said, Dust thou art, and unto

dust shalt thou return, men have becOlne mortal, how then

could things which were created undo sin? but the Lord is

He who has undone it, as He says HÏIllself, Unless the Son

shall make you free; and the Son, who made free, bas shown

in truth that He is no creature, nor one of things brought

into being, but the proper \V ord and Image of the Father's

Suhstance, who at the beginning sentenced, and alone re-

n1Ïtteth sins. For since by the Word it was said, Dust thou

art, and unto dust thou shalt return, suitably it is through

the 'V ord HÏlllself and in Him that the freedom and the

undoing of the condemnation has come to pass.

200. "Yet," they say, "supposing the Saviour were a

creature, God surely by speaking the word only could

undo the curse." And so another will tell them in like

manner, "Without His incarnation a

 all, God was able just

to speak and undo the curse;" but we must consider what

was expedient for mankind, and not what silnply is possible

with God. He could have destroyed, before the ark of

Noah, the then transgressors; but lIe did it after the ark.

He could too, without Moses, have spoken the word only,

and have brought the people out of Egypt; but it profited

to do it through Moses. And God was able without the

judges to save His people; but it wa

 profitable for the

y


.


838 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


(JH. XXII. people that for a season judges should be raised

up to theln. The Saviour too 111Ìght have COIne

aInollg us frOin the beginning, or on Ilis conling Inight not

have been delivered to Pilate; but lIe came at the fulJless

of the ages, and only when sought for said, I a'Jn He. For

what He does, that is profitable for men, and was not fitting

in any other way; and what is profitable and fitting, for

that He provides. Accordingly He came, not that He might.

be ministered unto, but that He might 'minister, and might

work our salvation. Certainly He was able to speak the

Law from heaven, but He saw that it was expedient to men

for Him to speak from Sinai; and this He did, that it

might be possible for l\'Ioses to go up, and for them, hearing

the word near them, the rather to believe.

ioreover, with

what good reason He acted may be seen thus: if God had

simply spoken, because that was in His power, and so the

curse had been undone, the power had been shown of Him

who gave the word, but man, though restored to what

Adam was before the transgression, had received grace

only from without,5 and not had it united to his body;

such would he have been, but, so restored to Paradise,

perhaps he had becOlne worse, because he had learned to

transgress. Such then being his condition, had he again

been seduced by the serpent, there had been fresh need for

God to give command and undo the curse; and thus the

need had become interminable, and men had reInained

under guilt not less than before, as being enslaved to sin;

and ever sinning, would have ever nceùed one to pardon

them, and had never become free, being in flesh thelnsel ves,

and ever worsted by the Law because of the infirmity of

the flesh.

201. Again, if the Son were a creature, man had remained

mortal as before, not being joined to God; for a creature


5 ViJ. Append. Gracø.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


839


would not have joined creatures to God, as itself ED. BEN.

ii.

 68-69.

seeking what would join theln; nor could any

portion of the creation have been the creation's salvation, as

needing salvation itself. To provide against this also, He

sends His own Son, who becOlnes Son of Man by taking

created flesh; that, since all men were under sentence of

death, He, being other than them an, might Himself for all

offer to death His own body; and that henceforth, all having

died in Him, the word of that sentence might be accomplished,

(for all died in Christ,) and that all through Him might there-

upon become free frOln sin and from the curse which came

upon sin, and might truly abide for ever, risen from the

dead and clothed in immortality and incorruption. For,

the Word being clothed in the flesh, as has many times

been explained, every wound which the serpent had in-

flicted was absolutely staunched; and whatever evil sprang

from the motions of the flesh henceforth was cut away, and

with these death also was abolished, the companion of sin,

as the Lord Himself says, The prince of this world cometh, and

findeth nothing in Me; and For this end was He 'ìnanifested,

as John has written, that He might destroy the works of tlte

devil. And these being destroyed from out the flesh, we

all were thus liberated as regards our relationship with

that flesh, and henceforward are joined, even we, to the

Word. And being joined to God, no longer have we earth

for our home; but, as He Himself has said, where He is

there shall we be also; and henceforward we shall fear no

longer the serpent, for he was brought to nought when he

was assailed by the Saviour in the flesh, and heard Him

Ray, Get thee bekind life, Satan, and thus he is cast out of

paradise into the eternal fire. Nor shall we have to watch

against woman 6 seducing us, for in tlte resurrection they

neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as lIte


I i. e., as in the instauce of Eve.


v2


340 THREE DISCOUR

ES OF ATHANA

IU8


Ca. XXII. An!Jels; anù in Christ Jesus it shaH be a nPllJ

creation, and neither rnale nor female, but all and

in all Christ; and where Christ is, what fear, what danger

can still happen? But this would not have COlne to pass

had the Word been a creature; for with a creature the devil,

hinlself a creature, would have ever continued the battlt

, and

man, being between the two, had been ever in peril of death,

not having one in whom and through whOln he Inight be

joined to God and delivered frOln all fear.

202. 'Vhellce truth shows us that the Word is not of the

things which came into being, but rather is HiIuself their

Framer. For therefore did He assume the body created

and hUlnan, that having renewed it as its Framer, He

nlÏght deify it in Himself, and thus might introduce

us all into the kingdom of heaven after His likeness.

For man had not been made god anew if joined to a

creature, nor unless the Son were very God; nor had man

stood in the Father's presence unless it had been His

natural and true Word who stood clad in that body which

belonged to man. And, as we had not been freed from sin

aud the curse, had it not been human flesh in its nature

which the 'V ord put on, (for we should have had nothing

cornlnon with what was foreign,) so also man had not been

made god, unless the Word who became man had in His

nature been from the Father and true and proper to

Him. For therefore was the union such, in order that He

might unite what is man by nature to Him who is in the

nature of the Godhead, and man's salvation and deification

might be sure. Therefore, let those who deny that the

Son is from the Father by nature and proper to His Sub-

stance, deny also that He took true human flesh of Mary

Ever-Virgin; for in neither case had it been of profit to

us men, whether the 'V ord were not true and naturally

Son of God, or the flesh not true which He assumed. But

surely lIe took true fle8h, though V oJentinus rave; and


AGAINST ARIANIf3M.


341


the Word was by nature Very God, though Ario- i


.6:

:i.

maniacs rave; and in that flesh He has become the

beginning of our new creation, He being created man for our

sake, and having made for us that new way, as has been said.

203. The Word then is neither creature nor work; for

"creature," "thing made," "work," are all one; and were

He creature and thing made, He would also be a work.

Accordingly He has not said, "He created

ie as a work,"

nor" He made me with the works," lest He should appear to

be in nature and substance a creature; nor, "He created

Me to make works," lest on the other hand, according to

the perverseness of the impious, He should be accflunted

as an instrument made for our sake. N or again has He

declared, "He created Me before the works," lest, as He

really is before all, as an Offspring, so, if created also

before the works, He should give one and the same sense to

" Offspring" and to He created. But He has said with exact

discrill1Ìnation, unto or into the works; as if to say, "The

Father has made

/Ie into flesh, that I might þe man,"

-which again shows that He is not a work, but an offspring,

for as He who comes into a house, is not part of the

house, but is other than the house, so He who is created

unto the works, must be by nature distinct from the works.

204. But if otherwise, as you hold, 0 Arians, the Word

of God be a work, by what Hand and Wisdom did He

Himself come into being? for all things that came to be,

came by the Hand and 1Yisdom of God, who Himself says,

lily Hand hath made all these things; and David says in the

Psalm, And Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foun-

dations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy

Hands; and again, in the hundred and forty-second Psalm,

I do remember tbe time past, I muse upon all Thy 'Works,

yea I exercise myself in the 'works of Thy Hands. There-

fore, if by the I-IalHI of God the works are wrought, and

it is written that all things 'll'ere made tltro'l(qh the Word,


342 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANAS IUS


Cu. XXII. and 'Without Him was made not one thing, and

again, One Lord Jesus, through whom are all things,

and in Hirn all things consist, it is very plain that the Son

cannot be a work, but He is the Hand of God and the

"\Visdom. This knowing, the martyrs in Babylon, Ananias,

Azarias, and J\lisael, arraign the Arian impiety. For when

they say, 0 all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, they

recount things in heaven, things on earth, and the whole

creation, as works; but the Son they name not. For they

say not, "Bless, 0 Word, and praise, 0 Wisdom;" in order

to show that all other things are both engaged in praise

and are works; but the "\V ord is not a work nor of those

that praise, but is praised with the Father and worshipped

and confessed as God, being His "\V ord and Wisdom, and of

the works the Framer.

205. This too the Spirit has declared in the Psalms with

a most apposite distinction, the lVord of the Lord is true,

and all His works are faithful; as in another Psalm too He

says, 0 Lord, how great are Thy works! in Wisdom, host


l.'hou made them all. But if the Word were a work, then

certainly He as others had been made in "\Visdom; nor

would Scripture have distinguished Him frOln the works,

nor, while it named the one as works, would have revealed

Him as Word and proper 'Visdom of God. But, as it is,

distinguishing Him from the works, Scripture shows that

WisdOln is Frainer of the works, and not a work. This

distinction Paul also observes, writing to the Hebrews,

The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than

any two-edged sword, reaching even to the dividing of soul and

spirit, joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and

intents of the heart, neither is there any creation hidden before

Him, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of Him

with whom is our account. For behold He caUs things which

can1C into being "creatioll ;" but the Son he recogllises as

the VY ord of God, as if lIe were other than the creatures.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


348


..A.nd again saving, All things are naked and oprn to ED. BEN.

J

 Ïi.

 71-72.

the eyes of Him with whom is our account, He sig-

nifies that He is other than all of them. For hence it is

that it is He that is judge, but each of all created thÏ11gS

is hound to give account to Him. And so also, whereas the

whole creation is groaning together with us in order to be

set free from the bondage of corruption, the Son is thereby

shown to be other than the creatures. For if He were

creature, He too would be one of those who groan, and would

need one who should bring adoption and deliverance to Him-

self as wen as others. And if the whole creation groans

together, for the sake of freedom fronl the bondage of cor-

l'uption, therefore the Son is not of those that groan nor of

those who need freedOIn, but He it is who gives sonship and

freedom to all, saying to the Jews of His time, The servant

remains not in the house for ever, but the Son remaineth for

ever; if then the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free

indeed; from these considerations also it is clearer than the

light, that the Word of God is not a creature but true Son,

and by nature genuine, of the Father. Concerning then

The Lord hath created ]lIe a beginning of the ways, this,

though in few words, is sufficient, as J think, to afford

matter to the learned to frame more ample refutations of

the Arian heresy.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Answer to objecUons from 8criptvre; sixthly, the context nf

Proverbs viii. 22, viz., 22-30.

206. RUT since the here

;

s, reading the following verse,

take a perverse view of it as well as of the preceding, hecause

it is written, lIe founded .J.11e before the world, umuely, that

this is said of the divlllilJy of the \V or<1 and not of IIis


344 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Cn. XXIII. incarnate Presence, it is necessary, by explaining

this verse also, to show their error.

207. It is written, TIM Lord in TVisdom hath founded the

earth; if then by 1Visdom the earth is founded, how can

He who founds be founded? nay, this too is said after the

nlanner of proverbs, and we must in like manner investi-

gate its sense. The question is, "He founded Me" to be

what? Does he mean "He founded Me" to be Son? or

"founded l\fe" to become beginning and foundation of our

new creation and renewal? This is the point. Let it

be observed then, that here as before, He says not, "Be-

fore the world He hath made l\Ie Word or Son," lest there

should be a making and a beginning. For this, as before,

we must seek before all things, whether He is Son, and on

this point specially search the Scriptures; for this it was,

when the Apostles were questioned, that Peter answered,

saying, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God.

This also the father of the Arian heresy asked, as one of

his first questions: If 1'hou be the Son of God; for he knew

that this is the truth and the sovereign princi pIe of our

faith; and that, if He were the Son, the tyranny of the

devil would have its end; but if He were a creature, He

too was no n10re than one of those descended from that

Adam whom he deceived, and he might make himself easy.

For the same reason the Jews of the day were angered,

because the Lord said that He was Son of God, and that

God was IIis proper Father. For had He called Him-

se]f one of the creatures, or said, "I am a work," they had

not been startled at the inte11igence, nor thought such

words blasphemy, knowing, as they did, that Angels too

had COlne among their fathers; but since lIe called IIim-

se]f Son, they perceived that such was not the note of a

creature, but of Godhead and of the Father's nature. The

Arians then ought, even in imitation of their own father

the devil, to take some special pains on this point; aud if


AGAINST ARIANISM.


845


lIe said, " He founded

Ie to be Word or Son," then i


. 72

f4.

to think as they do; but if He has not so spoken,

not to invent for themselves what is not to be found.

208. For He says not, "Before the world He founded Me

:),s 1V ord or Son," but simply, He founded l1fe, to show

again, as I have said, that not for His own sake but for

those who are built upon HÜn does He here also speak,

after the way of proverbs. For this knowing, the Apostle

also writes, Other foundation can no man lay than that is

laid, which is Jesus Christ; but let evm"y man take heed hoUJ

he buildeth thereu)Jon. And it must be that the foundation

should be such as the things built on it, that they may

adlnit of being well compacted together. Being then the

'r ord, He has not, as far as Word, any beings such as

I-1imself, who may be compacted with HÜn; for He is

Only-begotten; but having become man, He has the like

of man, of those namely the likeness of whose flesh He

has put on. Therefore it is according to His manhood that

lIe is founded, that we, as precious stones, may admit of

building upon Him, and may become a temple of the I-1oly

Ghost who dwelleth in us. And as He is a foundation, and

we stones built upon Him, so again He is a .Vine, and we knit

to Him as branches,-not according to the Substance of the

Godhead; for this surely is impossible; but according to His

manhood, for the branches must. be like the Vine, since we

are like Him according to the flesh.

209. l\loreover, since the heretics have such human

notions, we may suitably confute them with human resem-

blances contained in the very matter they urge. Thus lIe

saith not, "He hath made Me a foundation," lest He might

seen1 to be nlade and to have a beginning of being, and they

might thence find an audacious pretence for impiety; but,

Hp hath founded 111e. N ow what is founded is founded for

the sake of the stones which are raised upon it; it is not

a randOln process, hut a stone is first transported from the


346 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CR. XXIII. mountain and set down in the depth of the eartl).

And while a stone is in the mountain, it' is not yet

founded; but when need demands, and it be transported,

and laid in the depth of the earth, then forthwith if the stone

could speak, it would say, "No'.v he has founded me, who

has brought me hither from the mountain." Therefore the

Lord also did not when founded take a beginning of exi

-

tence; for He was the Word before that; but when He

put on our body, which He severed and took from }\{ary,

then He says, He hath founded },[e; as much as to say,

"Me, being the Word, He hath enveloped in a body of

earth." For so He is founded for our sakes, taking on

Him what is ours, that we, as incorporated and compacted

and bound together in Him through the likeness of the

flesh, may attain unto a perfect lnan, and abide immortal

and incorruptible.

210. Nor let the words before the world and bifore He mad",

the earth and bPjore the mountains were settled disturb any

one; for they very well accord with founded and created;

for here again allusion is made to the Economy according

to the flesh. For though the grace which has come to us

from the Saviour has but lately appeared, as the Apostle says,

and took place when He came among us, yet this grace

had been prepared even before we came into being, nay,

before the foundation .of the world; and the reason why, is

excellent and wonderful. It beseemed not that God should

counsel concerning us afterwards, lest He should appeal'

ignorant of our future. The God of all then, creating us

by His own Word, and knowing our destinies better than

we, and foreseeing that, though created good, we should

in the event be transgressors of the commandment, and be

thrust out of paradise for disobedience, He, being loving and

kind, prepared beforehand in IIis proper Vi ord, by whom

also He created us, the gCOllOlny of our salvation; tl,mt

though by the serpent's deceit we feU froul Ilitu, we nlÍght


AGAINST ARIANISM.


847


not remain altogether dead, but having in the W ord i


. 7


6.

the redemption and salvation which was afore pre-

pared for us, we might rise again and abide immortal, when

He should have been created for us a beginning of the ways,

and when He who was the First-born of creation should

become first-born of His brethren, and again should rise

Jirst-fruits of the dead.

211. ThIs Paul the blessed Apostle. teaches In his

writings; for, as interpreting the words of The Proverbs

before the UJorld and before the earth He was made, he thus

speaks to Timothy: Be partaker of the afflictions nf the

Gospel according to the power of God, who hath saved

us and called us with a holy calling, not according to

our works, but according to His own purpose and grace,

which was -given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,

but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour

Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death and brought HIe

to light. And to the Ephesians: Blessed be God, even the

Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us

with all sjJiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,

according as He hath chosen us in Him before the founda-

tion of the world, that we should be holy and without blame

brfore Him in love, having predestinated us to the adoption

of child?"en by Jesus Christ to Himself. How then has

He chosen us, before we came into existence, but that,

as He says Himself, in Him we were represented before-

hand? and how at all, before men were created, did He

predestinate us unto adoption, but that the Son IIimself was

founded before the world, taking on Him that economy which

was for our sake? or how, as the Apostle goes on to say,

have we an inheritance, being predestinated to it, save that the

I

ord Himself was founded before the world, inasmuch as

He had a purposè, for our sakes, to take on HÜu through

the flesh all that inheritance of adverse judgllHmt which lay

against us, and henceforth to lllake us sons in Him? and


.


,


348 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CH. XXIII. how did we receive it before eternallÙnes, when we

were not yet in being, but afterwards in time, save

that in Christ was stored the groce which has reached us?

"Therefore also in the Judgment, when everyone shall re-

ceive according to his conduct, He says, Come, ye blessed oj

lily Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the

foundation of the world. How then, or in whonl, was it

prepared before we came to be, save in the Lord who before

the world was founded for this purpose; that we, as built

upon HiIn, might partake, as well-compacted stones, the

life and grace which is from Him?

212. And this took place, as naturally suggests itself to

the religious mind, in order, as I sald, that we, rising after

our brief death, may be capable of an eternal life, of which

we had not been capable, men as we are, formed of earth,

except that before the world there had been prepared for ns

in Christ the hope of life and salvation. rrherefore good

reason is there that the Word, who was to enter into our

flesh, and to be created in it as a beginning of ways for His

works, should withal be laid as a foundation, according as the

Father's will was deternlined in Him before the ages, as

has been said, and before land was, and before the moun-

tains were settled, and before the fountains burst forth;

that, though the earth and the mountains and the forms

of visible nature pass away in the fulness of the present age,

we on the contrary may not grow old after their pattern,

but may be able to live after them, having the spiritual

life and blessing which have been prepared for us before

these things in the "\V ord Himself according to election.

For thus we shall be capable of a life not ten1porary, but

may ever afterwards abide and live in Christ, since

even before our own time our life had 1;>een founded and

prepared in Christ .J esus.

213. Nor in any other was it fitting that our life "honId

be founded, except in the fjord who is before the ages,


.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


849


and through whom the ages were brought to be ; that, ED. BEN.

ii.

 ï6-77.

since that everlasting life was ill IIim, we too n1Ïght

be able to inherit it. For God is good; and being good

always, lIe willed this as knowing that our weak nature

needed the succour and salvation which is from Him. And

as a skilled architect., proposing to build a house, antici-

pates also his repairing it, in case it should at any future

time become dilapidated after building, and, as counselling

about this, makes -preparation from the first, and gives to

the workman materials for a repair; and thus the means

of the repair are provided before the house is built; in the

same way, prior to us is the repair of our salvation founded

in Christ, that in Him also we might be new-created.

And the will and the purpose were ready before the world;

but the work took place when the need required, and

the Saviour came among us. For the Lord Himself will

stand us in place of all things in the heaveus, wheu He

receives us into everlasting life.

214. This then is quite enough to prove that the 'V ord of

God is not a creature, but that the doctrine of this passage is

concordant with orthodoxy. But since the pa::S8age, when

scrutinised, has an orthodox sense in every point of view,

it Inay be well to state what that large sense is; for perhaps

Inany words may prevail with these men. Now to do tllÌs

I must here recur to what has been said before, for what

I have to say relates to the same proverb and the same

'Visdom. The Word then has not called Himself a

creature by nature, but has said in proverbs, The Lord

c1'eated Jle; and He plainly indicates a sense not spoken

openly but latent, such as we shall be able to find by taking

away the veil from the proverb. I do not shrink fronl

calling it a dark saying; but a -man of understanding, says

the sacred writer, shall understand a proverb and the inter-

pretation, the words of the wise and their dark sayings.

215. Now the Only-begotten and Auto-WisdOlll uf God


.


350 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Off. XXIII. is Creator and Franler of all things; for in TVisJ01n

hast ThOll 'made them all, Jle says, and the earth 1:S

full of Thy creation. But that what came into being nlight

not only be, but be good, it pleaseJ God that His own

'Visdom should condescend to the creatures, so as to in-

troduce an impression and semblance of Its Image on all of

thein in COlnlnon and on each, that what was made might

be manifestly wise works and worthy of God. For as of the

Son of God, considered as the 1V ord, our word is an image,

so of the same Son, considered as Wisdom, is the wisdom

which is implanted in us an image; in which wisdom we,

having the power of knowledge and thought, become

recipients of the All-framing Wisdom; and through It we

are able to know Its Father. For he who hath the Son,

saith He, hath the Father also; and he that receiveth life,

receiveth Him that sent life. Such an inlpression then of

WisdOln being created in us, and being in all the works,

with reason does the true and Iraming Wisdom take to

Itself what belongs to Its own impression, and say, The Lord

created ltle for His works; for what, the wisdOlll in lIS says,

that the Lord Himself speaks as if it were HIS own; and:

whereas He is not Himself created, being Creat/or, yet

because of the image of Him created in the works, He says

this as if of Himself. And as the Lord Himself has said,

He t/tat receivetlt you, receÙJeth life, because HIS iInpression is

in us, so, though He be not among the creatures, yet because

His image and Ìlnpl'essÎon is created in the works, lIe says,

as If in His own person, The Lord created life a beginning of

His ways for His works. And therefore has this impression

of Wisdom in the works been brought into being, that, as I

said before, the world might recognise in it its own Creator

the Word, and through HÌ1n the Father. And this is

what Paul saId, Because that which may be known oj God is

'manifest in theuz, for God has showed it unto them: for tlte

invisible things oj Him from the creation of the llJorld are


AGAINST ARIANISM.


351


clearly SMJ7, being understood by thp things that ED. BRN.

fl.

 78 -79.

are '/Jwde. But if so, the \V ord is not a creature

in substance; but the wisdOlll which is in us, and so called,

is spoken of in this passage in the Proverbs.

216. But if this too fails to persuade them, let them teU

us theinseives, whether there is any wisdOlll in the crea.

tures or not? If not, how is it that the Apostle complains,

J/or after that in the Wisdom of God the world by Wisdom

knew not God? or how is it, if there is no wisdom, that a

multitvde of wise men are found in Scripture? for a U'i:ie

man feareth and departeth from ev'il; and through wisdom is

a house builded; and the Preacher says, A lnan's wisdom,

'Inaketh his face to shine; and he blalnes those who are head-

strong thus, Say not thou, what is the cause that the fonner

days were better than these? for thou dost not inquire wisdy

concerning this. But if, as the Son of Sirach says, He

poured her out upon all His works; she is with all flesh

according to His gift, and He hath given her to them that

love Him, and if this outpouring is a note, not of the

Substance of the Very 'Visdom and Only-begotten, but

of that wisdom which is imaged in the world, how is

it incredible that the All-framing and true 'Visdom

Itself, whose impression is the wisdom and knowledge

poured out in the world, should say, as I ha ve alread y

explained, as if of Itself, The Lord hath created .J[e for His

works?

217. For the wisdom in the world is not creative, but is

that which is created in the works, according to which the

heavens declare the glory of God, and the .firmament showeth

His handiwork. This if men have within them, they will

acknowledge the true Wisdom of God; and will know

that they are made really after God's Image. And, as

some son of a king, when the father wished to build a

city, might cause his own name to be printerl upon each

of the works that were rising, both to give security to them


352 THREE DISCOURRES OF ATHANASIUS


Cn. XXJlI. that the work!::; would remain, by reason of the

mark of his name on everything, and also to Blake

thCln remclnber him and his father from the name, and having

finished the city might be asked concerning it, how it was

luade, and then would answer, "It is made securely, for

according to the will of my father, I am imaged in every

work, for there is a creation of my UaIl1e in the works;"

but saying this, he does not signify that his own substance

is created, but the impression of hÏ1nself by means of his

name; in the same manner, to apply the illustration, to

those who adll1Ïre the wisdom in the creatures, the true

'Yisdom makes answer, The Lord hath created J[e for the

works, for My impress is in thCln; and I have thus con-

descended for the fraIning of all things.

218.

Ioreover, that the son should be speaking of the

impress that is within us as if it were HÜnself, should not

startle anyone, considering (for we must not care about

repetition) that, when Saul was persecuting the Church,

in which was His impression and image, lIe said, as if He

were Hirnself under persecution, Saul, why persecutest thou

l1fe? Therefore, (as has been said,) just as, supposing the

impression itself of "\VisdOln which is in the works had saiù,

The Lord It(tth created ]'fe for the works, no one would have

been startled; so, if lie, the True and Framing 'Yisdom,

the Only-begotten Word of God, should use what belongs

to His iInage as about HiInself, namely, The Lord hath

created Me for the works, let no one, overlooking the

wisdom created in the world and in the works, think that

He created is said of the Substance of the Very 'Yisùom,

lest, diluting the wine with water,1 he be judged a de-

frauder of the truth. For 1V iSùOln is Creator and Framer;

but Its impression is created in the works, as the copy of

an Image.

219. And lie says, Be.qinning of ways, since such wisdom

7 Vid. pp. 26, 401.


AG ArNST ARIAN l

M.


353


becomes a sort of beginning, and, as it were, a li


. 7


i.

rudhnent of the knowledge of God; for a luau

entering, as it were, upon this way first, and keeping it in

the fear of God, (as SolOlnon says, Tlte fear of the Lord is the

beginning of w'isdom,) then advancing upwards in his thoughts

and perceiving the Framing Wisdonl which is in the creation,

will perceive in It also Its Father, as the Lord Himself

has said, He that hath seen i1Ie hath seen the Father, and as

John writes, He who acknowledgeth the Son, hath the Father

also. And He says, Before the world hath He founded Me,

since in Its impression the works remain settled and eternal.

rrhen, lest any, hearing concerning the wisdom thus created

in the works, should think the true vVisdom, God's Son,

to be by nature a creature, He has found it necessary to

add, Before the mountains, and before the earth, and before

the 'Waters, and before all hills, He be.qets Jl;Ie, that in saying,

"before all creation," (for He includes all the creation

under these heads,) He may show that He is not created

together with the works according to substance. For if

I{e was created for the works, yet is before them, it follows

that He is in being before He was created. He is not

then a creature by nature and substance, but as He HÜn-

self has added, an Offspring. But in what differs a crea-

ture from an offspring, and how it is distinct by nature,

has been shown in what has gone before.

220. 1\loreover, if He proceeds to say, When He prepared

the heaven, I was present with Him, He must not be sup-

posed to say this as if it was without Wisdom that the

Father prepared the heaven or the clouds above; but this

is what lie says, "All things took place in 1\le and through

1\'le, aud when there was need that Wisdom should be

created in the works, in 11y Substance indeed I was with

the Father, but by a condescension to creatures, I was

engaged in diffusing over the works My own impression,

so that the whole world, as being in one body, n1Ïght.

z


354 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CR. XXIII. not be at variance but in concord with itself."

All those then who with an upright under-

standing, according to the wisdom given unto them, come

to cont81l1plate the creatures, are able to say for themselves,

'ó By Thy appointment aU things continue;" but they

who make light of this, must be told, Professing them-

selves to be wise, they became fools; for that which ma,l/

be known of God is 'manifest in them; forr God has revealed

it unto them; for the invisible things of Him from the crea-

tion of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the

things that are made, even His eternal Power and Godhead,

so that they are without excuse. Because that when they

knew God, they glorified Him not as God, but served the crea-

ture 'more than the Oreator of all, who is blessed for ever.

Amen.

221. And they will feel SOlne compunction surely at the

words, For after that in the wisdom of Goif" (in the mode

we have eXplained above,) the world by wisd01n knew not

God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to sa'/}e

them that believe. For no longer, as in the former times,

has God willed to be known by a mere image and shadow

of wisdom, that namely which is in the creatures, but He

has made the trne Wisdom Itself to take flesh, and to

beconle man, and to undergo the death of the cross; that

by their faith in Him henceforth aU that believe may

obtain salvation. However, it is the saUIe Wisdom of God,

which jn the first instance by means of Its own Image in

the creatures, (whence also it is said to be created,)

manifested first Itself, and through Itself Its own Father;

and afterwards, being Itself the \V ord, became flesh, as .J ohn

says, and after abolishing death and saving our race,

still further revealed Himself and through Hin1 His own

Father, saying, Grant unto tltem that they rnay lenow

Thee the only Ü.ue God, and Jesus Ohrist whom Thou hast

sent.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


855


222. Hence the whole earth is fined with the ED. BEN.

Ïi.

 81-82.

knowledge of IIÜn; for the knowledge of Father

through Son and of Son fron1 Father is one and the same,

and the Father delights in Hin1, and in that joy the Son

rejoices in the Father, saying, I 'Was by Him, daily His delight,

r(:joicÙ

q aluHlJJs before Hinz. And this again provès th

; t the

Son is not foreign, but proper to the E'ather's Substance. FOI

behold, not because of us has He come into being, as they

say, nor is He made out of nothing, (for not from without

dId God procure for Himself a cause of rejoicing,) but the

words denote what is proper and like. "\Vhen then was

it that the Father rejoiced not? but if He ever rejoiced,

He too was ever, in whOln He rejoiced. And in whOln docs

the Father rejoice, except as seeing Himself in His proper

Image, which is His Word? And though in sons of men

also He had delight, on His finishing the world, as it is

written in these same Proverbs, yet this too has a con-

sistent sense. For even in this case He had delight, not with

a joy which came to IIim from without, but again as

seeing the works made after His own Image; so that even

thÌs rejoicing of God is on account of His lInage. And how

too has the Son delight, except as seeing Hinlself in the

Father? for this is the same as saying, He that hath seen

l1fe, hath seen the Fatlter, and I am in the Father and

the Father in .J.1Ie.

223. Vain then is your vaunt, as is on all sides shown, 0

Christ's enen1Îes, and vainly do ye trumpet forth 8 and cir-

culate everywhere your text, The Lord hath created .Jle a

beginning of His ways, perverting its sense, and publishing,

not SulUlllon's meaning, but your own COll1ment. For


8 fVE7rOJl7re{JlTaTE. "The ancients

said 7roP.7rf.VUV, 'to use bad lan-

guage,' and the coarse language

.of the procession, 7roJl7rEía. This

arose from the custom of persons

in the Bacchanalian cars using


bad language towards bystanders,

and their retorting it..' Erasm.

Adag. p. 1158. He quotes Me-

nander' -

i7rì TWV åp.a

wv E(crÌ, 7rop.1T'f.iai Tl.VE!:

crtþóopa "^,OíOOpOL.


z :2


356 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Cu. XXIII. behold your meaning is proved to be but a

phantasy; for the passage in the Proverbs, as

well as aU that is above said, proves that the Son is not a

creature in nature and substance, but the proper Offspring

of the Father, true 'VisdOlll and Word, by whonl all things

were 'lrtade, and Wit/lOut Him was nvule not one thing.


AGAINST ARIANISM. 857


DISCOURSE III.


CHAPTER XXIV.


Answer to objections from Scripture; . .seventhly, .fohn xiv. 10.


224. THE Ario-maniacs, when the passages which E!?:

F. l .N.

111.

 .

they allege, The Lord created life, and Made better

than the Angels, and First-born, and Faithful to Him that

made Him, are shown to have an orthodox meaning, and to

inculcate piety towards Christ, therefore, as if bedewed with

the serpent's poison, not seeing what they ought to see,

nor understanding wh

t they read, as if bursting forth

from the depth of their impious hearts, have next pro-

ceeded to disparage our Lord's words, I in the Father

and the Father in 1J{e; saying, "How can the One be

contained in the Other and the Other in the One?"

or "Howat all can the Father who is the greater be con-

tained in the Son who is the less?" or "What wonder,

if the Son is in the Father, considering it certainly is

written of us too, In Him 'We live and move and have our

being?" And this state of mind is in keeping with the

perverseness of men who think God to be material, and

understand not what is signified by "True Father" and

"True Son," by "Light Invisible" and "Eternal," and

Its "Radiance !nvisible," nor "Invisible Subsistence,"

and "Inllnaterial Inlpress" and " Innnaterial lInage."

For had they known, they would not have dishonourcd

and ridiculed the Lord of glory, nor, interpreting thingR


358 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CR. XXIV. immaterial after a material manner, perverted

good words.

225. It were sufficient indeed, on only hearing wOlds

which are the Lord's, at once to believe, since the faith of

simplicity is better than an elaborate process of persuasion;

but since they have endeavoured to desecrate even this

passage for the ends of their personal heresy, it becomes

necessary to expose their perverseness and to show the pur-

pose of the truth, at least for the security of the faithful.

For when it is said, I in the Father and the Father

in jJfe, They are not therefore, as these suppose,

pouring Each into Other, filling Each Other, as in the

case of empty vessels, so that the Son fills the emptiness of

the Father and the Father that of the Son, and Each of Them

by Hin1self is not complete and perfect, (for this is proper

to bodies, and therefore the mere assertion of it is full

of impiety,) for the Father is full and perfect, and the Son

is the Fulness of Godhead. Nor again, as God, by coming

into the Saints, strengthens them, so is it that He is also in

the Son. For the Son is HÏInself the Father's Power and

Wisdom, and by partaking of Him things created are sancti-

fied in the Spirit; but the Son Himself is not Son by partici-

pation, l but is the Father's proper Offspring. Nor again, is

t

e Son in the Father, in the sense of the passage, In HÙn

we live and move and have our being; for, He as being from

the Fount of the Father is the Life, in which all things

are both quickened and consist; for the Life does not live

in life, else it would not be Life, but rather He gives life

to all things.

226. But now let us see what Asterius the Sophist says,

the retained 2 pleader for the heresy. In imitation then of

the Jews so far, he writes as follows: "It is very plain

that He has said, that He is in the Father and the Father

again in IIiJn, for this reason, that neither the word, on

I Vid. App. /lETQVuía. 2 Yid. App. AsterÏ'lIS.


AGAINST ARIANISJ\!.


359


which He was discoursing is, as He say

, His own, ED. BEN.

iii.

 1-2.

but the Father's, nor the works belong to. HÌln, but

to the Father who ga,ye Him the power." N ow this, if

uttered at random by a little child, had been excused from

his age; but when one who bears the title of Sophist, and

professes universal knowledge,3 is the writer, what a serious

conden1nation does he deserve? And does he not show himself

a stranger to the Apostle, as being puffed up with persuasive

words of wisdom, and thinking thereby to succeed in de-

ceiving, not understanding himself what he saith nor whereof

hr affirms? For what the Son has said, as being proper

and suitable to a Son only, who is ",V ord and ",Visdom and

Inlage of the Father's Substance, this he brings to the level

of all the creatures, and makes common to the Son and to

them; and he says, lawless 4 nlan, that the Power of the

Father receives power, that by Ineans of this impiety it may

be open to him to say that in a Son the Son was made a son,

and the Word received a ",V ord's authority; and, far from

granting that He spoke this truth thus as a Son, he ranks

Him with all things made, as having learned it as they have.

For if the Son said, I am in the Father and the Father in

Jle, because His discourses were not His own words but

the Father's, and so of His works, then, since David says,

I will hear what the Lord shall say in me, and again

Solomon, },[ y words are spoken by God, and since Moses

was minister of words which were from God, and since

each of the Prophets spoke not what was his own but what

was from God, Thus saith the Lord, and since the works of

the Saints were, as they professed, not their own but God's


3 1råVTa Yl11Wl1lCHV i1ranEÀÀÓ-

11.EVO!:. Gorgias a

cording to Ci-

cero de Fin. ii. init. was the first

who ventured in public to say

1rPOßÚ^^ETf., "give me a ques-

tion." This was the f7rÚYYf.^p,a

of the Sophists, of which Aristotle

speaks, ascribing to Protagoras


the "profession" of being able to

,. make the worse cause the

better." Rhet. ii. 24 fin. Vid.

Cressol. Theatr. Rhet. iii. 11.

t 7rapávoJ1o!;, Rist. Ar. 71, 75,

79. Ep. Æg. 16, d. Vide åvuJ10',

2 Thess. ii. 8.


360 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Cu. XXIV. who gave the power, (Elias for instance and

Eliseus invoking God that He Himself would raise

the dead, and Eliseus saying to N aaman, on cleansing him

from the leprosy, that thou mayest knOl1J that there is a God

in Israel," and Samuel too in the days of the harvest pray-

ing to God to grant rain, and the Apostles saying that not

in their own power they did miracles but in the Lord's grace,)

it is plain that, according to Asterius, such a statement as

that in question must belong to all, so that each of

thenl is able to say, I in the Father and the Father in

me; and as a consequence that He is no longer One Son

of God and W or<J and Wisdom, but, as others, is only one

out of many.

227. But if the Lord said this, His words would not

rightly have been, I in the Fathe'!' and the Father in J.1Ie,

but rather, "I also ain in the Father and the Father also is

in l\Ie," that He may have nothing proper and by prero-

gative, relatively to the Father, as being a Son, but the same

grace in common with all. But it is not so, as they think;

for not understanding that there is a genuine Son from

the Father, they belie that genuine Son, whom only it befits

to say, I in the Father and the Father in life. For the Son

is in the Father, as it is allowed us' to apprehend, because

the whole Being of the Son is proper to the Father's

substance, as radiance from light, and stream from

fountain; so that whoso sees the Son, sees that which is the

Father's, and apprehends that the Son's Being, because

from the Father, is therefore in the Father. For the

Father is in the Son, since the Son is what is from the

Father and proper to IIiIn, as in the radiance the snn, and

in the word the thought, and in the stream the fountain:

for whoso thus contemplates the Son, contemplates what

(i È

aípf.TOV, vid. supr. p. 274, Nyss. contr. Eunom. iii. p. 133, s.

iv.

 28. init. Euseb. Eccl. Epiph. Hær. 76, p. 970. Cyril.

TheoJ. pp. 47, b. 73, b. 89, b. 124, Thes. p. 100.

R. 129, c. Theodor. Rist. p. 732


AGAINST ARIANISM.


361


belongs to the Father's substance, and apprehends i:.D




::

that the Father is in the Son. For whereas the

countenance and Godhead of the Father is the Being of

the Son, it follows that the Son is in the Father and

the Father in the Son.

228. On this account and reasonably, having said before,

I and the Father are One, He added, I in the Father and the

Father in life, by way of showing the identity of Godhead

and the unity of Substance. For They are one, not as

one thing which divides into two, and after all is nothing

but one, nor as one thing twice named, so that the Same

becon1es at one time Father, at another His own Son, for

Sabellius holding this was judged an heretic. But They

are two, because the Father is Father and is not also Son,

and the Son is Son and not also Father; but the nature is

one; (for the offspring is not unlike its parent, for it is his

image,) and all that is the Father's is the Son's. 1Vhere-

fore neither is the Son another God, for He is not to

be iInagined as external, else were there many godheads;

for if the Son be other, considered as an Offspring, still He

is the Same, considered as God; and He and the Father are

one in that nature which is proper and peculiar to Each,

and in the identity of the one Godhead, as has been said.

For the radiance also is light, not second to the sun, nor a

different light, nor from participation of it, but a whole

and proper offspring of it. And such an offspring is

necessarily one light; and no one would say that they are

two lights, but sun and radiance two, yet one the light

frOln the sun enlightening in its radiance things every-

where. So also the Godhead of the Son is the Father's;

whence also it is indivisible; and thus there is one God

and none other but He. And so, since they are one, and

the Godhead itself one, the sanle things are said of the

Son which are said of the Father, except His being

aid

to be Father :-for instance, that lIe is God, And the


362 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CH. XXIV. fVm'd was God; that He is Almighty, Thus said

He which was and is and is to come, the Almighty;

Lord, One Lord Jesus (}ll1

ist,. that He is Light, I am the

Light; that He forgives sins, that ye may know, He says, that

the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins; and so

with other attributes. For all things, says the Son Himself,

whatsoever the Father hath, are 1Iline,. and again, And ltline

are Thine. And on hearing the attributes of the Father pre-

dicated of the Son, we shall thereby see the Father in the Son;

and we shall contemplate the Son in the Father, whenever what

is said of the Son is said of the Father also. And why are the

attributes of the Father ascribed to the Son, except that

the Son is an Offspring from HÜn? and why are the Son's

attributes proper to the Father, except again because the

Son is the proper Offspring of His Substance? And the

Son, being the proper Offspring of the Father's Substance,

reasonably says that the Father's attributes are His own

also; whence suitahly and consistently with saying, I and

the Father are One, He adds, that ye may kJWW that I am in

the Fathrr and the Father in Jfe.

229. 1\loreover, He has added this again, He that hath seen

life, hath seen the Father; and there is one and the same

sense in these three passages. For he who in this sense

understands that the Son and the Father are one, knows

that He is in the Father and the Father in the Son; for

the Godhead of the Son is the Father's, and this is in the

Son; and whoso enters into this, is convinced that He that

hath seen the Son, hath seen the Father; for in the Son is

contemplated the Father's Godhead. And we may perceive

this ITIOre intimately from the illustration of the Emperor's

image. For in the image is the face and form of the

Emperor, and in the Elnperor is that faC'e which is in the

in1age. For the likeness of the Elnperor in the image is

intiInately exact; 6 80 that a per

on who looks at the lInage,

e Vid. App. å7r(CpúÀÀaKTo".


AGAINST ARIANISM.


363


sees in it the Ell1peror; and he again who sees





.

the Emperor, recognises that it is he who is in

the image. And from the likeness not differing, to one who

after the image wished to view the Elnperor, the image

might say, "I and the Emperor are one; for I am in him,

and he in me; and what thou seest in me, that thou be-

holdest in him, and what thou hast seen in him, that thou

beholdest in me." Accordingly he who worships the image,

in it worships the En1peror also; for the image is his form

and face. Since then the Son too is the Father's image, it

must necessarily be understood that the Godhead and own

self of the Father is the Being of the Son.

230. And this is the meaning of JVho being in the form

of God, and the Father in Jfe. Nor is this Form of the

Godhead partial merely, but the fnlness of the Father's

Godhead is the Being of the Son, and the Son is whole

God. Therefore also, being equal to God, He thought it

not robbery to be equal to God; and again since the Godhead

and the Face of the Son is none other's than the Father's,

this is what He says, I in the Father. Thus God was in

Christ re.conciling the world unto Himself; for what be-

longed to the Substance of the Father is that Son, in whom

the creation was then reconciled with God. And thus what

things the Son then wrought, are the Father's works,

for the Son is the Face of that Father's Godhead, who

wrought the works. And thus he who looks at the Son,

sees the Father; for in the Father's Godhead is and is

contemplated the Son; and the Father's Face, which is in

the Son, sho.ws in HÏ1n the Father; and thus the Father is

in the Son. And that peculiarity and Godhead which is from

the Father in the Son, shows the Son in the Father, and

His inseparability from Him; and whoso hears and

apprehends that what is said of the Father is also said of the

Son, not as added to IIjs Snh

tance by grace or partici-

pation, but because the very Being of the Son is the own


364 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CK. XXIV. Offspring of the Father's Su bstance, will fitly

understand the words, as I said before, I in the

Father, and the Father in 1J{e; and I and the Father are

One. For the Son is such as the Father is, because He

has all that is the Father's.

231. "\Vherefore also is He signified when the Father

is named. For, a son not being, we cannot say father;

whereas, when we can God a Maker, we do not of necessity

n1anifest the things which through Him have come to be; for

a maker is before his works. But when we call God Father,

at once with the Father we signify the Son's existence.

Therefore also he who believes in the Son, believes also in

the Father; for he believes in what belongs to the Father's

Substance; and thus the faith is one in One God. And

he who worships and honours the Son, in the Son wor-

ships and honours the Father; for one is the Godhead;

and therefore one the honour and one the worship which

is paid to the Father in and through the Son. And he

who thus worships, worships one God; for there is onc

God and none other than He. Accordingly when the

Father is caned the only God, and we read that there is one

God, and I am, and beside life there is no God, and I the

first and I am the last, this has a fit meaning. For God is

One and Only and First; but this is not said to the denial

of the Son; perish the thought; for He is in that One,

and First and Only, as being of that One and Only and

First the Only Word and Wisdom and Radiance. And

l-le is Himself the First, too, as being the FnIness of the

Godhead of the First and Only, and whole and fun God.

"\V c maintain then the Divine Unity, not as against the

Son, but to deny that there is other such as the Fathcr

and His "'tV ord.


AGAINSr ARIANISM.


865


CHAPTER XXV.


Answer to objections from Scripture; eighthly, John xvii. 3,

and lite like.


232. Now that this is the sense of the Prophets ED. BEN.

iii.

 6-7.

is clear and Inanifest to all; but since the impious

Inen, who allege such passages, dishonour the Lord and

reproach us, saying, "Behold God is said to be One and

Only and First; how say ye that the Son is God? for if

He were God, He had not said, I Alone, nor God is One;"

it is necessary to declare the sense of these phrases in addi-

tion, as far as our ability allow!:;, that all may know from

this also that verily the Arians are God's adversaries. It

there then is rivalry of the Son towards the Father, then be

such words uttered against Him; and if, according to the

apprehensions of David concerning Adonias and AbsalOln, so

too the Father looks upon the Son, then let Him say to

Himself and insist on such words, lest He the Son, calling

Himself God, make any to revolt from the Father. But if

on the contrary, he who knows the Son, knows the Father,

the Son Himself revealing Him to him, and in the 'V ord

rather he shall see the Father the more, as has been said,

and if the Son on coming, glorified not IIimself but the

Father, saying to one who came to Him, lVhy callest thou

!tIe good? none is good sa.ve One, that is, God; and to one

who asked, what was the great commandment in the Law,

ansìVcring, Hear, 0 Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord;

and saying to the multitudes, I came down from hea.'ven, not

to do illy own will, but the will of Him that sent lIle; and

teaching the disciples, !tfy Father is greater than I, and He

that honoureth ...lIe, honoureth HÙn that sent !tIe; if the Son

is such towards His own Father, what is the difficulty,7 that

one must need take so perverse a view of such }Ja::'f:3ages?


7 Vide supr. Disc. nn. 12, 65, 88, 105, &c., vid. App. óp(JÓt;.


.


366 THREE DISCOURSES OF A.THANA.SIUS


CH. xxv. and on the other hand, if the Son is the Word

of the Father, who is so wild, besides these Christ-

opposers, as to think that God has thus. spoken, as traducing

and denying His own "T ord ? This is not the mind of

Christians; perish the thought; for not with reference to

the Son is it thus written, but for the denial of those

falsely called gods, invented by men.

233. And the explanation of such passages is obvious; for

since those who are devout to gods falsely so called, revolt

fron1 the True God, therefore God, being good and care-

ful for mankind, recalling the wanderers, says, I am God

alone, and I am, and Besides life there is no God, and the

like; that He may condemn things which are not, and

may convert all men to Himself. And as, supposing in the

day-time when the sun was shining, a man were rudely to

paint a piece of wood, which had not even the pretence to

be luminous, and call that irrmge the source of light, and if

the sun with regard to it were to say, "I alone am the light

of the day, and there is no ot.her light of the day but I,"

he would say this, with reference, not to his own radiance,

but to the error arising from the wooden image and the

dissimilitude of that vain representation; so it is with I am,

and I am Only God, and There is none other besides IIIe, viz.,

that He may make men renounce falsely called gods, and

that they may recognise Hirn the true God instead.

234. Indeed when God said this, He said it through His

own Word, unless forsooth these modern

J ews add this too,

that He has not said this through His Word; but "the

Word of the Lord came" to the Prophet, and this was what

was heard; this is what Scriptures declares, let them rave

as they will; if the Word be His, of course this was said

by the Word, for there is not the thing which God says or

does, but He says and does it in the Word. Not then with

reference to Him is this said, 0 God's enemies, but to things

foreign to Him and not from HÜn. For according to the


AGAINST ARIANISM.


ß67


aforesaid image, if the snn had spoken those words ED. BEN.

Iii.

 1-9.

he would have been setting right the error, and

have so spoken, not as separating his radiance from him,

but in his own radiance showing his own light. Therefore,

not for the denial of the Son, nor with reference to HiIn, are

such passages, but to the overthrow of falsehood. Accord-

ingly God spoke not such words to AdaIU at the beginning,

though lEs "\V ord was with Hinl, by whOln all things

came to be; for there was no need, before idols came in;

but when men made insurrection against the truth, and

named for themselves gods such as they would, then it

was that need arose of such words, for the denial of gods

that were not. Nay I would add, that they were said

even in anticipation of the folly of these Christ-opposers,

that they luight know, that whatsoever god they devise

external to the Father's Substance, he is not True God,

nor T lnage and Son of the Only and First.

235. If then the Father be called the only true God, this

is said, not to the denial of Him who said, I am the Truth,

but of those on the other hand who by nature are not true,

as the Father and lIis "\V ord are. And hence the Lord

Himself added at once, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast

sent. N ow had He been a creature, He would not have

added this, and ranked Himself with His Creator; (for

what fellowship is there between the True and tIle not

true?) but now by adding Hinlself to the Father, He has

shown that He is of the Father's nature; and He has

given us to know that of the True Father He is True Off-

spring. And John too, as he had learned, so he teaches 8

this, writing in his Epistle, And we are in the True, e'lHJn

?n His Son Jesus Christ; This is the True God and eternol

life. And when the Prophet says concerning the creation,

That stretcheth forth the heavens alone, and when God says


8 p.aBwv iCíòar,e. And so p.a- lPWTWVTE!; JpávOavov, supr. p. 250,

Bwv iòíòaclIcev, supr. p. 21, and vid. App. Traditivn.


368


THREE DISCOURSBS OF ATHANASIUR


H. xxv. I only stretrh out the hea'l}ens, it is made plain to

everyone that in the Only is signified also the

'V ord of the Only, in whOln all things 'were made, and with-

out whom 'Was made not one thing. Therefore, if they were

made through the VV ord, and yet He says, I only, and to-

gether with that Only is understood the Son, through WhOll1

the heavens were made, so also then, if it be said, One God

and I Only, and I the Fz'rst, in that One and Only and

First is understood the Word co-existing, as in the Light

the Radiance.

236. And this can be held in respect of no other but

the Word alone. For all other things subsisted out of

nothing through the Son, and are greatly different in

nature; but the Son Himself is natural and true Off-

spring from the Father; and thus the very passage

which these men have thought fit to adduce, I the First,

in defence of their heresy, doth rather expose their

perverse spirit. For God says, I the First and I the Last;

if then, as if ranked with the things after IIÏIn, He is

said to be first of them, so that they come next to Him,

then certainly you will have shown that He Himself

precedes the works in time only; which, to go no further,

is a surpassing in1piety; but if it is in order to prove that

He is not frOln any, nor any before Him, but that He is

Origin and cause of all things, and to destroy the Gentile

fables, that He has said I the First, it is plain also, that

when the Son is called First-born, this is done, not for the

sake of ranking Him with the creation, but to pro"

e the

framing and adoption of all things through the Son.

:For as the Father is First, so also is He both First, as

In1age of the First, and because the First is in II im, and

as being Offspring fronl the Father, in whom the whol



creation is created and adopted into sonship.


AGA.INST ARIANIS

I.


869


CHAPTER XXVI.


Answer to objections from Scripture; ninthl!l, John x. 30;

xvü. 11, æc.

237. HOWEVER, here too they put forward their i


 :


õ.

pri vate fictions, and contend that the Son and the -

Father are not in such wise "one," or "like," as the Church

preaches, but, as they themselves would have it. 9 For they

say, since what the Father wills, the Son wills also, and is

not contrary to Him either in what He thinks or in what

He judges, but is in all respects concordant with Him, de-

claring doctrines which are the same, and a message con-

sistent and united with the Father's teaching, therefore it is

that He and the Father are One; and some of them have

dared to write as well as to say thÜ

. Now what can be more

extravagant than this? for if this is the reason why the Son

and the Father are One, and if in this way the 'Vord is like

the Father, it fol]ows forthwith 10 that the Angels too, and

the other beings above us, Principalities and Powers and

Thrones and DOluinions, and things visible, Sun and Moon,

and the Stars, should be sons also, as the Son is; and that

it should be said of them too, that they and the Father are

one, and that each is God's Image and 'Vord. For what

God wills, that will they; and neither in judging nor in

doctrine are they discordant, but in all things are obedien



to their Maker. For they would not have remained in

their own glory, unless, what the Father willed, that they

had willed also. He, for instance, who did not preserve it,


" bJr; avrOL 6fXoV{TL. This is a

common phrase with Athan., and

is here connected with private

judgment (iowv) in contmst to

the Ecrlesiastical TrHdition; vid.

8upr. ovç iífhXov, D.

35, and infr.

WS fJp.f.Ìç ÐÉ.Xop.f.v, n. 249. Vid.


App. Tradition.

10 wpa f.ìvm lCaí ; vid. also de Syn.




-t, Omt. i.

 15, Ii.

 6. IV.


 10, 19, Hemp. ii.

 1. Cyr.

Dial. p. 45G. 'l'hes. p. 2!):>, fin.

Euseb. c. l\Iarc. pp. 47, 91. Also

"aípo!:, Decr.

 15.


Aa


370 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CII. XXVI. but lost his mind, heard the words, How a1.t thou

fallen from heaven, 0 Lucifer, son of the morning!

238. But if this be so, how is He alone Only-begotten Son

and "\Vord and 'Visdom? or how, whereas so many are like

the Father, is only He an Image? for among men too will

be found many like the Almighty Father, numbers, for

instance, who became martyrs, and before then1 the Apostles

and Prophets, and again before them the Patriarchs. And

many now too have kept the Saviour's command, being

merciful, as their Father who is in heat'cn, and observing the

exhortation, Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children,

and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us; many too

have become followers of Paul as he also of Christ. And

yet no one of these is Word or "\Visdom, or Only-begotten

Son or Image; nor has anyone of them had the audacity

to say, I and the Father are One, or, I in the ]i'ather, and

the Father in 1J[e; but it is said of all of them, J;Vlw is

like unto Thee among the gods, 0 Lord? and who shall be

likened to the Lord among the sons of God? and of Him on

the contrary that He only is Image true and natural of the

Father. For though we were made after the Image, and

caned both image and glory of God, yet not on our own

account is it still, but it is by reason of that Image and true

Glory of God inhabiting us, which is His Word, who was for us

afterwards made flesh, that we have the grace of this calling.

239. This notion of theirs then being evidently unbefit-

ting and irrational as well as the rest, the likeness and the

oneness must be referred to the very Substance of the

Son ; for unless it be so taken, He will not be shown to

have anything beyond things created, as has been said,

nor will He be like the Father, but He will n1erely be like

the Father's doctrines; nay, and He differs from the Father,

in that the Father is the Father's se)f, but the doctrines

and teaching are beside the Father. If then in respect to

the doctrines and the teaching the Son is like the Father,


AGAINST ARIANISM.


371


then the Father according to them will be Father ii

D




il.

in name only, and the Son will not be an unvary-

ing Image, or rather will be seen to have no claim to be

like or to belong to the Father; for what that is like or

proper has He who is so utterly different from the Father?

for Paul taught like the Saviour, yet was not like Him In

substance. Having then such notions, they speak falsely;

whereas the Son and the Father are one in such wise as has

been said, and in such wise is the Son like the Father Him-

self and from Him, as we may see and understand a son

to be towards his father, and as we may see the radiance

towards the sun. l

240. Such then being the Son, therefore when the Son

works, the Father is the Worker, and when the Son visits

the Saints, the Father is He who cometh in the Son, as He

has promised when He says, I and .1Jfy Father will come, and

will make our abode with hÙn; for in the Image is con-

templated the Father, and in the Radiance is the Light.

Therefore, as we said just now, when the Father gives

grace and peace, the Son also gives it, as Paul signifies

in every Epistle, writing, Grace to you and pence from God

our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. For one and the

bame grace is from the Father in the Son, as the light

of the sun and of the radiance is one, and the sun's illu-

Inination is effected through the radiance; and so too

when he prays for the Thessalonians, in saying, Now God

Himself, even our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, may

He direct our way unto you, he has guarded the unity of the

Father and of the Son. For he has not said, "

lay they

direct," as if a double grace were given from two Sources,

This and That, but lJIay He direct, to show that the Father

gives it through the Son ;-at which these impious ones

will not blush, though they weU might. For if there were


I As regards Almighty Gorl, with Him. 1'his strikes at the

Teal likeness to Him is identity Semi-Arians.


Aa2


372


THREE DISCOURSES OF ATJIANASIUS





CR. XXVI. no unity, nor the Word the proper Offspring of

the Father's Substance, as the radiance of the

light, but the Son were divided in nature from the Father,

it were sufficient that the Father alone should give, since

none of created things is a partner with his l\Iaker in His

givings; but, as it is, such a mode of giving shows the one-

ness of the Father and the Son. No one, for instance, would

pray to receive from God and the Angels, or from any other

creature, nor would anyone say, "God and the Angel may

He give thee ; "2 but from Father and the Son, because of

Their oneness and the oneness of Their giving. For through

the Son is given what is given; and there is nothing that

the Father does not operate through the Son; for thus is

grace secure to him who recei ves it.

241. And if the Patriarch Jacob, blessing his grand-

children Ephraim and l\Ianasses, said, God who fed me all

n'lY life long unto this day, the Angel that delivered me from

all evil, bless the lads, yet none of created and natural

Angels did He join to God their Creator, nor, rejecting God

that fed him, did he from any Angel ask the blessing on his

grandsons; but in saying, JVho delivered me from all evil, he

showed that it was no created Angel, but the Word of God,

whom he joined to the Father in his prayer, through whom,

God, whomsoever He will, doth deliver. For knowing that

He is also caned the Father's Angel of great Counsel, he

said that none other than He was the Giver of blessing, and

Deliverer from evil. Nor was it that he desired a blessing

for himself from God, and for his grandchildren from the

Angel, but for theln too from IEm whom he himself had


2 THs seems to show that in

Athanasius's day such joint invo-

cations of God and HIS servants

were not in use in the Alexandrian

Church. But that the questiun

was one of discipline, nut of what

was lawful, seems clear from such

passages in Scripture as, .. they


worshipped the Lord and the

King," "the people believed the

Lord and His servant Moses. II As

to the point of Christian dogma,

Catholics now are as earnest as

Athanasius could be, in holdin



that no temporal or spiritual gift

simply comes from creatures.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


373


besought saying, I ll'ill not let Thee go except Tholl i

.D



;

i3.

bless rne, (for that was God, as he says himself, I

ha'l'e seen God face to face,) for lTiln it was that he addressed

for a blessing on the sons of Joseph also.

242. It belongs then to an Angel to Inillister at the com-

mand of God, and often does he go forth to cast out the

Amorite, and is sent to guard the people in the way; but

these are not his doings, but God's, who con111mnded and

sent him, whose also it is to deliver whom He will deliver.

Therefore it was no other than the Lord God Himself

whom he had seen, who said to him, And behold I a.m with

thee, to guard thee in all the way whither thou goest; and it

was no other than the God whOln he had seen, who kept

Laban froin his treachery, ordering him not to speak evil

words to Jacob; and none other than God did he himself

beseech, saying, Rescue me fr01n the hand of my brother

Esau, for I fear him; for in conversation too with his wives

he said, God hath not suffered Laban to in}ure me. Therefore

it was none other than God Himself that Da vid too be-

sought concerning his deliverance, When I was in trouble,

I called upon the Lord, and He heard me; deliver my soul, 0

Lord, j.,.om ly-ing lips and fr01n a deceitful tongue. To Hinl

also giving thanks, he spoke the words of the Song in the

seventeenth Psahn, in the day in which the Lorù delivered

lúm from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand

of Saul, saying, I will love Thee, 0 Lord my strength; the

Lord is my strong ?'ock and my defence and deliverer. And

Paul, after enduring many persecutions, to none other than

God gave thanks, saying, Out of them all the Lord delivered

me; and He will deliver, in whom we trust. And none other

than God blessed Abraham and Isaac; and Isaac praying

for Jacob, said, lJlay God bless thee and increase thee and

multiply thee, and thou shalt be for many companies of

nations, and may He give thee the blessing of Abraham my

fatlter .


374 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CH. XXVI.


243. Gut if it bc10ng to none other than God

to bless and to deli vel', and none other was the

deliverer of Jacob than the Lord Hin1self, and if Him the

Patriarch besought for his grandsons, Him who had delivered

him, evidently none other did he join to God in his prayer,

than God's Word, whom therefore he called Angel, because it

is He alone who reveals the Father. Which the Apostle also

did when he said, Grace unto you and peace from God our Father

and the Lord Jesus Ckrist; for thus the blessing was secure,

because of the Son's indivisibility from the Father, and

because the grace given by Them is one and the same.

}11or though the Father gives it, through the Son is the

gift; and though the Son be said to vouchsafe it, it is the

Father who supplies it through and in the Son; for I thank

my God, says the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, al'Way



on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you ÌlI

Christ Jesus. And this we may see in the instance of light

and radiance; for what the light enlightens, that the

radiance irradiates; and when the radiance irradiates, from

the light is its enlightenment. So also when the Son is

beheld, so is the Father, for He is the Father's radiance;

and thus the Father and the Son are one.

244. But this is not so with things which have been

brought into being and are creatures; for when the Father

works, it is not that any Angel works, or any other creature;

for none of these is an efficient cause, but they are of things

which come to be ; and moreover being separate and divided

frOln the only God, and other than He in nature, and being

Inere works, they can neither work what God works, nor, as I

said before, when God gives grace, can they give grace

with Him. Nor, on seeing an Angel, would a n1an say that

he had seen the Father; for Angels, as it is written, are

'ministering SlJirits sent forth to serve, and are heralds of gifts

given frOin Him through the Word to their recipients.

And the Augel 011 his appearance hÏ111sclf confesses that


AGAINST ARIANISl\I.


375


he haH been sent by his Lord, as GaLricl confessed ..

I

. 1

R

 ] Y. 4

111.}I i) - .

in the case of Zacharias, and also in the case of

l\Iary, 1\Iother of God. And he who beholds a vision of

Angels, knows that he has seen the Angel aud not God. For

Zacharias saw an ....t\.l1gel; but Esaias saw the Lord. 1\Ianoe,

the father of Sml1son, saw an Angel, but 1\loses beheld

God. Gideon saw an Angel, but to Abraham appeared

God. And neither he who saw God beheld an Angel,

nor he who saw an Angel considered that he saw God;

for greatly, or rather wholly, do things of created nature

differ frOll1 God the Creator. But if at any time, when

the Angel was seen, he who saw it heard God's voice, as

took place at the bush; for the Angel of the Lord was seen

in a flame of fire out of the bush, and the Lord called J1foses

out of the bush, saying, I am the. (1od of thy father, the God

of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob, still

the Angel ,vas not the God of Abraham, but in the Angel

God spoke. And what was seen was an Angel; but God

spoke in hÎIn. For as lIe spoke to }\loses in the pillar of

a cloud in the tabernacle, so also God appears and speak



in Angels. So again to the son of Nave He spake by an

Angel. But what God speaks, it is very plain He speaks

through the 'V ord, and not through another. And the

\V ord, as being not separate from the Father, nor unlike

and foreign to the Father's Substance, what He works,

those are the Father's works, and His framing of all things

IS one with HIS; and what the Son gives, that is the

Father's gift. And he who hath seen the Son, knows that

in seeing Him, he has seen, notJ Angel, nor one l11erely

greater than Angels, nor in short any creature, but the

Father IIimself. And He who hears the 'V ord, knows

that he hears tlle Father; as he who is irradiated by the

radiance, knows that he is enlightened by the SUllo

245 For divine Scripture wishing us thus to understand

the Illatter, has given us such illustrations, as w

 ha.ve


376 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Ca. XXVI. said above, fron1 which we are able both to press

the traitorous Jews, and to refute the allegation of

Gentiles who maintain and think, on account of the Triad,

that we profess lnany Gods. For, as the illustration shows,

we do not introduce three Origins or three Fathers, as the

followers of :Thiarcion and :Thianichæus; since we have not

suggested the image of three suns, but sun and radiance.

And one only is the light from the sun in the radiance; and

so we know of but one origin; and the All-framing Word

we hold to have no other manner of godhead than that

of the Only God, because IIe is born from IIin1. Rather

then will the Ario-maniacs with reason incur the charge of

polytheism or else of atheism, because they idly talk of the

Son as external and a creature, and again of the Spirit as

from nothing. For either they will say that the Word is not

God; or, saying that lIe is God, because it is so written, but

not proper to the Father's Substance, they will be introdu-

cing many Words, as admitting in God a difference of kind ;-

(unless forsooth they shall dare to say that by participation

only, He, as all things else, is called God; though, if this

be their sentin1ent, their impiety is the same, as considering

the Word as one anlong all things)- but may this never

even come into our minds I For there is but one Face 3 of

Godhead, which is a.lso in the 'V ord; and one God, the

Father, existing of IIin1self according as He is above all,

and appearing in the Son according as He pervades all

things, and in the Spirit according as in Hinl He acts in

all things through the Word. For thus we confess God

to be one through the Trinity, and we say that our belief in

the one Godhead in the Trinity is a much more religious

conception than the god "head which the heretics acknow-

ledge with its many forms and its many parts.

246. For if it be not so, but the Word is a creature and

a work out of nothing, either He is not True God, because

3 dðo,. character. features.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


377


lIe is Himself onc of the creatures, or if they name iiE

.


i6.

HiIu God froni regard for the Scriptures, they luust

of necessity say that there are two Gods, one Creator, the

other creature, and must serve two Lords, one Ingenerate,

and the other generate and a creature; and n1ust have two

faiths, one in the True God, and the other in one who is

made and fashioned by thmnselves and called God. And

it foHows of nccessity, in so grcat blindness, that, when

they worship the Ingenerate, they renounce the generate)

and when they come to the creature, they turn from the

Creator. For they cannot see the One in the Other, because

Their natures and operations are to them foreign and

distinct from each other. And with such sentiments, they

will certainly be going on to more gods, for this is the

proceeding of those who have revolted from the One God.

'Vherefore then, when the Arians have these speculations

and views, do they not rank themselves with the Gentiles?

for they too, as these, worship the creature Inore than God

the Creator of all; and though they shrink frUIn the

Gentile name, in order to deceive the ullskilful, yet they

secretly hold a like sentiment with them.

247. Their subtle saying which they are accustomed

to urge, "1Ve say not two Ingenerates," they plainly em-

ploy to deceive the sÏInple; for in their very professing " We

say not two Ingenerates," they inlply two Gods, and these

with different natures, one gencrate and one Ingenerate.

And though the Greeks worship one Ingenerate and ll1any

generate gods, while Ariana one Ingenerate and one generate,

this is no difference between them; for the God whom

these men call generate is one out of many; and again, the

many gods of the Greeks have the same nature with this

one, for both he and they are creatures. Wretched then are

they and greater traitors than the Jews in their denial of

the Christ, and they wallow with the Gentiles, being hateful

to God, as worshipping the creature and many deities.


378 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CII. XXVI.


24R. For there is One God, and not many, and

One is His 'V 01'<1, and not Illany; for the 'Y ord

is God, and lIe alone has the Pace of the Father. Being then

such, the Saviour Himself urged the Jews with these words,

The Father Himself who hath sent .Jle, hath borne witness of

jfe; ye have neither heard His voice at any time nor seen His

Face; and ye have not His Word abiding in you; for whom

He hath sent, Him ye believe not. Suitably has He joined

the JVord to the Face, to show that the 'V ord of God is

Himself Inlage and Impress and Face of His Father; and

that the Jews who did not receive IIim who spoke to

them, thereby did not receive the Word, which is the

Face of God. This too it was that the Patriarch Jacob

having seen, received a blessing from Him and the name

of Israel instead of ,T acob, as divine Scripture witnesses,

saying, And as the Face of God passed by, the sun rose upon

him. And This it was who said, He that hath seen lIIe hath

seen the Father, and, I in the Father and the Father in J.JIe,

and, I and the Father are one; for thus God is One, and

one the faith in the Father and Son; for, though the

VV' ord be God, the Lord our God is one Lord; for the Son

belongs to that

ne, and is inseparably His according to

what is proper and peculiar to His Substance.

249. The Arians, however, reply, "Not as you say, but

as we will

 and we will thus :-So are the Son and the

Father One, and so is the Father in the Son and the Son in

the Father, as we too may become one in Him. For this

is written in the Gospel according to John, and Christ

desired it for us in these words, Holy j?{tther, keep through

Thine own Nall'le those whom Thou hast given life, that they

may be one, as We are. And shortly after: Neither pray

I for these alone, but for them also wkich shall believe on jfe

through their word; that they all '1Jlay be one, as Thou, Father,

art in life, und I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us,

that the world 'Jnay beliel'e tltat Thou hast sellt ...lIe. And tlu


AGAINST ARIANISM.


379


glory f{'hich Thou ga'L'est life I have given them, ii

Di 1:


7.

that they may be one, even as fVe are oue; I in

them, and Thou in Jfe, that they may be made pmfed in one,

and that the world may know that Thou hast sent Jfe." Then,

as having found an evasion, these lnen of craft 4 add, "If,

as we become one in the Father, so also He and the

Father are one, and thus He too is in the Father, how pretend

you fronl His saying, I and the Father are One, aud I in

the Father and the Father in J[e, that He is proper and like

the Father's Substance? for it follows either that we too

are proper to the Father's Substance, or He foreign to it,

as we are foreign."

250. vVhat is this but saying after the pattern of the

evil one, "'V e will ascend to heaven, we will be like the

l\Iost High." For what is given to man by grace, this

they would make equal to the Godhead of the Giver.

Thus hearing that men are called sons, they thought

themselves equal to the True Son who is by nature such.

And now again hearing frOln the Saviour, that they may be

one as TVe ære, they deceive themselves, and are arrogant

enough to think that they may be such as the SOIl is in

the Father and the Father in the Son; not considering

the fall of their father .the devil, which happenéd upon

such an imagination. If then, as we have n1any tÏInes

said, the 'V ord of God is the same with us, and nothing

differs frolll us except in time, let Him be like us, and

have the same place with the Father as we have; nor let

HiIn be called Only-begotten, nor only Word or Wisdom

of the Father; but let the same name be of COinmon


 oi ÒÓÀWl. And so oi Of.OUTVYf.Ì!:,

supr.

 16; oi tcatcólþpovH;, infr.



26; oi ÒfÍÀawl, ibid.; oi 7rapálþpovf.t;,

de Deer.

 8, a.; oi ãeÀwt, Orat.

ii.

 39 fin.; oi òV(JUf.ßf."if;, in illud

Omn. 3 fin.; oi OavfLauToí, Ep. Æg.

14, e.16 init.; oi 7ravovpyot, Ep.Æg.

16. c.; oi 7rapávofLot, Ep. Æg. 16,


d.; oi ãTtfLOt, Serap. i. 15, f.; oi

åVÓ1JTOL, Orat. ii.

 11, c. ; oi fL1JòÈ.v

åÀ1JedJOVTf.t;, Rist. Ar. 7, b.; oi

å7rávepw7rot lCaì fLLuÓtcaÀoL, ibid. e.;

oi V7r07rTOL, ibid. 9, d. ; oi TOÀfL1Jpoí,

ibid. 20, e.; oi ãrppovf.{;, ibid. 47, d.,

&c., &c.


380 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CH. XXVI. application to all us who are like Hinl. For it is

right that they who have one nature should llave

their name in cOlllInon, though they diff

r frOln each other

in point of time. For ...

dam was a man, and Paul a man,

and he who has come into being at this day is a man, and

time is not that condition which alters the nature of the

race. If then the 1V ord also differs from us only in time,

then we must be as He. But in truth neither we are Word

or WisdOln, nor is He creature or work; else why are we all

sprung from one, and He the Only 1V ord? but though it be

suitable to them thns to speak, in us at least it is unsuitable

to entertain their blasphelnies. And yet, needless though

it be to refine 5 upon these passages, considering their so

clear and religious sense, and our own orthodox belief, yet

that their irreligion may be shown here also, come let us

shortly, as we have received frOln the fathers, expose

their heterodoxy fron1 the passage in question.

251. It is a custom with divine Scripture to take the

things of nature as inlages and illustrations for mankind;

and this it does, that from these physical objects the

moral iInpulses of man may be explained; and thus their

conduct shown to be either bad or righteous. For in-

stance, in the case of the bad, as when it charges, Be ye

not like to horse and mule which have no understanding. Or

as when it says, complaining of those who have beconle

such, Man, being in honour hath no understanding, but is

compared unto the beasts that perish. And again, They

were as fed horses in the morning. And the Saviour to

expose Herod said, Tell that fox: but, on the other hand,

charged His disciples, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the

1nidst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents and innocent


5 7rEPI.Epyá

E(1ear., vid. Orat. Ii.


 34,

 73. fin. iii.

 1.

 43,

init. iv.

 33 init. Serap. i. 15

fin. 17, d. 18, e. 7rEpífpya in

Acts xix. 19, is generally in-

terpreted of magic, though it


is otherwise explained as em-

bracing various kinds of bad

books in Ortlob. Dissert. ape

Thesaur. Nov. Theol.-Phil. in

N. 1'. t. 2.


AGAINST ARIAXISM.


381


as dOVBS. And lIe said this, not that we may be- i


.


.9.

come in nature beasts of burden, or become ser-

pents and doves; for He hath not so Inade us Himself, and

therefore nature does not allow of it; but that we might

eschew the irrational motions of the one, and being aware of

the wisdOll1 of that other animal, might not be deceived by

it, and might take on us the meekness of the dove. Again,

taking patterns for man from divine subjects, the Saviour

says, Be ye merc[ful, as your Father who is in heaven is

merciful; and, Be YB perfect, as your heavenly Father is

perfect. And He said this too, not that we might be-

come such as the Father; for to become as the Father is

impossible for us creatures, who have been brought into

being out of nothing; but as He charged us, BB ye not

like to horse, not lest we should become as draught animals,

but that we ought not to imitate their want of reason; so

not that we might become as God, did He say, Be YB

merciful as your FathBr, but that, looking at His beneficent

acts, what we do well, we might do not for men's sake,

but for His sake, so that from Him and not from men we

may have the reward. For as, although there be one Son

by nature, True and Only-begotten, we too become sons,

not as He in nature and truth, but according to the grace

of Him that calleth; and though we are n1cn from the

earth, we are yet called gods, not as the True God or His

VV ord, but as has pleased God who has given us that

grace; so also, as God do we become merciful, not by

being made equal to God, nor becoming in nature and

truth b

nefactors, (for it is not our gift to benefit, but it

belongs to God,) but in order that what has COll1e to us

from God Himself by grace, these things we may impart

to others without making distinctions, but largely towards

all extending our kind service. For ouly then and in

this way can we a.nyhow become imitators, and in no other



when we minister to others what comes from Him.


..


382 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


252. And as we put a fair and orthodox sense

upon these texts, such again is the sense of the

passage in John. For He does not say, that as the Son is

in the Father, such we must beconle :-whence could it

be? when He is God's )V ord and Wisdom, and we were

fashioned out of the earth, and He is by nature and sub-

stance "\V ord and true God,-for thus speaks John, JVe

know that the Son of God is come, and He hath given us an

understanding to know Him that is True, and we are in Him

that is true, even in His Son Jesus Christ; this is the true

God and eternal life. And we are made sons through IIim

by adoption and grace, as partaking of His Spirit, (for

as many as received Him, he says, to them gave He power to

become child'J'en of God, even to them that believe on His

Name,) and therefore also He is the Truth, (saying, I am.

the Truth, and in His address to His Father, He said

Sanctify them through Thy Truth, Thy TVord is Truth;)

but we by imitation become virtuous and sons :-therefore,

-not that we may become such as He, did He say, that they

may be one as We are; but that as He, being the 'V ord, is in

Ilis own Father, so we too, taking Him as an exemplar

and looking at Him, Inight becOlne one towards each other

in unanimity and oneness of spirit, nor be at variance as

the Corinthians, but breathe the same sentiments as those

five thousand in the Acts, who were as one. For it is as

sons, not as the Son; as gods, not as He Himself, and mer-

ciful as the Father, but still not as the Father. And, as has

been said, by so becoming one, as the Father and the Son,

we shall be such, not as the Father is by nature in the Son

and the Son in the Father, but according to our own

nature, and as it is possible for us from that nature to be

moulded and to learn how we ought to be one, just as we

learned also to be lnerciful. For like things arc naturally

one with like; thus all flesh is ranked together in kind;

but the VV ord is unlike us and like the Father. And


Cn.XXVI.


An-AINRT ARIANISM.


383


therefore while He is in nature and truth one ED. BEN.

iii.

 13-21.

with His own Pather, we, as being of one kind with

each other, (for from one were all made. and one is the nature

of all men,) become one with each other in good disposition,

having as our copy the Son's natural unity with the Father.

For as He taught us meekness from Himself, saying, Learn

of J[e,for I am meek and lowly in heart, not that we may be-

come equal to Him, which is impossible, but that looking to-

wards Him, we nlay remain meek continually, so also here,

wishing that our good disposition 6 towards each other

should be true and firm and indissoluble, frOln Himself

taking the pattern, He says; that they may be one, as fVe

are whose oneness is indivisible; that is, that "they learning

frOln Us what is Our indivisible Nature, may preserve in like

manner agreement one with another." And this imitation

of things which are in nature is especially safe for man,

as has been said; for since they remain and never

change, whereas the conduct of men is very change-

able, one may look to what is unchangeable by nature,

and avoid what is bad, and re-model themselves on what is

bes t.

z53. And for this reason also the words that they may be

one in Us, have a right sense: "in Us" Jneans "after

our pattern." If, for instance, it were possible for us

to become as the Son in the Father, the words ought to

run, "that they may be one in Thee," as the Son is in the

Father; but, as it is, He has not said this; but by saying

in Us He has pointed out the distance and difference; that

He indeed is Only in the Only Father, as Only 'V ord and

'Visdom; but we in the Son, and through Him in the

Father. And thus speaking, He meant this Only, "By

Our unity may they also be so one with each other, as We

6 òwOiCJu, disposition; this is 7. Theod. Rist. i. 4 (5), init.

its sense in Deer.

 2 fin. Orat. Parker strangely translates in ii

ii.

 4, iii.

 20. Monach. init.

 4, "external condition."

,l-list. Arian.

 45. Hipp. c. Noet.


.


384 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUB


Ca. XXVI. are one in nature and truth; for otherwise t.hey

-..-- could not be one, except by learning unity in Us."

And that in Us has this signification we may learn from

Paul, who says, These things I have in a figure

lransfelTed to rnyself and to Apollos, that ye may learn in

us not to be pulled up above that is 'written. The words

in Us, then, are not "in the Father," as the Son is in

Him; but imply an eXalnl)le and image, instead of saying,

"Let them learn of Us." For as Paul to the Corinthians,

so is the oneness of the Son and the Father a pattern and

lesson to all, by which they may learn, looking to that natural

unity of the Father and the Son, how they themselves ought to

be one in spirit towards each other. Or if it needs to account

for the phrase otherwise, the words in Us may mean the

same as saying, that in the power of the Father and the

Son they may be one, speaking the same things; for

without God this is imposssible. And this mode of speech

also we lnay find in the divine writings, as In God will W6

do great acts; and In T1UJe will we tread down our enemies.

Therefore it is plain, that in the Name of Father and Son

we shall be aùle, becoll1Ïng one, to hold firm the bond of

charity.

254. For

 dwelling still on the same thought, the Lord

says, And the glory which Thou gavest .life I have given to

them, that they may be one as We are one. Suitably bas He

here too said, not, "That they may be in Thee as lam,"

for that would bave .been to make Him one of them, and

to make them one with the Father, but as We are; but as

to the word as, it signifies not identity with, but an image

and example of the things spoken of. The Word then

has the real and true identity of nature with the Father;

but to us it is given to ÏInitate it, as has been said; for He

iInrnediately aùùs, I in tltew, and Thou in 1I1e; that thpy

ma.lJ be 'lnade J1f1Ject in one. Here at length the l.4orù asks

something greater and more perfect for us; for it is plain


AGAINST ARIA1-

IS

r.


885


that it is in us that the Word has come to be, for ED. BEN.

iii.

 21-23.

He has put on our body. And Thou Fltther in lIle ;

"for I am Thy Word, and since Thou art in 1\Ie, because I

am Thy \V ord, and since I aJn in them by reason of the

body, and since by reason of Thee the salvation of men is

perfected in 1\1e, therefore I ask that they also may become

one, according to the body that is in Me and according to its

perfection; that they too may become perfect, having one-

ness with It, and having become all one in It; that, as if

all were carried by 1\le, all may be one body and one spirit,

and may grow up unto a perfect Inan." For we all,

partaking of the Same, become one body, having the

one Lord in ourselves. Since the passage then has

this meaning, still more plainly is refuted the hetero-

doxy of Christ's enemies. I repeat it: if He had said

simply and absolutely "that they may be one in Thee,"

or "that they and I may be one in Thee," God's enemies

had had some plea, though an extravagant; but in fact He

has not spoken sÜnply, but, As Thou, Father, in iJfe, and I

in Thee, that they may be all one.

255. l\loreover, by using the word as, He marks that He

is speaking of those who only distantly become what

lIe is in the Father; distantly not in place but in

nature; for in place nothing is far from God, in nature

alone all things are far from Him. And, as I said be-

fore, whoso uses the particle as hnplies, not identity nor

equality with, but a copy of the Inatter in question, when

viewed in a certain respect. Indeed we may learn also

from our Saviour HÏ1nself, when He says, For as Jonas was

three days and three nights 'in the whale's belly, so shall the

Son of 71'lan be three days and three nights in the heart of the

earth. For Jonas was not as the Saviour, nor did Jonas

go down to Hades; nor was the whale Hades; nor did .J onas,

when swallowed up, bring up those who had before been

swallowed by the whale, but he alone caIne forth, when

nb


:386 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Cli. XXVI. the whale was bidden. Therefore there is no

identity nor equality signified in the term as, but

one thing and another; and there is a certain kind of

parallel to our Lord in the case of Jonas, on account of the

three days. In like manner then we too, when the Lord says

a.'ì, neither become as the Son is in the Father, nor as the

Father is in the Son. For we becOIlle one as the Father and

the Son in mind and agremnent of spirit, alHI the Saviour will

be as Jonas buried in the earth; but as the Saviour is not

Jonas, nor, as he, was swallowed up, so did the Saviour descend

into Hades, but it is only a parallel; in like manner, if we

too become one, as the Son in the Father, we shall not be

as the Son nor equal to Him; for He and we are but

parallels. For on this account is the word as applied to

us; since things differing from others in nature becOIlle

as they when viewed in a certain relation.

256. Wherefore the Son Himself, simply and without

any condition, is in the Father; for this attribute He has

by nature; but for us, to whom it is not natural, there is

needed a pattern and example, that He may say of ns, As

Thou in life, and I in Thee. "Anù when they shall be so

perfected," He says, "then the world knows that Thou

hast sent 1\1e, for unless I had come and borue this thcir

body, no one of theln had been perfected, but one and all

had remained corruptible. Work Thou then in thenl, 0

Father; and as Thou hast given to 1\1e to bear this body,

grant to them Thy Spirit, that they too in It may becOIne

one, and Inay be perfected in l\Ie. For their perfecting shows

that Thy 'V ord has sojourned alilong the111; and the world

seeing them perfect and full of God, will believe altogether

that Thou hast sent Me, and 1 have sojourned here. For

whence is this their perfecting, but that I, Thy 'V ord,

having borne their body, and beconle man, have perfected

the work which Thou gavest :rvle, 0 :Father? And thè work

is perfeeteù, becausc nlell, redeemed frOln sin j no longcr


AGAIKST ARIANISM.


387


remain dead; but being made gods, have in each ii


. 2


4.

other, by looking at l\Ie, the bond of charity."

257. 1Ve then, by way of giving a rude view of the lan-

guage used in thi

 passage, have been led into Inany words;

but blessed John in his Epistle will show the sense of the

words, concisely and much more perfectly than we can.

And he will both disprove the interpretation of these

iInpious men, and will teach how we conle to be in God

and God in us, and how again in Him we become One, and

how utterly the Son differs in nature frOln us; and he will

thereby rid the Arians of their iInagination that they shall

be as the Son, lest they hear it said to theIn, 1 J }wu art a man

and not God, and, Stretch not thyself, being poor, beside the

rich. John then thus writes: lIereby know we that we

d'well in Him and He in us, because He hatlì given us of His

Spirit. Therefore, because of the grace of the Spirit

which has been given to us, in HÜn we COlne to be, and

He in us; and since it is the Spirit of God, therefore

through His becOlning in us, reasonably are we, as having

the Spirit, considered to be in God, and thus is God in us.

Not then as the Son in the Father, so also we come to be

in the Father; for the Son of God does not merely partake

the Spirit, in order to His being in the Father; nor again

does He receive the Spirit at all, but rather He supplies It

Hinlself to all; and the Spirit does not unite the VV ord to

the Father, but rather the Spirit receives frOIn the 'V ord.

And the Son is in the Father, as His proper Word and

Radiance; but we, apart from the Spirit, are foreign and

distant fr01n God, and by the participation of the Spirit

we are knit in to the Godhead; so that our being in the

Father is not ours by nature, but is the Spirit's gift who

is in us and abides in us, while by confession of the faith

we preserve It in ns, John again saying, Whosoever shall

cOllfess that JpSllS is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him

and he in God.


Bb2


388 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


Ca. XXVI.


258. What then is our likeness and equality to

the Son? rather, are not the Arians confuted on

every side? and especially by John, from whom we learn

that the Son is in the Father in one way, and we become

in Him in another, and that neither we shall ever be as He,

nor is the Word as we; unless indeed they boldly persist in

saying still, that the Son also by participation of the Spirit

ann by ethical iInprovement 7 came to be in the Father.

But here again there is an excess of impiety, even in ad-

lnitting the thought. For He, as has been said, gives to the

Spirit, and whatever the Spirit hath, He hath from the

Word. The Saviour, then, saying of us, As Thou, Father,

aTt in .1.1fe, and I in Thee, that they too may be one in Us,

does not signify that we were to have identity with Him,

as was shown frOIn the instance of Jonas; but it is a

claim upon the Father, as John has written, that the Spirit

should be vouchsafed through Him to those who believe



through whom we are found to be in God, and in this

respect to be united in Him. For since the Word is in

the Father, and the Spirit is given from the Word, He

wills that we should receive the Spirit, in order that,

when we receive It, then, having the Spirit of the Word

who is in the Father, we too Inay be found, by reason of

the Spirit, One in the Word, and through Him with the

Father.

259. t\.nd if He says, as u 1 e, this again is only a reqnest

that such grace of the Spirit as is given to the disciples

may be without failure or revocation. For what the Word

has in the way of nature, as I said, in the Father, that He

wishes to be given to lIS through the Spirit irrevocably;

which the Apostle knowing, said, Who shall separate us

fro m the love of Oltrist? for the gifts of God and grt1Æe qf


7 ßfÀnWtTH 7rpá

fW

, and so ad (supr. pp. 215 init.,

22 fin.

27,

Afro

, TpÓrrWJI ßf.XTíw(w;, 8. Vid. &c.)

also Orat. i.


 37, 43, 47, &c.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


889


His calling are 'Withnut repentance. It is t.he Spirit "


. 2 B 4

N 2 .

lII. '1/ 6.

then which is in God, and not we viewed in our

own selves; and as we are sons and gods becam

e of the Word

in us, so we shall be in the Son and in the Father, and we

shall be accounted to have become one in Son and in Father,

inaslnuch as that Spirit is in us which is in the Word who is

in the Father. vVhen then a man falls from the Spirit for

any wickedness, if he repent after his fall, the grace remains

irrevocably to such souls as have the win; but he who has

fallen is no longer in God, (because that Holy Spirit and

Paraclete which is in God has deserted hin1,) and shaH hence-

forth be in him to whom he has subjected himself, as took

place in Saul's instance; for the Spirit of God departed frOln

hin1 and an evil spirit afflicted him. God's enemies hearing

this ought to be thereupon abashed, and no longer to feign

then1selves equal to God. But they neither understand (for

the irreligious, he saith, does not understand knowledge) nor

endure religious words, but find them heavy even to hear.


CHAPTEH XXVII.


Answer to obj'ections from Scripture; Introductory to Texts

frO'/Jl the Gospels on the Illcarnalion.

260. For behold, as if not wearied out in their impieties,

but with hardened Pharaoh, while they hear and see the

Saviour's human attributes in the Gospels, they have utterly

forgotten, like the Samosatene, the Son's paternal Godhead,

and with arrogant and audacious tongue they say, "How

can the Son be from the Father by nature, and be like lIim

in substance, who says, All power is given unto Ale; and

'l'he Father j'udgeth no man, but hath committed all j'udgment

unto the Son; and The Father loveth the Son, and /talh given

all things into His hand; he that believeth in the Son hath

everlasting life; and again, All things are delit'ered unto J[e


390 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CH. XXVII. Of lily Fatller, and no one knoweth the Father

save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will

reveal Him; and again, All that the Father hath given unto

111e shall fome to life." On this they observe, "If, as ye

say, He was Son by nature, He had no need to receive

aught, but lIe had it hy nature as a Son."

261. "Or how can He be the natural and true Power of

the Father, who near upon the season of the passion says,

Now is J[y soul t1'0 u bled, and what shall I say? Father,

save .1.11e from this hour; but for this came I unto this hour.

Father, glorify Thy Name. Then came there a voice from

henz'en, saying, I have both glm.ijied it, and will glorify it

again. And He said the same another thne: Father, if it

be possible, let this cup pass from life; and when Jeslls had

thus said, He was troubled in spirit, and testified and said,

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betra,lJ

l1fe." Then these perverse Inen argue: "If lIe were Power,

He had not feared, but rather He had supplied power to

others. "

262. Furt

er they say: "If He were by nature the true

and proper Wisdom of the Father, how is it written, And

Jesu8 increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with

God and man? In like manner, when He had COlne into

the parts of Cæsarea Philippi, He asked the disciples

whon1 men said that He was; and when lIe Calne to

Bethany He asked where Lazarus lay; and He said

besides to His disciples, How many loaves have ye? How

then," say they, "is He 'VisdOll1, who increased in wisdom,

and who was evidently ignorant of that which He asked

of other8?"

263. This too they urge: "IIow can He be the proper

'V ord of the Father, without whOln the Father never was,

by whom He n1akes all things, as ye think, whereas He said

upon the Cross, i11y God, .Jly God, why hast Thou forsaken

J/e? and He had before that prayed, Glorify Thy Name,


AGAINST ARiANISM.


391


and, 0 Father, glorify Thou life 'with the glory which iii


'2:


7.

I had with Thee before the world was. And He -

used to pray in the deserts, and charge His disciples to pray

lest they should enter into temptation; and, The spirit indeed

is willing, He said, but the flesh is weak. And, Of that day

and that hour knoweth no man, no, nor the Angels, neither

the Son." Upon this again they say, "If the Son were,

according to your interpretation, eternally existent with God,

He had not been ignorant of the Day, but had known it

as being 'V ord; nor had He been forsaken as being co-

existent; nor had asked to receive glory, as having it in

the Father; nor would have prayed at all, for, being the

\V ord, He had needed nothing; but since He is a creature

and one of things which were brought into being, therefore

He thus spoke, and needed what He had not; for it belongs

to creatures to require and to have needs."

264. This then is what these men allege in their dis-

courses; and if they thus argue, it would be only consistent

in them to speak yet more daringly: "'Vhy in the first

instance did the Word becOlue flesh?" and they might

add, "For how could He, being God, beconle man?" or,

"How could the Immaterial bear a body?" or they Iuight

speak with Caiaphas still more .J udaically, "Why in short

did Christ, being a mere man, make IIinlself God?" for

this doctrine and the like the

 ews carped at when they

sa.w Him, and the Arians repudiate when they read of Him,

and have fallen away into blasphelnies. If then a man

should carefully parallel the words of these and those, he

will of a certainty find theln both arriving at tIle saine in-

fidelity, and the daring of their hnpiety equal, and their

quarrel with ns a joint one. 8 For the Jews said, "How,

being a man, can He be God?" And the Arians, "If He

wpre very God from God, how could lIe become man?"

ð This parallel between the drawn out by Athan. in Deer.

Arians and the Jews is also

 1 and

 (supr. pp. 12, 13).


392


THREE DtSCOtJRSES OF ATHANASIUS


CH. XXVII. And the ,Jews were offended then and mocked,

saying, "Had He been Son of God, He had not

endured the Cross;" and the Arians, taking their stand

over against then1, urge upon us, "How dare ye say that

He is the Word proper to the Father's Substance, who had

a body, so as to be capable of enduring all this?" Next,

while the Jews sought to kill the Lord, because He said that

God was His own Father, and made HiInself equal to Him,

as working what the Father works, the Arians also, not

only have learned to deny both that He is equal to God, and

that God is the proper and natural Father of the 1V ord, but

those who hold this they seek to kill. Again, whereas the

Jews said, "Is not this the Son of Joseph, whose father and

mother we know? how then is it that He saith, Before

Abraham was, I am, and I came down from heaven?" the

Arians on the other hand make response 9 and say con-

formably, "How can He be Word or God, who slept as

man, and wept, and inquired?" Thus both parties deny

the Eternity and Godhead of the Word in consequence of

those human attributes which the Saviour took on Him by

reason of that flesh which He bore.

265. Extravagance then like this being Judaic, and

Judaic after the mind of Judas the traitor, let them openly

confess themselves scholars of Caiaphas and Herod, instead


Hence his phrase oi vvv 'Iovòa'ic t

for Arians (in spite of his some-

times using it for the Jews of his

day, e.g. Orat. i.


 H, 10, 38, ii.

1, &c.), e.g. 'Iovòa'iot oï TE 7raÀawi

.cai 01 vÉOt OVTOt, Orat. iii.

 52.

T[;J1J vvv 'Iovôatwv, in illud Omnia,


 5. 01 rórl: .cai oi vÉOt vvv, Sent.

D. 3, TWV vÉwv 'Iovòaíwv, ibid. 4,

init. (vid. also .cai oi TÓrf. 'Iovôa'iot, i.

o rat.

 8, yet vide 01 TÓrf. 'Iovòa'ioL,

de Syn.

 33.) TWV VV}! 'Iovôaï-


ÓVTWV, Orat. i.

 39. 'ÝJ 'IovôaïlCq

vÉa a;pf.(JL!:, Rist. Arian. 19 fin.

'Iovôa'ioL oi TÓTE . . . . ' ApELavoi

vvv 'Iovôat

ovTf.!:, Deer.

 2. The

Ariana are addressed under the


name of Jews, W XpL(JTóp.axot lea;

áXápt(JTOt ' IovòaioL, Orat. iii.

 55.

They are said to be Jews passim.

It is observable, that Eusebius

makes a point. on the contrary,

of calling Marcellus a Judaiser

and Jewish, on the ground that

he denied that \Visdom was more

than an attribute in the Divine

l\Iind, e.g. pp. 42, c. 62, fin. 65, d.

9 f.7raIeOVov(JLV. Montfaucon in

Onomast. (Athan. Opp. t. 2, ad

calc.) adduces other passages in

bis author, where f.7ra.cDVf.LV, like

V7rWCOVELV, means to answer, vid.

Apolog. contr. Arian.

 88, Apol.

ad Const.

 16, init.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


393


of cloaking Judaism with the nmne of Christianity, iii


.

f


.

and let them deny outright, as we said before, the

Saviour's presence in the flesh, for a disbelief of this sort

is akin to their heresy; or if they fear openly to J udaise

and be circumcised,! from servility towards Constantius and

for their sake whom they have beguiled, then let them keep

from saying what the Jews say; for if they disown the

nanle, let theJn in fairness renounce the doctrine. For we

are Christians, 0 Arians, Christians we; it is our privilege

well to know the Gospels concerning the Sayiour, and neither

with Jews to stone Him, if we hear of His Godhead and

Eternity, nor with you to stumble at such lowly Bayings as

JIe may speak for our sakes as man. If then you would

become Christians, put off Arius's Inadness and cleanse with

the words of religion those ears of yours which blaspheming

has defiled; knowing that, by ceasing to be Arians, you

will cease also from the malevolence of the present Jews.

rrhen at once will truth shine on you out of darkness, and

ye will no longer reproach us with holding two Eternals,

but ye will with us acknowledge that the Lord is God's

true Son by nature, and not as simply eternal in Himself..

but revealed as co-existing in the Father's eternity. He

is more than eternal; He is co-eternal. For there are

things called eternal of which He is Framer; thus in the

twenty-third Psalm it is written, Lift up your heads, 0 ye

gates, and be ye lift up, ?Ie everlasting doors; and it is plain

that through HÜn these things were made; but if even of

things everlasting He is the Fran1er, who of us shall be

able henceforth to dispute that He is anterior to those

things eternal, and in consequence is proved to be Lord

not so much frOln His eternity, as in that He is God's

Son; for being the Son, He is inseparable froin the Father,

and never was it when He existed not, but He was always;


1 And so supr. p. 216.


394 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATtIANASIUS


Cli. XXVII. and being the Father's Image and Radiance, He

has the Father's eternity also.

266. Now that they certainly give an unsound interpreta-

tion of these passages from the Gospels we may easily see,

if we take into account the scope of that faith which we

Christians hold, and apply it as our rule, as the Apostle

teaches in our reading of inspired Scripture. 2 For

Christ's enemies, being ignorant of this drift, have wan-

dered fr01n the way of truth, and have stumbled on a

stone of stumbling, thinking otherwise than they should

think. Now the scope and form of Scripture teaching, as

we have often said, is this,-it contains a double announce-

Inent of the Saviour; that He was ever God, and is the

Son, being the Father's Word and Radiance and Wisdom;

and that afterwards for us He took flesh of a Virgin, of

l\lary, Mother of God, and was made man. And this scope

is to be found traced throughout inspired. Scripture, as the

Lord Himself has said, Search tile Scriptures, for they are

they which testify of ...lIe. But lest I should exceed in

writing, by bringing together all the pa.ssages on the

subject, let it suffice to n1ention as a specimen, first John

saying, In the beginning 'Was the }Vord, and the }Vord was

with God, and the Word 'Was God. The same 'Was in tlte

beginning u'ith God. All tltings 'We're 'Jìwde by Him, aud

'without Him 'Was 'made not one thing,. next, And the TVord

'was made flesh and dwelt among u.'$, ann '/l'e bPlzeld His .ljlory,

the glory as of the Only-begotten of thp Father,. and next

Panl writing, TVho bein.q in tlte form of God, tltou,qht it not

robbery to be equal 'With God, but made Himsf'lj of no repu-

tation, and tnole upon Him the form of a servant, and 'Was

made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion like

a man, He humblpd Himself, and became obedient unto death,

even the death of the Cross. Anyone beginning with these

2 Vid. AppenJ. Regula Fidei; also supr. pp. 163, 214, infr.

:


9, 407 note, 427, &c.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


895


passages anJ going through the whole of Scripture, ii

D




30.

upon the interpretation which they suggest, will

perceive how in the beginning the Father said to HÌIll, Let

there be light, and Let there be a firmament, and Let us make

man; and how in fulness of the ages, fIe sent Him into the

world, not that He might judge the world, but that the world

by fIim might be saved, and how accordingly it is written,

Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a

Son, and they shall call His Namp Enunanuel, which, being

interpreted, is God with us. The reader then of divine

Scripture may acquaint hiIllself with those passages from

the older books; and from the Gospels on the other hand

he will perceive that the Lord became man; for tlte Word,

he says, becarne flesh and dwelt ltmon.q us.

267. And He became n1an, and did not come into man;

for this it is necessary to know, lest perchance these n1en

fall into this notion also, and beguile any into thinking, that,

as in former tin1es the 'V ord was used to come into each

of the saints, so now He sojourned in a man, hallowing him

also, and manifesting hÌ1nself as in the others. For if it

were so, and He only appeared in a man, it were nothing

strange, nor had those who saw Him been startled, saying,

'Vhence is He? and wherefore dost Tholl, being a man,

luake Thyself God? for they were fmniliar with the idea,

from the words, And the TVord of the Lord came to the

Prophets one by one. But now, since the "\Y ord of <Jod,

by WhUlll all things came to be, endured to becOlne also

Son of man, and hUlnbled HiInself, taking a servant's form,

therefore to the Jews the Cross of Christ is a scandal, but

to us Christ is God's power and God's wisdO'1n; for the

TVord, as John says, bpca'/np flesh; (it being the custom of

Scripture to call nutn by the name of flesh, as it says by

Joel the Prophet, I will pour out Jfy Spirit upon all flesh;

and as Daniel said to Astyages, I may not worship idols

made with hands, but the Li'IJin.q God, who hath created tlte


396 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANARTUS


CH. XXVII. heaven and the Ul'J'th, and hath .çovere

qnty Ot'er all

flesh; for both he and Joel call n1ankind flesh.)

Of old time He was wont to come to the Saints individually,

and to hallow those who truly received Him; but neither,

on their birth, was it said that He had become man, nor,

when they suffered, was it said that He I-limse1f suffered.

But when He came among us from lVlary, once for all in

falness of the ages, for the abolition of sin, (for so it wa:=;

pleasing to the Father to send His own Son, made of a woman,

made. under the Law,) then it is said, that lIe took flesh and

became man, and in that flesh He suffered for us, (as PeteI'

says, Christ therefore having suffered for us in the flesh,) that

it might be shown, and that we all Jnight believe, that,

whereas He was ever God, and hallowed those to whOln

He came, and ordered all things according to the Father's

will, afterwards for our sakes He became man, and bodily,

as the Apostle says, the Godhead dwelt in the flesh; as

much as to say, "Being God, He had His own body, and

using this is an instrument, 3 He became man for our sakes."

268. Ãnd on account of this, the properties of the flesh

are said to be His, since He was in it, such as to hunger,

to thirst, to suffer, to weary, and the like, of which the

flesh is capable; while on the other hand the works proper

to the "'tV ord HiInsclf, such as to raise the dead. to restore

sight to the blind, and to cure the wonlan with an issue

of blood, He did through His own body, and the Word

bore the infirn1Ïties of the flesh, as His own, for His was

the flesh; and the flesh ministered to the works of the

Godhead, because the Godhead was in it, for the body

was God's. And well has the Prophet said carTied; and

has not said, "lIe tended our infifJnities," lest, as Lcing

external to the body, and only healing it, as He has

always done, He should leave men subject still to death;

but He carries onr infirlnities, and He HiInse]f bean:) our

3 Vid. App. ópyavov.


AGAINST ARIANISM.


397


sins , that it might be shown that He became man ED. BE1J.

'-' iii.

 30-32.

for us, and that the body which in HiIn bore

them was His proper body; and, while He recei ved no

hurt Himself by bearing our sins in His body on the tree,

as Peter speaks, we men were redeemed from our own affec-

tions, and were filled with the righteousness of the Word.

"\Vhence it was that, when the flesh suffered, the Word was

not external to it; and therefore is the passion said to be

His; and when He did divinely His Father's works, the

flesh was not external to Him, but in the body itself did

the Lord do them. Hence, when made man, He said,

If I do not the works of the Father, believe JIe not;

but if I do, though ye believe not lJIe, believe the works,

that ye may klWw that the Father is in JIe, and I in Him.

269. And thus when there was need to raise Peter's

wife's mother who was sick of a fever, He stretched forth

His hand humanly, but He stopped the illness divinely.

And in the case of the man blind from the birth, hmman was .

the spittJe which He gave forth from the flesh, but divinely

did He open the eyes through the clay. And in the case

of Lazarus, He gave forth a human voice, as man; but

divinely, as God, did He raise Lazarus from the dead.

These things were so done, were so manifested, because

lie had a body, not in appearance, but in truth; and it

beseemed that the Lord, in putting on hlunan flesh, should

put it on whole with the affections proper to it; that, as we

say that the body was proper to Him, so also we may say

that the affections of the body were absolutely proper to

Him, though they did not touch Him according to His God-

head. If then the body hàd been another's, to that other

too had been the affections attributed; but if the flesh is the

VV ord's (for the Word became flesh,) of necessity then the

affections also of the flesh are ascribed to HiIn, whose the

flesh is. And to whom the bodily affections are ascribed,

such nmnely as to be condemned, to be soourgcd, to thirst,


3

8 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CR. XXVII. and the cross, and death, and the other infirmities

-- of the body, of HÏ1n too is the triumph and the

grace. For this cause then, consistently and fittingly such

affections are ascribed not to another, but to the Lord; that

the grace also may be from Him, and that we may become, not

worshippers of any other, but truly devout towards God,

because we invoke no creature, no ordinary man, but

the natural and true Son from God, who has become n1an,

yet is not the less Lord and God and Saviour.

270. Who will not adn1ire this? or who will not agree

that such a thing is truly divine? for if the works of the

\V ord's Godhead had not taken place through the body,

Inan had not been made god; and again, had not the

belongings of the flesh been ascribed to the 1V ord, man

had not been thoroughly delivered from them; but though

they had ceased for a little while, as I said before, still sin

had remained in man and corruption, as was the case with

mankind before He came; and for this reason:- Many, for

instance, have been n1ade holy and clean from all sin; nay,

Jeremias was hallowed even fron1 the womb, and John,

while yet in the womb, leapt for joy at the voice of l\Tary

l\Iother of God; nevertheless, death reigned frorn AdaJJl to

jJfoses, even over those tltat had not sinned after the similitude

of Adam's transgression; and thus men remained mortal

and corruptible as before, liable to the affections proper to

their nature. But now the 'V orù having become n1an,

and having appropriated the affections of the flesh, no

longer do these affections touch the body, because of the

'V ord who has come in it, but they are destroyed by Him,

and henceforth men no longer 'remain sinners and dead

according to their proper affections, but having risen

according to the Word's power, they abide ever immortal

and incorruptible. Whence also, whereas the flesh is

born of l\[a,ry Mother of God, He Himself is said to have

LccH burn, who furnishes to others a generation of beiug;


AGAINST ARIANISl\1.


f)9


in order that, b y His transferring our g eneration ED. BEX.

'-' iii.

 32-34,

into Himself, we may no longer, as mere ear!:'h,

return to earth, but as being knit into the 'V ord from heaven,

may be carried to heaven by Him. Therefore in like manner

not without reason has He transferred to Hin1self the other

affections of the body also; that we, no longer as being nlen,

but as the 'V ord's own, Inay have share in eternal life. For

no longer according to that former generation in AdaIll do

we die; but henceforward, our generation and all infirmity

of flesh being transferred to the Word, we rise from the

earth, the cnrse by reason of Sill being 4removed, because

of Him who is in us and who has becon1e a curse for us.

And with reason; for as we are all from earth and die in

Adam, so being regenerated from above of water and

Spirit, in the Christ we are all quickened; the flesh being

no longer earthly, but being henceforth n1ade the 'V ord,

by reason of God's Word who for our sake became flesh.

271. And that one may attain to a more exact knowledge

of the impassibility of the 'V ord's nature and of the

infirmities ascribed to Him because of the flesh, it will be

well to listen to the blessed Peter; for he will be a trust-

worthy witness concerning the Saviour. He writes then

in his Epistle thus: Christ then having s

tfered for us in

the flesh. Therefore also when He is said to hunger and

thirst, and to toil, and not to know, and to sleep, and to

weep, and to ask, and to flee, and to be born, and to

deprecate the cup, and in a word to undergo all that

belongs to the flesh, let it be said, as is congruous, ill each

case, "Christ then hungering and thirsting for us in the

flesh; " and "saying He did not know, and being buffeted,

and toiling for' us in the flesh;" and "being exalted too,

and born, and growing in the flesh;" and "fearing and

hiding ù

 the flesh;" and "saying If it be possible [pi

this cup pass frorn .lIe, and being beaten, and receiving gifts,

for us in the flesh;" and in a worù all such thillgs for U8


400 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


CH. XXVII. in the flesh. For on this account has the Apostle

himself said, Christ then having suffered, not in His

Godhead, but for us in the flesh, that these affections may be

acknowlcdged as, not proper to the very Word by nature, but

proper by nature to the very flesh.

272. Let no one then stumble at these human affections,

but rather let a man know that in nature the "\V ord Him- ·

self is impassible, and yet because of that flesh which He

put on, these things are ascribed to Him, since they belong

to the flesh, and the body itself belongs to the Saviour.

And while He Himself, being impassible in nature, re-

mains as He is, not harmed by these affections, but rather

obliterating and destroying them, men, their passions as

if changed and abolished in the Impassible, henceforth

become also impassible themselves and free from them

for ever, as John teaches when he says, And ye know that

He was manifested to take away our sins, and in Him is no sin.

And this being so, no heretic shall object, ""\Vherefore

rises the flesh, being by nature mortal? and if it rises,

why not hunger too and thirst, and suffer, and remain

mortal? for it came from the earth, and how can its natural

condition pass from it?" because the flesh is able now to

make answer to this so contentious heretic, "I aln from

earth, being by nature mortal, but afterwards I became

the Word's flesh, and He can'ied my affections, though

He is without them; and so I becaine free from them,

being no more abandoned to their service, because of the

Lord who has made me free from them. For if thou makest

it a difficulty that I am rid of that corruption which is by

nature, next thou wilt be making it a difficulty that God's

'V ord took my form of servitude; for as the Lord, putting

on the body, became man, so we men are made gods by

the Word, as being taken to HiIn through His flesh, anò

henceforward inherit life everlasting."

273. The::;e points we have found it necessary first to


AOAINST AluANrS1t.


401


discuss, that, when we see HÜn doing or saying "


. 3 BE

 3 "

Ill.

 4- 5.

aught divinely through the instruJllent of His own

body, we may know that He so works, as being God; and

also, if we see Him speaking or suffering humanly, we may

not be ignorant that, by bearing flesh, He became man, and

hence He so acts and so speaks. For if we recognise what

belongs to each, and see and understand that both these

things and those are done by One, we are right iu our faith,

and shall never go astray. But if a lnan, looking at what

is done divinely by the Word, deny the body, or looking at

what is proper to the boùy, deny the 'V ord's presence in

the flesh, or frmll what is human entertain low thoughts

concerning the \V ord, such a one, as a .Jewish vintner,4

mixing water with the wine, will account the Cross au

offence, or as a Gentile, will deem the preaching to be folly.

This then is what happens to God's enemies the Arians;

for looking at what is human in the Saviour, they have

judged Him a creature. They ought in consistency, looking

also at the divine works of the \V ord, to deny the birth

of His body, and henceforth to rank themselves with


lanichees. As to them, however, let thmn learn, though

tardily, that the Word beca1ne flesh; and let us, retaining

the general scope of the faith, acknowledge that what

they interpret ill, has a right interpretation.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Answer to objections from Scripture; tentlÛy, l1fatthew xxviii.

18, John iii. 35, &c.


274. FOR, The Father loveth the Son, and hath given ull

things into His hand; and, All things are given unto Jlfj of


f. Vid. pp. 26, 352.


DC


402 THRF:1<

 DISCOURSF.S OF ATHANASIUS


CH.XXVIIi. Jly Father; and, I can do nothin/J of Jl!Jse/f, but

as I ANtr, I judge; and the like passages, do not

show that the Son once had not these prerogatives,-(for had

not He eternally what the Father has, who is the Only 'V ord

and Wisdom of the Father in substance, who also says, All

that the Father hath are }'[ine, and what are l\tline, are the

Father's? for if the things of the Father are the Son's and

the Father hath

hen1 ever, it is plain that what the Son

hath, being the Father's, was ever in the Son)-not then

because once He had them not, did He say this, but because,

whereas the Son hath eternally what He hath, yet He hath

them from the Father. For lest a nlan, perceiving that

the Son has all that the Father hath, from the unvarying

likeness and identity of that He hath, should wander into

the Í1l1piety of Sabellius, considering HÜn to be the Father,

therefore He has said Is given unto life, and I ha've 'received,

and Are delivered to Me, only to show that He is not the

Father, but the Father's Word, and the Eternal Son, who

because of His likeness to the Father, hath eternally what

He hath from Him, and because He is the Son, hath from

the Father what eternally He hath.

275. l\Ioreover, that Is given and Are delivered, and the like,

do not impair the Godhead of the Son, but rather show Him

to be truly Son, we may learn from the passages themselves.

For if all things are delivered unto HiIn, first, He is other

than that all which He has received; next, being specially

heir, He alone can be the Son, anà proper to the Father

according to Substance. For if He were one out of all, then

lIe were not heÙ. specially, but everyone of that all would

have received according as the Father wined and gave.

But now, as receiving all things, He is other than them

all, and alone proper to the Father.

276. Moreover, that Is given and Are delivered do not show

that once He had them not, we prove as regards this aud

the like passages frOlll a special instance; for the Saviour


AGAINST ARIANTRM.


403


TliInself sa y s , As the Fatlle . }" hath h . fP in 11imspl 7f, so ED. BEN.

iii.

 36- 37.

h(6tlt He given also to the Son to have life in Himself.

Now from the words Hath given, He signifies that He is not

the Father; but in saying so, fIe shows the Son's natural

resemblance and belonging to the Father. If then once the

Father had not, then indeed the Son once had not; for as the

Father, so also the Son has. But if this is impious to say, and

orthodox on the contrary to say that the Father had ever, is

it not extravagant in thelll when the Son says that, a.

 the

Father has, so also the Son has, to say that lIe has not tW,

but otherwise ? No, rather is the Word faithful, and an

things which He says that He has received, He has had

always, and" from" the Father; and the Father indeed not

from any, but the Son from the Father. For as in the

instance of the radiance, if the radiance itself should say,

"All places the light hath given me to enlighten, and I do

not enlighten from myself, but as the light wills," yet in

saying this, it does not imply that it once had not, but it

nleans, "I am proper to the light, and all things of the

light are mine;" so, and much more, must we understand

in the instance of the Son. For the Father, having given

all things to the Son, in the Son still hath all things; and,

the Son having, still the Father hath them; for the Son's

Godhead is the Father's Godhead, and thus the Father in

the Son takes the oversight of all thÍI)gs.

277. And while such is the sense of these passages, those

too which speak humanly concerning the Saviour, admit

of a religious meaning also. For with this end have we

examined them beforehand, that, if we should hear HiIn

asking where Lazarus is laid, or when He asks on coming

into the parts of Cæsarea, TVlwm do men say that I am ?

or, How many loaves have ye? and, What will ye that I shall

do unto you? we may know, frOlll what has been already

said, the orthodox sense of the passages, and may not

stumble with the Christ-opposing Arians. First then we

cc2


404 THREE DtSCOURRES OF ATHANASrUS


Cn.XXVIII. must put this question to theIn, 'Vhy do they con-

sider Hiul ignorant? for one who asks, does not for

certain ask from ignorance; but it is possible for one who

knows, still to ask concerning what he knows. Thus.J ohn

was aware that Christ, when asking, How many loaves have ye?

was not ignorant, for he says, And this He said to prove

llim, for He Hi1nself knew what He would do. But if

He knew what He was doing, therefore not in ignorance

but with knowledge, did He ask. From this instance we

lnay understand sin1Ílar ones; that, when the Lord asks,

He does not ask in ignorance, where Lazarus lies,-nol'

again, whom men do say that He is, but knowing the

thing which He was asking, and aware what He was about

to do; and thus with ease is their sophism overthrown.

278. Next, if they still persist on account of His asking,

chen they must be told that in the Godhead indeed ignorance

is not, but to the flesh ignorance is proper, as bas been

said. And that this is really so, observe how the Lord who

inquired where Lazarus lay, Himself said, when He was

not on the spot but a great way off, Lltzarus is dNld,

and where he was dead; and how that it was He who is

considered by them as ignorant who foreknew the reasonings

of the disciples, and was aware of what was in the heart

of each, and of what was in man, and, what is greater, who

alone knows the Father and says, I in the Father and the

Father in J11e. Therefore this is clear to everyone, that

the flesh indeed is ignorant, but the Word Himself, con-

sidered as the Word, knows all things even before they

happen. For He did not, when He became man, cease to

be God; nor, whereas He is God, does He shrink from what

is man's; perish the thought; but rather, being God, He

has taken to Him the flesh, and being in the flesh makes

the flesh god. For as He asked questions in it, so also in it

did fIe raise the dead; and He made it clear to all that He

who quickens the dead and recalls the soul, much more dotb


AGAINST ARIANISM.


405


He discern the secrets of all. And He knew where ii

D




38.

l.Jazarus lay, and yet He asked; for the All-holy

Word of God, who endured all things for our sakes, did

this, that, thus carrying our ignorance, He might vouchsafe

to us the know ledge of His own only and true Father, and

of Himself, who was sent because of us for the salvation of

all, than which no grace could be greater.

279. When then the Saviour uses the words which they

allege in their defence, Power is given to Me, and GloTify

Thy Son, and Peter says, Power is given unto Him, we

understand all these passages alike, viz., thus humanly

because of the body He says all this. For though He

had no need, nevertheless He is said to have received

what He received hUlnanly, that on the other hand, inas-

much as the Lord has received, and the grant is lodged

with Him, the grace may remain sure to us. For while

nlere man receives, he is liable to lose again, (as was

shown in the case of Adam, for he received and he lost,) but

that the grace may be irrevocable, and may be kept sure for

men, therefore He Himself appropriates the gift; and He

Bays that He has received power, as man, which He ever

has as God, and He who glorifies others, says, Glorify 111e,

to show that that very flesh which He has taken has need

of these things. "Therefore, when the flesh receives, since

that which receives is in I-lim, and He by taking it hath

becollle lllan, therefore lIe is said lIimself to have received.

If then, (as has so often been said,) the \V ord did not become

man, then let Him be said to receive, and to need, and to

be ignorant, as you would have it; but if He has become

lnan, (and He has,) and it attaches to man to receive, and

to need, and to be ignorant, wherefore do we consider the

Giver as receiver? and the Dispenser to others why do we

snspect to be in need? and why divide the \V ord frOIn the

Father, as imperfect and needy, to the stripping human

nature of grace? For if indeed the \V ord Himself, con-


406 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CH.XXVIII. sidered as 'V ord, has received and been glorified

for His own sake, and if He according to His

Godhead is He who is sanctified and has risen again, what

hope is there for men? for they remain as they were, naked,

and wretched, and dead, having no interest in the things

given to the Son. vVhy too did the Word come among us,

and become flesh? If for His own receiving these things,

which He says that He has received, then He was without

thenl before that, and of necessity will rather Himself owe

thanks to the body, because, when He came into it, then

He received these things from the Father, which He had

not before His descent into the flesh. For on this showing

He seems rather to be Himself promoted because of the body,

than the body promoted because of Him. But this notion

is Judaic. But if in order to ransom nlankind, the Word

did conle among UB, and if in order to hallow them and

make them gods, the Word became flesh (and for this He

did come), who does not see that it follows, that what He

says that He received, when He became flesh, such things

He mentions, not for His own sake, but for the flesh?

for to it, in which He was speaking, pertained the gifts

bestowed through Him from the Father.

280. Now let us see what He asked, and what the things

f1,ltogether were which He said that He had received, that

in this way perhaps our opponents may be brought to some

proper feeling. He asked then for glory, yet He had said

All things are delivered unto j[e. And after the resurrection,

He says that He has received all power; however, even

before He had said, All things are delivered unto lIIe; and He

was Lord of all, for all things were made by Him, and there

was One Lord by whom are all things. And when He asked

glory, He was as He is, the Lord of glory, as Paul says,

If they had known it, they would not have cruciftpd the Lord


f .qlory; for He already had that glory which lIe asked for

when lIe said, the glory which I had with Thee before tlte


AGAINST ARIANIS:\l.


407


'world was. Also the power which He said He re- En. BE

.

Hi.

 39-41.

ceived after the resurrection, that He had before He

received it, and before the resurrection. For He of Himself

rebuked Satan, saying, Get thee behind Jle, Satan; and to the

disciples He gave the power against Satan, when on their

return He said, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from

heaven. And again, that what He said that He had re-

ceived, this He possessed before receiving it, appears from

His driving away the devils, and from His unbinding

what Satan had bound, as He did in the case of the

daughter of Abraham; and from His remitting sins,

saying to the paralytic, and to the woman who anointed

His feet, Thy sins be forgiven thee; and from His both

raising the dead, and repairing the original nature of the

blind, granting to him to see. And all this He did not,

waiting till He should receive, but being possessed of power.

281. From all this it is plain that the attributes which

He had as 'Vord, those when He had becon1e man and

wa

 risen again, He says that He received as man; that

for His sake men might henceforward upon earth have

power against devils, as having become partakers of a

divine nature; and in heaven, as being delivered from

corruption, might reign everlastingly. Thus TIe must

acknowledge this once for an, that nothing which fIe says

that He received, did He receive as not possessing before;

for the Word, as being God, had Himself those prero-

gatives always; but in these passages fIe is said hnmanly

Himself to have received, in order that the- flesh, which was

man's, receiving them in Him, henceforth from It the gift

might pass, and might abide surely for us. For what is said

by Peter, receh'z.ng from God honour and glory, An!fP7s l J tÏ11!}

subject unto Him, has this meaning; for as lIe inf}nired

humanly, and raised Lazarus divinely,

o He reccÙ'rtl

Ìß spoken of Him humanly, but the subjection of the

Angels marks the Word's Godhead.


408 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OR.XXVIII. 282. Cease then, wicked men, degrade not the

'V ord; nor detract from His Godhead, which is

the Father's, as though He needed or were ignorant; lest

you be flinging blasphemous thoughts of your own imagin-

ing against the Christ, like the Jews who once actually stoned

Him. For these do not belong to the 'Vord, as the Word;

but are proper to men; and, as when He spat, and stretchrd

forth the hand, and called Lazarus, we did not say that the

triumphs were hUlnan, though they were done through

the body, but were God's, so, on the other hand, though

hunlan things are ascribed to the Saviour in the Gospel,

still, considering the nature of what is said and that they

are foreign to God, let us impute them, not to the 1V ord's

Godhead, but to His manhood. For though the fVord became

flesh, yet to the flesh only do these affections belong; and

though in the 'V ord the flesh is God-inhabited, yet to the

Word belong the grace and the power. He then through the

flesh did the Father's works, and He again, quite as truly

in that flesh displayed the affections of the flesh; for in-

stance, He inquired and He raised Lazarus, He chid His

Mother, saying Jly hour is not yet come, yet then at once

He made the water wine. For He was Very God in the

flesh, and He was true flesh in the VV' ord. Therefore from

His works He revealed both Himself as Son of God, and

His own Father, and froin the affections of the flesh lIe

showed that lIe bore a true body, and that it too was

proper to Him.


CHAPTER XXIX.


A nswer to objections from Scripture,. eleventhly, J.JI ark xiIi.

32, and Luke ii. 52.


83. THESE things being so, let us now go on to exaTnine

the passage, But of that drt,lj and that hour knoweth 11(J


AGAINST ARIANISM.


409


man, neither the Angels of God, nor the Son; for ili

1

'4


2.

they think they have in it an important argument --

for their heresy. But I, when the heretics allege it and

arm themselves with it, see in them the giants again fighting

against God.:> For the Lord of heaven and earth, by whom

all things were made, has to litigate before them about

day and hour; and the all-knowing Word is accused by

them of ignorance about a day; and the Son who knows

the Father is said to be ignorant of an hour of a day;

now what can be spoken Inore contrary to sense, or what

madness can be likened to this? Through the \Y ord aU

things were made, tinles and seasons and night and day

and the whole creation; and is the Franler of an said to

be ignorant of His work? 6 And the very context of the

passage shows that the Son of God knows that hour and

that day, though the Arians fall headlong in their

ignorance. For after saying, nor the Son, He relates to

the disciples the approaches of the day, saying, "This

and that shall be, and then the end." But He who

speaks of the antecedents of the day, knows certainly the

day itself, which is to be manifested after the things

foretold. But if He had not known the hour, He had not

signified the events previous to it, as not knowing when it

. should be. And as anyone, who, by way of pointing out

the site of a house or city to those who were ignorant of

it, gave an account of what nlet the eye before arriving at

it, and having described an particular

, said, " Then


5 w

 TOV

 yíyavTEf;, so de Deer.


 32. AIs() TOV!; JWÐEVOpÉVOVf,

yíyaJJTaç, Grat. ii.

 32, (supr.

Disc. n. 144.) And so Nazianzen

of the disorderly Bishops during

the Arian ascendency, Orat. xliii.

26. Also Socr. v. 10, of the

heretics in the time of Theodosius.

In Rist. Arian. 74, Constantius

is called a yíya!;. Sometimes the

Scripture giants are spoken of,

SDmetimes the mythologic

l. The


same idea is implied as is expres

ed

in the word ÐEOpåxo!;.

6 Here again, as so often before,

Athan. instances his usual mode

of argument by appealing to

Scripture as interpreted by the

broad outline of its teaching and

the tradition of the Church. He-

fore this grand unequivocal sense

particular difficulties from outly-

ing passages are dissolved &I).Q

disappear.


410 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHAN ASIUS


CH. XXIX. immediately comes the city or the house," wonld

know, of course, where the house or the city was,

(for had he not known, he had not described these ante-

cedents, lest from ignorance he should throw his hearers

far out of the way, or in speaking he should unawares go

beyond the object,) so the Lord, saying what shall precede

that day and that hour, knows exactly, not is ignorant:

when the hour and the day are come.

284. Now why it was that, though He knew, He did

not tell His disciples plainly at that time, no one may be

curious about, since He has been silent Himself; for TVho

hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His

counsellor? but why, though He knew, He said, no, not the

Son knows, of this I think none of the faithful is ignorant

viz., that He made this, as well as those other declarations,

as man, by reason of the flesh. For this as little as the

other's is the vV ord's deficiency, but of that hun1an nature

whose property it is to be ignorant. And this again wil1

be well seen by honestly examining into the occasion,

when and to whom the Saviour spoke thus. Not then

when the heaven was made by Him, nor when the 'V ord

was with the Father Himself, disposing all things, nor before

He became man, did He say it, but when the Word became

flesh. On this account it is reasonable to ascribe to His

manhood every thing which, after He became man, lIe

speaks as man. For it belongs to the 'V ord to know what

was lnade, and not be ignorant either of the beginning or

the end of these, (they are His works,) and He knows

how Inany things He bas wrought, and the limit of their

consistence. And, knowing the beginning and the end of

each, lIe knows surely the general and common end

of all.

285. Certainly when He says in the Gospel concerning

Hin1self in His humanity, Father, tlte hour is come, glonfy

1'hy Son, it is plain that lIe knows also the hour of the


AGAINST ARIAKISM.


411


end of all things, as being the Word, thou b crh as .

J); 4 B 2 EN.

1Il.

 -44

Ulan He is ignorant of it, for ignorance is proper

to man, and espe.cially ignorance of these things. l\1ore-:

over this is proper to the Saviour's love of roan; for since

He was made man, He is not ashamed, because of the

flesh which is ignorant, to say "I know not," that He may

show that knowing as God, He is but ignorant according to

the flesh. And therefore He said not, "no, nòt the Son of

God knows," lest the Godhead should seem ignorant, but

simply, no, not the Son, that the ignorance might be the

Son's as born from among men. On this account, He

introduces the Angels, but He did not go further and say,

"not the Holy Ghost;" but He was silent with a double

intimation: first, that if the Spirit knew, much more must

the Word know, considered as the "\V ord, from whom the

Spirit receives; and next, by His silence about the Spirit,

He made it clear that it was of the Son's human economy

that He said, no, not the Son knows. 1

286. And a proof of it is this: that, when He had spoken

humanly No, not the Son knows, He yet shows that

divinely He knew all things. For that Son whom He

declares not to know the day, HÜn He declares to know

the Father; for }lo one, He says, knoweth the Father save

the Son. And all men but the Arians would join in

confessing, that He who knows the Father, much more

knows the whole history of the creation; and in that

whole, its end. And if already the day and the hour be

detennined by the Father, it is plain that through the

Son are they determined, and He knows Himself what

through Him has been determined; for there is nothing

but has COIne to be and has been determined through the

Son. Therefore He, being the Franler of the universe,

knows of what nature, and of what magnitude, and with


7 It should be borne in mind His Divine nature, but also in His

that our Lord is Son, not only in human.


412 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


CR. XXIX. what limits r the Father has willed it to be made;

and in the how much and how far is included its

changings. And again, if all that is the Father's is the

Son's, (and this He Himself has said,) and it is the Father's

attribute to know the day, it is plain that the Son too knows

it, having this belonging to Him from the Father. And

again, if the Son be in the Father and the Father in the

Son, and the Father knows the day and the hour, it is

clear that the Son, being in the Father and knowing the

things of the Father, knows Himself also the day and the

honr. And if the Son is also the Father's Very Image,

and the Father knows the day and the hour, it is plain

that the Son has this likeness also to the Father of know-

ing them. And it is not wonderful if He, through whom

all things were made, and in whom the universe consists,

HiInself knows what has been brought into being, and

when the end will be of each and of all together; rather is

it wonderful that this recklessness, suitable though it be to

the Ario-maniacs, should have forced ns to have recourse

to so long an explanation. For ranking the Son of God,

the Eternal 'tV ord, an10ng things that have been made,

they are gradually training themselves to maintain that the

Father Himself is second to the creation; for if He who

knows the Father knows not the day nor th

 hour, I fear

lest knowledge about the creation, or rather of the lower

portion of it, be sonlCthing more rare and precious in their

wild estÏ1nation than knowledge concerning the Father.

287. But for them, since they thus blaspheme the Spirit,

they Inust look for no forgiveness ever of impiety such as

t.his, as the Lord has said; but for us, who love Christ and

bear Christ within us, we know that the Word, not as

if ignorant, considered as Word, said I know not, (for lIe

knows,) but in order to show His n1anhood, since to be

ignorant belongs to man, and because He had put on a

flesh that was ignorant, therefore it was that He said accord-


AGATNRT A1UANJR:I\{.


413


iug to the flesh, [ knoUJ not. And for this reason, ED. BE!>;.

iii.

 44-46

after saying, No, /lot the Son knows, and n1en-

tiolling the ignorance of the men in N oe's day, immediately

He added, " Watch therefore, for you too know not in wh(tl

hour your Lord doth come," and again, "In such an hour as

ye think not the Son of man cometh; and it was for your sake

that I, on becon1ing as you, said no, not tlM Son, for, if I, as

nlan, ain ignorant, how much nlOl'e you." For, if ignorant

divinely, He must have said, "Watch therefore, for I know

not," and, "In an hour when I think not;" but in fact this

hath fIe not said; but by saying IT"e know not, and When ye

think not, He has signified that it belongs to man to be ig-

norant; for whose Rake He too, having a flesh like theirs and

having become Ulan, said No, not the Son knows, for He knew

not in flesh, though knowing as 1Vord.

288. And again in the instance of Noe, there too He said,

not, "I know not," but, they knew not until the flood came.

For nlen did not know, but He who brought the flood (and

it was the Saviour HÜnself) knew the day and the hour in

which lIe opened the windows of heaven, and broke up the

fountains of the great deep, and said to Noe, Come thou

and all thy house into the ark. For were He ignorant, lle

had not foretold to Noe, Yet seven days and I will bring a

flood ujJon the earth. But if in describing the day, He

Inakes use of the parallel of N oe's time, and He did know

the day of the flood, therefore He knows also the day of

His own appearing. l\Ioreover, after narrating the parable

of the Virgins, again He shows more clearly who they are

who are ignorant of the day and the hour, saying, JVatch

therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour. He who

said shortly before, No one knoweth, no, not the Son, now

Rays, not" I know not," but ye know not. In like manner

then, when His disciples asked about the end, suitably

said He then, no, nor the Son, according to the flesh be-

cause of the body; that He might show that, as Ulan, He


,


414 TIIRF.E DISCOURSES OF ATHANARIUS


CR. XXIX. knows not; for ignorance is proper to nlan. If

--- however He is the Word, if it is IIe who is to

come, He to be Judge, He to be the BridegrOOll1, it is in-

credible that He should not know when and in what hour He

cometh, and when He is to say, Awake thou that sleepest, and

arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. For as, on

becoming man, He hungers and thirsts and suffers with men,

so with men, as man, He knows not, though divinely, being

in the Father Word and Wisdom, He knows, and there is

nothing which He knows not.

289. In like manner also about Lazarus, He asks humanly,

He who wa.q on His way to raise him, and knew whence He

should recall Lazarus's soul; and it was a greater thing to

know where the soul was than to know where the body

lay; but He asked humanly, that He might raise divinely.

So too He asks of the disciples, on con1Ïng into the parts

of Cæsarea, though knowing even before Peter Blade an-

swer. For if the Father revealed to Peter the answer tû

the Lord's question, it is plain that through the Son was

the revelation, for No one knoweth the Son, saith He, but

the Father, neither the Father but the Son, and he to whom-

soever the Son shall reveal Him. But if through the Son

is revealed the knowledge concerning both the Father and

the Son, there is no room for doubting that the Lord who

asked, having first revealed it to Peter from the Father,

next asked humanly ; in order to show that, asking after the

flesh, He knew divinely what Peter was about to say. The

Son then knew, as knowing aU things, and knowing His

own Father, than which knowledge nothing can be greater

or more perfect.

290. This is sufficient to confute them; but I could wish

to ask them a question. The Apostle, in the Second Epistle

to the Connthians, writes, I knew a man in Ch7'ist, above

fourteen years ago, whether in the body I do not know,

or whether out of the body I do not know; God knoweth.


,


AGAINST ARTANIS1\L


415


Now what say ye? T(new the Apo;-;t1e what ha(l ED. Brm.

Ïii.

 41) -4ì.

happened to hÜn in the vision, though he says [

know not, or knew he not? If he knew not, see to it, lest ye

err in the trespass 8 of the Phrygians, who say that the

Prophets and the other ministers of the 'V ord know neither

what they do nor what they announce. But if he knew when

he said I knoUJ not, for he had Christ within hÜn revealing

to hinl aU things,. is not the heart of these 11len in very truth

perverted and self-condemned? for when the Apostle says, 1

know not, they say that he knows; but when the Lord says,

"I know not," they say that He does not know. For if,

since Christ was within him, Paul knew that of which he

says, I know not, does not much more Christ Himself

know, though He say, "I know not?" The Apostle then,

the Lord revealing it to him, knew what happened to him,

for on this account he says, I knew a man in Christ; and

knowing the man, he knew also how the man was caught

away. r.f'hus Eliseus, who beheld Elias, knew also how he

was taken up; but, though knowing, yet when the sons

of the Prophets thought that Elias was cast upon one of

the Jnountains by the Spirit, he, knowing from the first

what he had seen, tried to persuade thenl; but when they

urged it, he was silent, and suffered them to go after him.

Did he then not know, because he was silent? he knew

indeed, but as if not knowing, he suffered them, that they,

being convinced, might no more doubt about the aSSUJl1p-

tion of Elias. Therefore nluch more Paul, himself being

the person caught away, knew also how he was caught;

for Elias knew; and had anyone asked, he would have

said how. And yet Paul says I know not, for these two

reasons, (as I think at least,) one, as he has said hÜnself,

lest, because of the abundance of the revelations, anyone

should think of hinl beyond what he saw; the other, be-


H 7rapavopíav, vid. supr. Disc. n. Mùntanists, supr. p. 67.

226 note 3, P. 359, Phrygians, i.e.,


416 rHRKg DISCOURSES OF ATHANARTUS


CH. XXIX. cause, our Saviour having said "1 know not," it

-- became bÏln also to say I know not, lest the ser-

vant should appear above his Lord, and the disciple above

his Master. Therefore He who gave to Paul to know, much

rather knew HÌInself; for since He spoke of the antecedents

of the day, He also knew, as I said before, when the Day

and when the IIour, and yet, though knowing, He says, No,

/lot th,p Sun knuweth.

291. Why then said He at that tÏlne " I know not," what

He, as Lurd, knew? As we may on careful consideration

conjecture, (as I think at least,) for our profit did He this;

and lnay He grant that our explanation be a true one! On

both sides did the Saviour secure our advantage; for if He

hath made known what will COlne before the end, it is that,

as He said Himself, we may not be startled nor scared

when the things luppen, but fronl thetn may expect the

end after them. On the other hand, concerning the day

and the hour, He was not willing to say according to

His divine nature, "I know," but after the flesh," I know

not," for the sake of the flesh which was ignorant, as I have

said before; lest they should ask Hinl further, and then

either He should have to pain the disciples by not speak-

ing, or by speaking nlight act to the prejudice of thenl

and us all. For whatever He does, that altogether He does

for our sakes, since also for us the TVm'd became flesh. For

us therefore He said No, not the Son knoweth; and neither

was He untrue in thus saying, (for He said humanly, as

lnan, "I know not,") nor did He give an opening for the

disciples to force Hinl to speak, for by saying "I know

not" He stopped their inquiries.

292. And so in the Acts of the Apostles it is written,

when He went up upon the Angels, ascending as man, and

carrying up to heaven the flesh which He bore, on the

disciples seeing this, and again asking, "When shall the

end be, and when wilt Thou be present?" IIe said to


AGAINST ARIANISM.


417


thenl more clearly, It is not for you to know the times ED. BEN.

Ïii.

 47-49.

or the seasons which the Father hath put in His own

power. And He did not then say, No, not the Son, as He

said before humanly, but, It is not for you to know. For

now the flesh had risen and put off its mortality and been

deified; and no longer did it beconle Him _ to answer according

to the flesh when He was going into the heavens; but hence-

forth to teach after a divine nlanner, It is not for you to know

times or seasons which the Father hath put in His own arbitre-

'ment; but ye shall receive Power. And what is that Power of

the Father but the Son? for Christ is God's Power and God's

Wisdom. The Son then did know, as being the Word;

for He implied this in what He said,-" I know, but it is

not for you to know; for it was for your sakes that, sitting

also on the mount, I said according to the flesh, No, not the

Son knoweth, for the profit of you and all. For it is

profitable to you to hear this both about the Angels, and

about the Son, because of the deceivers which shall be after-

wards; that though demons should be transfigured as

Angels, and should attempt to speak concerning the end,

you should not believe, since they are ignorant; and that,

if Antichrist too, disguising himself, should say, 'I am

Christ,' and should try in his turn to speak of that day

and that end, to decei ve the hearers, ye, ha ving these

words frOln

Ie, No, not the Son, may believe him no nlore

than the rest. "

293. And further, not to know when the end is, or when

the day of the end, is expedient for nlen, lest knowing,

they nlay become negligent of the tinle between, awaiting

the day near the end; for they will argue that then only

will they have to attend to thenlselves. Therefore also

has He been silent of the time when each shall die, lest

men, being elated on the ground of knowledge, should

forthwith neglect themselves for the greater part of their

time. Both, then, the end of all things and the limit of

Dd


418 THREE DISCOURSES OF .A THANASIUS


CH. XXIX. each of us hath the Word concealed from us, (for

in the end of all is the end of each, and in the end

of each the end of all is comprehended,) that, whereas it is

uncertain and always in prospect, we may ail vance day by day

as if summoned, reaching forward to the things before us

and forgetting the things behind. For who, knowing the day

of the end, would not be dilatory as regards the interval? but

who, as being ignorant, does not get ready day by day? It

was on this account that the Saviour added, Watch therefore,

for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come; and, in such

an hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh. For the

advantage then which comes of ignorance has He said

this; for in saying it, He wishes that we should always be

prepared; "for you know not," He says; "but I, the Lord,

know when it is that I come, though the Arians do not wait

for Me, who aill the 1Vord of the Father." The Lord then,

knowing what IS good for us beyond ourselves, thus

secured the discIples; and they, being thus taught, set

right those of Thessalonica, when likely on this point to

run into error.

294. However, to ask Christ's enemies again concerning

this :-In Paradise God asks, Adam, where a


t thou 1 and

He inquires of Cain also, Where is Abel, thy brother? What

then say you to this? for if you think Him ignorant and

therefore to have asked, Y011 are already of the party of

the Manichees, for this is their bold thought; but if, fear-

ing the open name, ye force yourselves to say, that He

knows, and yet He asks, what is there extravagant or strange

in the doctrine, that ye should thus fall off, on finding

that the Son, in whom God then inquired, He that same

Son, now clad in flesh, inquires of the disciples as man?

unless forsooth having become Manichees, you are willing

to blame the question then put to Adam, and all that you

may give fun play to yonr perverseness.

295. For being exposed on all sides, you fall back upon


AGAINST ARIANISM.


419


the words of Luke, mutterinQ" words which are ED. BEN.

<..J iii.

 49-51.

appropriately said by him, but ill understood by you,

and are as follows, And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature,

and in grace with God and man. This then is the passage,

and the case stands thus: Is Jesus Christ man, as all other

men, or is He God bearing flesh? If He is an ordinary

man as the rèst, then let Him, as a nlan, "ad vance ;" this

however is the sentiment of the Samosatene, which virtually

indeed you entertain also, though in name you deny it

because of men. But if He be God bearing flesh, as He

truly is, and the Word became flesh, and being God

descended upon earth, what advance had He who existed

equal to God ( or how had the Son increase, being ever in

the Father? For if He who was

ver in the Father,

ad vances, what, I ask, is there . beyond the Father from

which His ad vance might be made ? Next it is suitable

here to repeat what was said upon the point of His

receiving and being glorified. If He advanced when He

became man, it is plain that, before He became man, He

was imperfect; and rather the flesh became to Him a

cause of perfection, than He to the flesh. And again, if,

as being the Word, He advances, what has He more to

become than Word and Wisdom and Son and God's

Power? For the Word is all these, of which if anyone

can anyhow partake as it were one ray, such a man

becomes all-perfect among men, and equal to Angels.

For Angels, and Archangels, and Dominions, and all the

Powers and Thrones, as partaking the Word, behold

always the face of His Father. How then does He who

to others supplies perfection, Himself advance at a later

date ? For Angels even ministered to His human birth,

and the passage from Luke comes later than the ministra-

tion of the Angels. How then at all can this even come

into thought of man? 01. how did Wisdom advance In

wisdom? or how did He who to others gives grace, (as

Dd2


420 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIU8


Cu. XXIX. Paul says in every Epistle, knowing that through

Him grace is given, The grace of our Lord Jesus

Ghrist be with you all,) how did He advance in grace? for

either let them say that the Apostle is untrue, and presume

to say that the Son is not Wisdom, or else, if He is Wisdom

as SolOlnon has said, and if Paul has written, Ghrist, God's

Power and God's Wisdom, of what advance' did Wisdom

admit further?

296. For men, creatures as they are, are capable in a

certain way of reaching forward and advancing in virtue.

Enoch, for instance, was thus translated, and Moses in-

creased and was perfected; and Isaac by advancing became

great; and the Apostle said that he reached forth day by

day to what was before him. For each had room for

advancing, looking to the step before him. But the Son

of God, who is One and Only, what roon1 had He for

reaching forward? for all things ad vance by looking at

Him; and He, being One and Only, is in the Only Father,

out of whom never does He reach, but in Him abideth

ever. To men then belongs ad vance; but the Son of

God, since He could not advance, being perfect in the

Father, humbled Himself for us, that in His humiliation

we rather might have capacity to increase. This is the

real ad vance, the deifying and grace imparted fron1

Wisdom to men, sin being obliterated in them and their

inward corruption, according to their likeness and relation-

ship to the flesh of the tV ord. And our increase is no

other than the renouncing things sensible, and growing up

into the Word Himself, since He never was low except

in His taking our flesh. It was not then the VV ord,

considered as the tV ord, who advanced, who is perfect

frOln the perfect Father, who needs nothing, nay brings

forward others to an advance; but humanly is He here

also said to advance, since advance belongs to lnan. Hence

the Evangelist, speaki ng with cautious exactness, has


AGAINST ARIANISM.


421


mentioned stature in the advance; but bein g ED. BEK.

iii.

 51-53.

"r ord and God He is not measured by stature,

which belongs to bodies. Of the body then is the advance;

for, it advancing, in it advanced also the manifestation of

the Godhead to those who saw it. And, as the Godhead was

more and more revealed, by so much more did His grace as

man increase before all men. For as a child He was simply

carried to the Temple; but when He became a boy, He

renlained there, and questioned the priests about the Law.

And by degrees His body increasing, and the Word mani-

festing Hinlself in it, He is confessed henceforth by Peter

first, then also by all, Truly this is the Son of God; how-

ever wilfully the Jews, both the ancient and these modern,

shut their eyes, lest they should see that to advance in

wisdom is not the advance of Wisdom Itself, but rather

the manhood's advance in It. For Jesus advanced in wisdom

and grace; and, if we may speak what is explanatory as

well as true, He advanced in Himself; for JVisd01n hath

builded Herself an house, and in Herself She gave the house

advancement. For thus, the body increasing in stature,

in and with it there progressed the manifestation of the

Godhead also, and to all was it displayed that the body

was God's Temple, and that God was in the body.

297. And if they contend that the 1V ord was called Jesus

on becoming flesh, and refer to Him the terln advanced,

they must be told that neither does this impair the Father's

Light, which is the Son, but that it does but show again that

the 1V ord has become man, and bore true flesh. And as we

have said that He suffered in the flesh, and hungered in the

flesh, and was fatigued in the flesh, so also reasonably nlay

lIe be said to have advanced in the flesh; nor again, did this

advancement of the flesh, such as above described, take place

in the 1V ord while He was apart from it; for it was when the

flesh had been taken into Him, and is called His, when in

short that advance of human nature in Him was safe anò


422 THREE DISCOUR8ES OF ATHANASIUS


OH. XXIX. sure, because of the 'V ord that was with it.

Neither then was the advance the Word's, 1101' was

the flesh Wisdom, but the flesh becanle the body of Wisdom.

Therefore, as we have already said, not VVÜ;dOll1, as Wisdom,

advanced in respect of Itself; but the manhood advanced in

vVisdom, transcending by degrees human nature, and made god,

and becoming and appearing to all as the organ of 'V isdom

for the operation and the shining forth of the Godhead.

Wherefore neither said he, " The Word advanced," but

Jesus, by which Name the Lord was cal1ed when He

became man; so that the advance is of the hUlllan nature

in such wise as we have above explained.


CHAPTER XXX.


Answer to objections frO?n Scripture; twelfthly, lIfatthew

xxvi. 39; John xii. 27, æc.


298. THEREFORE as, when the flesh advanced, He is said

to ha ve advanced, because the body belonged to Him, so

also what is said at the season of His death, that He was

troubled, that lIe wept, must be taken in the same sense.

For they, going up and down, as if thereby reconlnlending

their heresy, allege: "Behold, He wept, and said, Now is

Jly soul troubled, and He besought that the cnp Blight

pass a way; how then, if He so spoke, is He God, and

'V ord of the Father?" Yea, it is written that He wept,

o God's enemies, and that He said, "I am troubled," and

on the Cross He said, Eloi, Eloi, lama sa bach th ani, that is,

illy God, J[y God, why hast Thou forsaken Jl e? and He

besought that the cup might pass away. Thus certainly

it is written; but again I wonld ask you, (for the SaIne

rejoinder must of neee

sity be made to each of your

objections,) if the speaker is mere man, let him weep and


AGAINST ARIANISM.


423


fear death as bein g man. but if He is the Word ED. BEN.

"


M-



in flesh, (for one must not be reluctant to repeat,)

whom had He to fear, being God? or wherefore should He

fear death, who was Himself Life, and was rescuing others

from death? or how, whereas He said, "Fear not him that

kills the body," should He Himself fear him? And how

should He who said to Abraham, Fear not, for I am with thee,

and encouraged Moses against Pharaoh, and said to the son of

Nave, Be strong, and of a good courage, how should He feel

terror before Herod and Pilate? Further, He who SUCCOUl'S

others against fear, (for the Lord, says Scripture, is on my

side, I will not fear what man doeth unto me,) did He fear

governors, mortal men? did He who HÍIllself was come

against death, feel terror of death? Is it not both ex-

travagant and impious to say that He was terrified at

death

r hell, whom the keepers of hell's gate saw and

shuddered? But if, as you would hold, the 'V ord was in

terror, wherefore, since He spoke of the conspiracy of the

Jews long before, did He not flee, instead of saying when

actually sought, I am He? for He could have avoided

death, as He said, I have power to lay down .L1fy life, and 1

haz'e power to take it again; and No one taketh it from Jle.

299. But these affections were not proper to the nature

of the Word, considered as Word; but in the flesh which

was thus affected was the Word, 0 Christ's enemies and

unthankful Jews' For He said not all this prior to the

flesh; but when the TVord became .flesh, and becanle man,

then is it written that He said this, that is, humanly.

Surely He of whom this is written, was He who raised

Lazarus from the dead, and made the water wine, and

vouchsafed sight to the man born blind, and said, J and

illy .Father are one. If then they make His hUlnan

attributes a ground for grovelling thoughts eoncerning

the Son of God, nay con

ider II im altogether JJlan from

the earth, anå not from heaven, wherefore not frOln His


424 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHAN ASIUS


CH. xxx. divine works recognise the Word who IS In the

Father, and henceforward renounce their self-willed

impiety? For it is open for them to see, how He who did

those works is the same as He who showed that His body

was passible by His permitting it to weep and hunger, and to

show other properties of a body. For while by means of

such He made it known that God, though impassible, had

taken a passihle flesh, yet fronl the great works He showed

Himself the "r ord of God, who had afterwards become man:

and He said, "Though ye believe not Me, beholding Me

dad in a hunlan body, yet believe the works, that ye may

know that I a.m in the Father and the Father in Me."

300. And these men seem to me to show plain shameless-

ness and blasphemy; for, when they read I and the Father

are one, they violently distort the sense, and tear in two the

unity of the Father and the Son; but reading of His tears or

sweat or sufferings, they do not advert to His body, but on

account of these place in the ranks of the creation Him

by whom the creation was made. 'Vhat then is left for

them to differ in from the Jews? for as the Jews blas-

phemously ascribed God's works to Beelzebub, so also will

these, ranking with the creatures the Lord who wrought

those works, undergo the same condemnation without

lllercy. But they ought, when they read I and the Father

are one, to see in Him the oneness of the Godhead and His

belonging to the Father's Substance; and again, when

they read, He wept, and the like, to say that these affections

are proper to the body; especially

since on this side and

that they have an intelligible ground, viz., that this is

written as of God, and that with reference to His manhood.

For properties of body in the Incorporeal had not been,

unless He had taken a body corruptible and mortal; for

mortal was Holy

Iary, from whom was His body.

'Vherefore of necessity, when He was in a body which

suffered, wept, and toiled, these things which are proper


AGAINST ARIANISM.


425


to the flesh are ascribed to Him together with that ii


.5


7.

body. If then He wept and was troubled, it was

not the Word considered as the Word, who wept and was

troubled, but it belonged to the flesh ; and if too He besought

that the cup might pass away, it was not the Godhead that

was in terror, but this affection too was proper to the

manhood.

301. And so as regards the words TVhy hast Thou for-

saken }'fe? that they are His, according to the above ex-

planations, though He suffered nothing, (for the Word

was impassible,) is still declared by the Evangelists; since

the Lord became man, and these things are done and said

as from a nlan, that He might IIimself lighten these very

sufferings of the flesh, and set free the flesh from them.

Whence neither can the Lord, who is ever in the Father,

be forsaken by Him whether before He spoke or even

when He uttered these words. Nor is it lawful to say that

the Lord was in terror, at whom the keepers of the gates of

Hades shuddered and set Hades open, and the earth, knowing

its Lord who spoke, straightway trembled, and the veil

was rent, and the sun was hidden, and the rocks were torn

asunder, and the graves did gape, and the dead in them

arose and appeared to their own people; and, what is

wonderful, they who were then present and had before

denied Him, then seeing these signs, confessed that truly

lle was the Son of God. Therefore be every heretic dumb,

nor dare to ascribe terror to the Lord, whom death, as a

serpent, flees, at

hom demons tremble and the sea is in

alarm; for whom the heavens are rent and all the powers

are shaken. For behold when He said,

Vhy hast 1'lwu

forsaken JJIe? the Father showed that He was ever and

even then in Him.

302. And as to His saying, If it be possib7p, let the cup

pass, observe how, though He thus spake, He rebuked Peter,

saying, Thou sltvourest not the things t!tat be of God, bu.


VOL. I.


E e


.


426 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS


OR. XXX. those that be of men. For He wined what He was

deprecating, for it was for this that He had come;

but His was the willing, but the terror belonged to the

flesh. Wherefore as man He utters this speech also, and both

were said by One and the Same, to show that He was God,

willing in HiInself, but when He had become man, having a

flesh that was in terror. For the sake of this flesh He blended

in one His own will with human weakness, that, destroy-

ing such affections, He might in turn make man undaunted

at the thought of death. Behold then a thing strange

indeed! He to whom Christ's enemies impute words of

terror, He by that so-called terror renders men undaunted

and fearless. And so the Blessed Apostles after Him from

such words of His conceived so great a contempt of death,

as not even to care for those who questioned them, but to

answer, We ought to obey God rather than men; and the

other Holy Martyrs were so bold as to think that. they

were rather passing to life than undergoing death.

303 Is it not extravagant then, to admire the courage of

the servants of the Word, yet to say that that Word Himself

was in terror, through whom they despised death? for

that most enduring purpose and courage of the Holy

Martyrs demonstrates that the Godhead was not in terror,

but that the Saviour took away our terror. For as He

abolished death by death, and by human means all human

evils, so by this so-called terror did He remove our terror,

and brought about for us that never more should men fear

death. His word and deed go together. For human

were the sounds, Let the cup pass, and Why hast Thou for-

saken }'fe'l and divine the action whereby He the Same did

cause the sun to fail and the dead to rise. And so He said

humanly, Now is .J.JIy soul troltbled; and He said divinely,

I have power to lay down My life, and power to take it again.

For to be troubled was proper to the flesh, but to have

power to lay down His life and take it again, when He


AGAINST ARIANISM.


427


would, was no property of men but of the Word's iI


'


58.

power. For man dies, not at his own arbitrement,

but by necessity of nature and against his will; but the Lord

being Hinlself immortal, but having a mortal flesh, had at

His own free will, as God, to become separate from the body

and to take it again, when He would. Concerning this too,

speaks David in the Psalm, Thou shalt not leave my soul

in Hades, neither shalt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see

rorruption. For It beseemed that the flesh, corruptible as it

was, should no longer after its own nature remain mortal,

but, because of the VV ord who had put it on, should abide

incorruptible. For as He, having come in our body, was

conformed to our condition, so we, having received Him,

partake of the immortality that is from Him.

304. Idle then IS the excuse for stumbling, and narrow

are the notions concerning the Word, of these Ario-maniacs,

from its being written, He was troubled, and He wept. For

they seem not even to have human feeling, if they are thus

ignorant of man's nature and properties; properties which

do but make it the greater marvel, that He, the Word,

though in a suffering flesh, neither prevented those who

were conspiring against Him, nor took vengeance on those

who were putting Him to death, though He was able, He

who hindered some from dying, and raised others from

the dead. And He let His own body suffer, for therefore

did He come, as I said before, th;tt in the flesh He might

suffer, and thenceforth the flesh might be made impassible

and immortal, and that, as we have many times said,

contumely and the other troubles might fall upon Him

but come short of others aiter Him, being by Him

annulled utterly; and that henceforth men might for ever

abide incorruptible, as a temple of the Word. Had

Christ's enemies thus dwelt on these thoughts, and recog-

nised the Ecclesiastical Scope 9 as an anchor for the faith,

8 He ends then, as he began, by maintaining that Scripture is


.


428 THREE DISCOURSES OF ATHANASIUS, ETC.

Ca. xxx. they would not have of the f(âth made shipwreck,

nor been so shanleless as to resist those who would

fain recover them from their fall, and to deem those as

enemies who are exhorting them to orthodoxy.

305. Therefore God 1 the \V ord Hirnself is Christ frOln


Iary, God and man ;-not SOlne other Christ, but One and

the Same; He before ages from the Father, He too in the

last times from the Virgin; invisible before, even to the

holy powers of heaven, visible now because of I-lis being

one with the Man who is visible; seen, I say, not in His

invisible Godhead, but in the operation of the Godhead

through the human body and whole man, which He has

renewed by making it His own,-

To Him be the adoration and the worship, who was

before, and now is, and ever shall be, even to all ages.

Amen. i


to be interpreted t not by its letter,

or piecemeal, but by the Eccle.

siastical Scope.

I From Orate iv.

 36.

2 It is an argument for con-

sidering that these Discourses ran

on to the end of Orat. iv. that there

is in the Greek a Doxology at the

end of that Orat., viz., that which I

have transferred to this place, and

none here. This, however. does

not touch the plain fact, that the


Fourth is both in matter and in

composition quite different from

the Three to which I have con-

fined myself in this Volume; and

of course the question may be

asked whether a Doxology is

necessarily to be considered an

integral portion of the work to

which it is attached, and never

due to the amanueIll:iis or the

transcri ber.


THE END.


ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS
