# Full Text (First 20,000 characters)

■J?

^

hbl,  stx

BF     173.J8

Psychology  of  the  unconscious;

3    1153    OQbOflfiia    3

%

00

PSYCHOLOGY   OF

THE  UNCONSCIOUS

A  Study  of  the  Transformations

and   Symbolisms    of  the   Libido

A  Contribution  to  the  History  of  the  Evolution  of  Thought

BY

Dr.  C.  G.  JUNG

Of  the  University  of  Zurich

AUTHORIZED  TRANSLATION,  WITH  INTRODUCTION,  BY

BEATRICE  M.  HINKLE,   M.D.

Of  the  Neurological  Department  of  Cornell  University  Medical

School  and  of  the  New  York  Post  Graduate  Medical  School

NEW  YORK

DODD,  MEAD  AND  COMPANY

1931

Copyright,  1916,  by

MOFFAT,  YARD  AND  COMPANY

New  York

All  rights  reserved

Second  Printing,  September,  1916

Reprinted,  November,  1917

TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE

That  humanity  is  seeking  a  new  message,  a  new  light

upon  the  meaning  of  life,  and  something  tangible,  as  it

were,  with  which  it  can  work  towards  a  larger  under-

standing of  itself  and  its  relation  to  the  universe,  is  a

fact  I  think  none  will  gainsay.  Therefore,  it  has

seemed  to  me  particularly  timely  to  introduce  to  the  Eng-

lish-speaking world  Dr.  Jung's  remarkable  book,  "  Wand-

lungen  und  Symbole  der  Libido."  In  this  work  he  has

plunged  boldly  into  the  treacherous  sea  of  mythology  and

folklore,  the  productions  of  the  ancient  mind  and  that  of

the  common  people,  and  turned  upon  this  vast  material

the  same  scientific  and  painstaking  method  of  psychologic

analysis  that  is  applied  to  the  modern  mind,  in  order  to

reveal  the  common  bond  of  desire  and  longing  which

unites  all  humanity,  and  thus  bridge  the  gaps  presumed

to  exist  between  ancient  and  widely  separated  peoples  and

those  of  our  modern  time.  The  discovery  of  this  under-

current affecting  and  influencing  ancient  peoples  as  wellto  exist  between  ancient  and  widely  separated  peoples  and

those  of  our  modern  time.  The  discovery  of  this  under-

current affecting  and  influencing  ancient  peoples  as  well

as  modern  serves  as  a  foundation  or  platform  from  which

he  proceeds  to  hold  aloft  a  new  ideal,  a  new  goal  of

attainment  possible  of  achievement  and  which  can  be  in-

tellectually satisfying,  as  well  as  emotionally  appealing:

the  goal  of  moral  autonomy.

This  book,  remarkable  for  its  erudition  and  the  tre-

mendous labor  expended  upon  it,  as  well  as  for  the  new

vi  TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE

light  which  it  sheds  upon  human  life,  its  motives,  its

needs  and  its  possibilities,  is  not  one  for  desultory  read-

ing or  superficial  examination.  Such  an  approach  ^will

prevent  the  reader  from  gaining  anything  of  its  real

value;  but  for  those  who  can  bring  a  serious  interest  and

willingness  to  give  a  careful  study  to  it  the  work  will

prove  to  be  a  veritable  mine  capable  of  yielding  the

greatest  riches.

The  difficulties  in  translating  a  book  such  as  this  are

almost  insuperable,  but  I  have  tried  faithfully  to  express

Dr.  Jung's  thought,  keeping  as  close  to  the  original  text

as  possible  and,  at  the  same  time,  rendering  the  difficult

material  and  complicated  German  phrasing  as  simply  and

clearly  as  the  subject-matter  would  allow.  In  all  this

work  I  owe  much  to  Miss  Helen  I.  Brayton,  without

whose  faithful  assistance  the  work  would  never  have  been

completed.  I  wish  to  acknowledge  my  gratitude  to  Mr.

Louis  Untermeyer,  whose  help  in  rendering  the  poetic

quotations  into  English  verse  has  been  invaluable,  and  to

express  as  well  my  gratitude  to  other  friends  who  have

assisted  me  in  various  ways  from  time  to  time.

B.  M.  H.

New    York,    1915.express  as  well  my  gratitude  to  other  friends  who  have

assisted  me  in  various  ways  from  time  to  time.

B.  M.  H.

New    York,    1915.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  PSYCHOANALYSIS

AND  ANALYTIC  PSYCHOLOGY

When  Professor  Freud  of  Vienna  made  his  early-

discoveries  in  the  realm  of  the  neuroses,  and  announced

that  the  basis  and  origin  of  the  various  symptoms

grouped  under  the  terms  hysteria  and  neuroses  lay  in

unfulfilled  desires  and  wishes,  unexpressed  and  unknown

to  the  patient  for  the  most  part,  and  concerned  chiefly

with  the  sexual  instinct,  it  was  not  realized  what  far-

reaching  influence  this  unpopular  and  bitterly  attacked

theory  would  exert  on  the  understanding  of  human  life

in  general.

For  this  theory  has  so  widened  in  its  scope  that  its

application  has  now  extended  beyond  a  particular  group

of  pathologic  states.  It  has  in  fact  led  to  a  new  evalua-

tion of  the  whole  conduct  of  human  life;  a  new  compre-

hension has  developed  which  explains  those  things  which

formerly  were  unexplained,  and  there  is  offered  an

understanding  not  only  of  the  symptoms  of  a  neurosis

and  the  phenomena  of  conduct  but  the  product  of  the

mind  as  expressed  in  myths  and  religions.

This  amazing  growth  has  proceeded  steadily  in  an

ever-widening  fashion  despite  opposition  as  violent  as

any  of  which  we  have  knowledge  in  the  past.  The  criti-

cism originally  directed  towards  the  little  understood  and

viii  INTRODUCTION

much  disliked  sexual  conception  now  includes  the  further

teachings  of  a  psychology  which  by  the  application  to  it

of  such  damning  phrases  as  mystical,  metaphysical  and

sacrilegious,  is  condemned  as  unscientific.

To  add  to  the  general  confusion  and  misundertanding

surrounding  this  new  school  of  thought  there  has  arisensacrilegious,  is  condemned  as  unscientific.

To  add  to  the  general  confusion  and  misundertanding

surrounding  this  new  school  of  thought  there  has  arisen

a  division  amongst  the  leaders  themselves,  so  that  there

now  exist  two  schools  led  respectively  by  Professor

Sigmund  Freud  of  Vienna  and  Dr.  Carl  Jung  of  Zurich,

referred  to  in  the  literature  as  the  Vienna  School  and

the  Zurich  School.

It  is  very  easy  to  understand  that  criticism  and  opposi-

tion should  develop  against  a  psychology  so  difficult  of

comprehension,  and  so  disturbing  to  the  ideas  which  have

been  held  by  humanity  for  ages;  a  psychology  which

furthermore  requires  a  special  technique  as  well  as  an

observer  trained  to  recognize  and  appreciate  in  psycho-

logic phenomena  a  verification  of  the  statement  that

there  is  no  such  thing  as  chance,  and  that  every  act  and

every  expression  has  its  own  meaning,  determined  by  the

inner  feelings  and  wishes  of  the  individual.

It  is  not  a  simple  matter  to  come  out  boldly  and  state

that  every  individual  is  to  a  large  extent  the  determiner

of  his  own  destiny,  for  only  by  poets  and  philosophers

has  this  idea  been  put  forth — not  by  science;  and  it  is  a

brave  act  to  make  this  statement  with  full  consciousness

of  all  its  meaning,  and  to  stand  ready  to  prove  it  by

scientific  reasoning  and  procedure.

Developed  entirely  through  empirical  investigation  and

through  an  analysis  of  individual  cases,   Freudian  psy-

INTRODUCTION  ix

chology  seems  particularly  to  belong  to  that  conception

of  Max  Miiller's  that  "  An  empirical  acquaintance  with

facts  rises  to  a  scientific  knowledge  of  facts  as  soon  as

the  mind  discovers  beneath  the  multiplicity  of  single

productions  the  unity  of  an  organic  system."  *facts  rises  to  a  scientific  knowledge  of  facts  as  soon  as

the  mind  discovers  beneath  the  multiplicity  of  single

productions  the  unity  of  an  organic  system."  *

Psychoanalysis  is  the  name  given  to  the  method  de-

veloped for  reaching  down  Into  the  hidden  depths  of  the

individual  to  bring  to  light  the  underlying  motives  and

determinants  of  his  symptoms  and  attitudes,  and  to  reveal

the  unconscious  tendencies  which  lie  behind  actions  and

reactions  and  which  influence  development  and  determine

the  relations  of  life  Itself.  The  result  of  digging  down

Into  the  hidden  psyche  has  been  to  produce  a  mass  of

material  from  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  so

astonishing  and  disturbing  and  out  of  relation  with  the

previously  held  values,  as  to  arouse  in  any  one  unfamiliar

with  the  process  the  strongest  antagonism  and  criticism.

Although  originally  studied  only  as  a  therapeutic

method  for  the  sick,  it  was  soon  realized  through  an

analysis  of  normal  people  how  slight  were  the  differences

in  the  content  of  the  unconscious  of  the  sick  and  of  the

normal.  The  differences  observed  were  seen  to  be  rather

In  the  reactions  to  life  and  to  the  conflicts  produced  by

contending  forces  in  the  individual.

These  conflicts,  usually  not  fully  perceived  by  the  In-

dividual, and  having  to  do  with  objectionable  desires  and

wishes  that  are  not  In  keeping  with  the  conscious  Idea  of

self,  produce  marked  effects  which  are  expressed  either

in    certain    opinions,    prejudices,    attitudes    of    conduct,

*  "  Science  of  Language,"  first  series,  p.  25.

X  INTRODUCTION

faulty  actions,  or  in  some  definite  pathologic  symptom.

As  Dr.  Jung  says,  he  who  remains  healthy  has  to  struggleX  INTRODUCTION

faulty  actions,  or  in  some  definite  pathologic  symptom.

As  Dr.  Jung  says,  he  who  remains  healthy  has  to  struggle

with  the  same  complexes  that  cause  the  neurotic  to  fall  ill.

In  a  valuable  book  called  "  The  Neighbor,"  written

by  the  late  Professor  N.  Shaler  of  Harvard  University,

there  occurs  this  very  far-reaching  statement:  "It  is

hardly  too  much  to  say  that  all  the  important  errors  of

conduct,  all  the  burdens  of  men  or  of  societies  are  caused

by  the  inadequacies  in  the  association  of  the  primal  animal

emotions  with  those  mental  powers  which  have  been  so

rapidly  developed  in  mankind."

This  statement,  reached  by  a  process  of  reasoning

and  a  method  of  thought  and  study  entirely  different

from  psychoanalysis,  nevertheless  so  completely  ex-

presses in  brief  form  the  very  basis  of  the  postulates

developed  through  psychoanalysis  that  I  quote  it  here.

Such  a  statement  made  in  the  course  of  a  general  exam-

ination of  human  relations  does  not  arouse  opposition  nor

seem  to  be  so  difficult  of  acceptance.  It  appears  to  be

the  individual  application  of  these  conceptions  that  has

roused  such  bitter  antagonism  and  violent  denuncia-

tions.

Rightly  understood  and  used,  psychoanalysis  may  be

compared  to  surgery,  for  psychoanalysis  stands  in  the

same  relation  to  the  personality  as  surgery  does  to  the

body,  and  they  aim  at  parallel  results.

It  is  well  recognized  that  in  the  last  analysis  nature  is

the  real  physician,  the  healer  of  wounds;  but  prior  to  the

development  of  our  modern  asepsis  and  surgical  technique

the  healing  produced  by  nature  was  most  often  of  a  very

INTRODUCTION  xi

faulty  and  Imperfect  type — hideous  scars,  distorted  and

crippled  limbs,  with  functions  impaired  or  incapacitated,INTRODUCTION  xi

faulty  and  Imperfect  type — hideous  scars,  distorted  and

crippled  limbs,  with  functions  impaired  or  incapacitated,

resulted  from  the  wounds,  or  else  nature  was  unable  to

cope  with  the  hurt  and  the  injured  one  succumbed.

Science  has  been  steadily  working  for  centuries  with

the  aim  of  understanding  nature  and  finding  means  to

aid  and  co-operate  with  her  so  that  healing  could  take

place  with  the  least  possible  loss  of  function  or  permanent

injury  to  the  individual.  Marvelous  results  have  re-

warded these  persistent  efforts,  as  the  brilliant  achieve-

ments of  surgery  plainly  indicate.

Meantime,  however,  little  thought  was  given  to  the

possibility  of  any  scientific  method  being  available  to  help

man  overcome  the  wounds  and  conflicts  taking  place  in

his  soul,  hurts  which  retarded  his  development  and  prog-

ress as  a  personality,  and  which  frequently  In  the  struggle

resulted  In  physical  pains  and  symptoms  of  the  most

varied  character.  That  was  left  solely  to  religion  and

metaphysics.  Now,  however,  this  same  assistance  that

surgery  has  given  to  the  physical  body,  psychoanalysis

attempts  to  give  to  the  personality.  That  it  cannot

always  succeed  is  as  much  to  be  expected,  and  more,

than  that  surgery  does  not  always  succeed,  for  the

analytic  work  requires  much  of  the  individual.  No

real  result  can  be  attained  if  he  has  not  already

developed  a  certain  quality  of  character  and  Intelli-

gence which  makes  It  possible  for  him  to  submit

himself  to  a  facing  of  his  naked  soul,  and  to  the  pain  and

suffering  which  this  often  entails.  Here,  as  in  no  other

relation  In  life,  an  absolute  truth  and  an  absolute  honesty

xii  INTRODUCTION

are  the  only  basis  of  action,  since  deception  of  any  kindrelation  In  life,  an  absolute  truth  and  an  absolute  honesty

xii  INTRODUCTION

are  the  only  basis  of  action,  since  deception  of  any  kind

deceives  no  one  but  the  individual  himself  and  acts  as  a

boomerang,  defeating  his  own  aims.

Such  deep  searching  and  penetrating  into  the  soul  is

not  something  to  be  undertaken  lightly  nor  to  be  con-

sidered a  trivial  or  simple  matter,  and  the  fact  is  that

where  a  strong  compulsion  is  lacking,  such  as  sickness

or  a  situation  too  difficult  to  meet,  much  courage  is

required  to  undertake  it.

In  order  to  understand  this  psychology  which  is  per-

vading all  realms  of  thought  and  seems  destined  to  be  a

new  psychological-philosophical  system  for  the  under-

standing and  practical  advancement  of  human  life,  it  will

be  necessary  to  go  somewhat  into  detail  regarding  its

development  and  present  status.  For  in  this  new  direc-

tion lies  its  greatest  value  and  its  greatest  danger.

The  beginnings  of  this  work  were  first  published  in

1895  ^^  ^  book  entitled  "  Studien  iiber  Hysteric,"  and

contained  the  joint  investigations  into  hysteria  of  Dr.

Breuer  of  Vienna  and  his  pupil  Dr.  Sigmund  Freud.  The

results  of  their  investigations  seemed  to  show  that  the

various  symptoms  grouped  under  the  title  of  hysteria

were  the  result  of  emotionally  colored  reminiscences

which,  all  unknown  to  the  conscious  waking  self,  were

really  actively  expressing  themselves  through  the  surro-

gate form  of  symptoms  and  that  these  experiences,  al-

though forgotten  by  the  patient,  could  be  reproduced

and  the  emotional  content  discharged.

Hypnosis  was  the  means  used  to  enable  the  physician

to  penetrate  deeply  into  the  forgotten  memories,  for  it

INTRODUCTION  xiiiand  the  emotional  content  discharged.

Hypnosis  was  the  means  used  to  enable  the  physician

to  penetrate  deeply  into  the  forgotten  memories,  for  it

INTRODUCTION  xiii

was  found  through  hypnosis  that  these  lost  Incidents  and

circumstances  were  not  really  lost  at  all  but  only  dropped

from  consciousness,  and  were  capable  of  being  revived

when  given  the  proper  stimuli.  The  astonishing  part

about  it  was  that  with  the  revival  of  these  memories  and

their  accompanying  painful  and  disturbing  emotions,  the

symptoms  disappeared.  This  led  naturally  to  the  con-

clusion that  these  symptoms  were  dependent  upon  some

emotional  disturbance  or  psychic  trauma  which  had  been

inadequately  expressed,  and  that  in  order  to  cure  the

patient  one  merely  had  to  establish  the  connection  be-

tween the  memory  and  the  emotions  which  properly

belonged  to  it,  letting  the  emotion  work  Itself  out  through

a  reproduction  of  the  forgotten  scene.

With  further  investigation  Freud  found  that  hypnosis

was  unnecessary  for  the  revival  of  the  forgotten  experi-

ences, and  that  it  was  possible  to  obtain  the  lost  emotional

material  In  the  conscious  and  normal  state.  For  this

purpose  the  patient  was  encouraged  to  assume  a  passive,

non-critical  attitude  and  simply  let  his  thoughts  flow,

speaking  of  whatever  came  into  his  mind,  holding  nothing

back.  During  this  free  and  easy  discussion  of  his  life

and  conditions,  directed  by  the  law  of  association  of

ideas,  reference  was  invariably  made  to  the  experiences

or  thoughts  which  were  the  most  affective  and  disturbing

elements.  It  was  seen  to  be  quite  Impossible  to  avoid

this  indirect  revelation  because  of  the  strength  of  the

emotions  surrounding  these  ideas  and  the  effect  of  theelements.  It  was  seen  to  be  quite  Impossible  to  avoid

this  indirect  revelation  because  of  the  strength  of  the

emotions  surrounding  these  ideas  and  the  effect  of  the

conscious  wish  to  repress  unpleasant  feelings.  This  im-

portant group  of  ideas  or  impressions,  with  the  feelings

xiv  INTRODUCTION

and  emotions  clustered  around  them  which  are  betrayed

through  this  process,  was  called  by  Jung  a  complex.

However,  with  the  touching  of  the  complex  which

always  contains  feelings  and  emotions  so  painful  or  un-

pleasant as  to  be  unacceptable  to  consciousness,  and  which

are  therefore  repressed  and  hidden,  great  difficulties  ap-

peared, for  very  often  the  patient  came  to  a  sudden  stop

and  could  apparently  recall  nothing  more.  Memory

gaps  were  frequent,  relations  twisted,  etc.  Evidently

some  force  banished  these  memories  so  that  the  person

was  quite  honest  in  saying  that  he  could  remember  noth-

ing or  that  there  was  nothing  to  tell.  This  kind  of  for-

getfulness  was  called  repression,  and  is  the  normal

mechanism  by  which  nature  protects  the  individual  from

such  painful  feelings  as  are  caused  by  unpleasant  and  un-

acceptable experiences  and  thoughts,  the  recognition  of

his  egoistic  nature,  and  the  often  quite  unbearable  con-

flict of  his  weaknesses  with  his  feelings  of  idealism.

At  this  early  time  great  attention  was  given  towards

developing  a  technique  which  would  render  more  easy

the  reproduction  of  these  forgotten  memories,  for  with

the  abandonment  of  hypnosis  it  was  seen  that  some  un-

known active  force  was  at  work  which  not  only  banished

painful  memories  and  feelings,  but  also  prevented  their

return;  this  was  called  resistance.  This  resistance

was  found  to  be  the  important  mechanism  which  inter-painful  memories  and  feelings,  but  also  prevented  their

return;  this  was  called  resistance.  This  resistance

was  found  to  be  the  important  mechanism  which  inter-

fered with  a  free  flow  of  thought  and  produced  the

greatest  difficulty  in  the  further  conduct  of  the  analysis.

It  appeared  under  various  guises  and  frequently  mani-

fested itself  in  intellectual  objections  based  on  reasoning

INTRODUCTION  xv

ground,  in  criticism  directed  towards  the  analyst,  or  in

criticism  of  the  method  itself,  and  finally,  often  in  a  com-

plete blocking  of  expression,  so  that  until  the  resistance

was  broken  nothing  more  could  be  produced.

It  was  necessary  then  to  find  some  aid  by  which  these

resistances  could  be  overcome  and  the  repressed  memories

and  feelings  revived  and  set  free.  For  it  was  proven

again  and  again  that  even  though  the  person  was  not  at

all  aware  of  concealing  within  himself  some  emotionally

disturbing  feeling  or  experience  with  which  his  symptoms

were  associated,  yet  such  was  the  fact,  and  that  under

proper  conditions  this  material  could  be  brought  into

consciousness.  This  realm  where  these  unknown  but  dis-

turbing emotions  were  hidden  was  called  the  "  Uncon-

scious " — the  "  Unconscious  "  also  being  a  name  used

arbitrarily  to  indicate  all  that  material  of  which  the  per-

son is  not  aware  at  the  given  time — the  not-conscious.

This  term  Is  used  very  loosely  in  Freudian  psychology

and  Is  not  intended  to  provoke  any  academic  discussion

but  to  conform  strictly  to  the  dictionary  classification  of

a  "  negative  concept  which  can  neither  be  described  nor

defined."  To  say  that  an  idea  or  feeling  is  unconscious

merely  means  to  indicate  that  the  individual  is  unawarea  "  negative  concept  which  can  neither  be  described  nor

defined."  To  say  that  an  idea  or  feeling  is  unconscious

merely  means  to  indicate  that  the  individual  is  unaware

at  that  time  of  its  existence,  or  that  all  the  material  of

which  he  is  u