MICROCOPY


ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OP AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 11

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 28-30

June 30-Aug. 20, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
arc predominantly affidavits by various persons. They arc
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal 1 from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


•


No. of

Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)

1

3

Joeef Altetoetter
et al.

Justice Case

16

4

Oswald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick
et al.

Flick Case
(Industrialist)

6

6

Carl Krauch et al.

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)

24

7

Wilhelm Diet et al.

Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

9

Otto Ohlendorf
et al.

Einsatzgruppen

Case (SS)

24

10

Al fried Krupp
et al.

Krupp Case
(Industrialist)

12

11

Emet von
Weizeaecker et al.

Ministries Case

21

12

Wilhelm von Leeb

High Command Case

14


et al.

Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemmed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

. 3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature

of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
burns.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for •
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Maffen SS, Reichskommissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blome: Deputy [of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Wehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation.


Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef dcs Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Frcysong: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captairv> Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtraedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokomy: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blomc, Pokomy, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Hand loser. Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyscng, Beiglboeck, Oberhcuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes arc arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reiohegesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


of the nedical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441 '

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

N0-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to

several exhibits.

including


exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Feioh8geeetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books arc
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

7


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the.International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They arc followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The 'official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that arc largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case arc closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, Til39; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminals
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Triale of War Criminals Before the Ituemberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 11
Target 1

Volume 28

June 30-July 9, 1947


'


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


i CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
\U.S. vs KARL BRANDT «t al
VOLUME 28


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


30 Juno - 9 July 1947 pp. 10382-10716(48)


fi*7

30 Jurv.-!i-FL-l-l^*Priaucu (Int. Busier)

Court Bo. I, Cas- I


Official Transcript of the. Jtocrican
HUitary Tribunal in th- natter of
th. United States of Aaurica against
K-.rl Brandt, _t all, defendants,
sitting at :<uraborg, &.rrny, on
30 Jane 1947, 0930, Ju3tic- Benia,
presiding.


TTC AftSKAL: Persons in the courtroom will plor.su find their sorts.

The Honorable, the Judges of liilltary Tribunal I, Hill tar y Tri¬
bunal I is n» in session. Cod save the United states of Aicricn end
this honorable Tribunal. Th-re will bo orc.wr in the Court.

THS PJUSIIXi T: ifr. Marshal, have you -sc-rt in.d if tho dofondants
cru ell present in the court?

TWx ARSKAL: ilay it please your Honor, nil tho do fondants nr© pro-
»jnt in tlx court with the exception of defendant Oberhr.usor who is
absent due to iUnoss. Medical certificate will be nresuntod.

TH2 PILSSZDlQiT: The Secretary will nit- for the record tho presence
of dl tho defendants in court with the exception of defendant Oborhau-
ser who is absent on account of illixsa.

Counsel any proceed.

IB. HAI5JY: lir.y it please tho Tribunal, before c-lUn.;. too two
witnesses who will testify as to the activities at Katcweiler, tho
prosecution desired to krvow whether -T not the defense counsels for
Beckor-Froyaens and Scr.r-edr h*vo mj interest in this interro; ation.

-THJ ?rL'S2D.fT: Couna.1 for defendant —

TH£ i:TJ , 5BuTORs The switch, your Honor.

THZ 7XXIL ,.T: . ill you kindly repeat it to then?

IB* KARf,Y: I would like to Imx wik-thor or not counsels for defen¬
dants Bccktr-Frcyseng and Schrader intend to attend tlx session this
00 mi ns while I on eX-aining the two witness, s in connection with tho
activities at ■ at sailer or whether or not it is only the dcionse corn¬
el for Rose :ho has interest in this natter. They wore duly wnrn-d or
nrtified on Saturday that tfc-se witrusses would be called this oorning,
your Honcr,


10382


30 June-r-FL-l-2-Pria-au (In’— Bnaalur)

Court I

DP.. KLirXG (Counsel for defendant . rugowsky): ?cr. President, I
shall notify these. two dofonsu counsel* isea^diatcly.

THd A 8S ia . « ?: Thank you. Doctor.

!R. HARDY: In trv. mantis., perhaps one of the defense counsels
hu S3K documents they can put in.

DT.. HUUSS: Jfr. President, with tho periission of tho high Tribu¬
nal, I should like to sake us«- of this int-rval to suhait Lho -in^lisli
tr~x.slr.tion of thr.e docu*-nts to the Tribunr 1, docus-nts which I sub¬
nit ted into ovidence o few days ago.

THo PRESt:.:. T: *..ill counsel, statu for the record tho defendant
for wh» you are appearing.

DS. iCAUSo! Dr. Krness, counsel for the defendant Professor
Rostock.

THZ P.^SIL ills Counsel ary proceed.

D?.. ICil'SS: The cnglish copies h“Ve been provided with the cor¬
responding -.\hibit nuahjrs, which have been admitted into cvidenco.

BC*PI£SE»2 T: Th.se English documents available to the Tribunal?

DR. TIAUSS: Thank you, :'j. President, thrt will be all.

THo PrjdE2.T; The Tribunal has received only threo cooiea of theso
docua-nts. Is there anotb-r fils available?

The Tribunal has sufficient of tr.uso documents.

DR. F7.0SC' A2<h (Counsel lor defendant Brack): lir. President, ary
I sake a brief urgent application? During the afternoon session of 13
Hay, pa.> 7531 of the C.rs-j. n-cord, I have stated that aftor long ef¬
forts I had succeeded to find the author of the opinion which was -ivon
in connecticn with Document JfO-205 upon which Brack has worked* This

•

witn.33 is nai residing in th- Rus*i® loiv in Gerarny. In the *oanti.He,
I have been able to correspond with that witness asking hL-n to apocar
in f urnberc in order to sake an affidavit upon his arrival.

Saturday ovenin? — that is, on the 28th of Jun. — I received a


30 Jiuo_FL- 1-3-PrS--*.au (int. Reader)

Court No. I, Case I

t,iegraa according to which this witness, in 2 -dor to travel to
wj'ild have to possess a docuaent which is requested by the Russian !ii-
litary :;ovcrr.- 1 enfc in Coraany in order to able to leave the Russian
Zone.

Delr y in correspondence with tho nit re as can be explained owing
to the well known circuastanoes which .ocko it Impossible for us to send
letters to reach the Soviet Zone in tide.

I a* ruw* submitting to the Coneral S cretary an application wliich
roqu-sts the Tribunal to invite this nitness to appear here. His nano
is University Professor Friedrich Holz residing at At lie. — to testify
that ho had givon an export opinion to brack in the spring of 1941 and
that this expert opinion had been converted by Brack's collaborators
to Document MD-2Q3. I ack tho Tribunal to gr^nt ray rv.qio.st and to tell
the General Secretary thr.t this docuxnt be sent to tho witn-so either
dir-ctly or through ae in order to enable him to loavo the Russian Zorw
and appear in Hamburg.

I should also like to ask you to pomit a- after Holz's arrival
to suboit tho affidavit to th- Tribunal if such a submission is still
possible before the beginning of the find pleas. Unf-rtuuntoly, I was
not able to deal with the jntter e-.rlivr rince only Saturday I received
thj tele gran.

!K. HARDY: four Hxior, it se~aa to .X that n mat ter requiring this
auch difficulty could Well have boon token care of sinoe 9 :>oconber 194b.

This is now Juno 30, 1947. I don't so- but that an affidavit would

•

suffice. Ho has had ample opportunity to brin- this witness lxro.

T*£i PRZSID-IT: If I understand Dr. Fr-actoann correctly, he dosiros
simply to suhait an affidavit to the Tribunal, not call this .oar. as a
witness.

A. -iRDY: That is not ay understanding, your Honor. It is .-ay
urderstrndin^ Dr. Freschnsnn intends to bring this nan in as a viitness
and get clearance papers frees tho Russian Zone-.


10384


30 June-4t-FI/-l-4.-Prl!»,au (In;. Raaalcr)

Court No. I, Cc»- I

Da. PBDKBUUV: Mr. President, I should like Professor Hols to
ccai to Numbers in order to &t the affidavit free hin «hon bo is taro
end then sulwit it to tta Tribunal* Obviously, that is inpossible to
deal with by way of correspondence. Since DuCoabvr until April 1 havo
triud to get hie address. I always receive ay replies threo or four
weeks too lata.

7HH raSSI DS T: Dr. Fr-schaann dxs n.'t desire to call this doctor
as a witness but sisply to have hia ntterd rt Surnberg in order to nako
an affidavit.

DR. PrDWtlANN: Yes, Ur. President.

THo PfflSJDZJTT: Dr. Rroschoann, did you hand the Secretary tho ap-
plication which you have aade to the Socivtary General?

DR. FnDSCHIUKJI: res, Ur. President.


103S5


30 Jua-IMS-2-l-Kinabuck (Int. Raaler)
Court Xo. I, Caso So. 1.


TH2 fRESUBHT: Dr. Froeschssmn, the Tribunal will consider
this application at the aorning recoss.

DR. ?ao2SCrDONHi Thank you, Kr. President.

DR. FZBNDGs kr. President, Dr. Tipp will be in tho courtroon
lmediotely.

HR. HARDY: lour Honor, perhape wo could call tho witrass at
this tino and have hia sworn in and go through sore of his biographical
data.

THE raZSlDEOT: Very well.

!R. HARDY: Tho witnoss tho prosocution wishes to call at this
tino is a prosocution rebuttal witness, Constantyn Johan Broors.

THE ?R2SIDS:<?i The Marshal will suenon tho witnoss, Constantyn

Broors.

CCKSTAHTYil JfHAN BRCER8, o witnoss, took tho star*] and tostlfiod
as follows:

JUDGE SEBRIMJ: Hold up your right hand, plooee.

«R. HARDY: If your Honor ploaso, this witnoss will testify in
tho English Language.

JUDGE SEBRIHG: Do you soloanly swear that tho tostinony you
are about to give in this issuo will bo tho truth, tho wholo truth and
nothing but tho truth, so holp you God?

THE WITNESS: I will spoak tho truth and only tho truth, so
holp no God.

JUDGE SE8KDK): You say bo soated.

THE H»ESIDSOT: I wjuld ask tho witness to spoil his nano.

THE WXfHBSSi Ky naoo is (spoiling) 3-r-o-o-r-e.

DIRECT SXAHINATIC.J

BY HR. HARDY:

Q Witness, what is your full nana?

A Vy full nano is Constantyn Johan Broors.

Q When were you born?

A I was born the 25th of Soptoubor 1913.


10386


30 Jun-*MC-2-2-Kinabuck (Int. Hanler)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

•

Q Where wore you born?

%

A I was born in Rikaloogan in Java, in the Dutch East Indio a.

Q You are a Dutch citizen?

A I an a Dutch citizen.

Q Would you kindly outline briefly for this Court your educa¬
tional background?

A tiy educational backgro-zod is school in Holland, and after¬
wards high school and thon university; first yoar in Batavia in tho
nodical high school and afterwards University of Utrecht whore I stud¬
ied biology and I finished ny studios.

Q When did you finish your studies at tho University of

Utrocht?

A When I cano back in 19li£> frocu concentration cruap Dachau.

Q Prior to tho war had you finished a substantial cnount of
your study period at tho University of Utrocht?

" Boforo tho war you noon?

Q Boforo tho war, yos.

A Yos, I only finished ny studies whan I ca*» back.

Q I sou. What aro you doing at tho prosorit tiro?

A At tho presont tiro I an an assistant of tho University of

Utrocht.

Q In what capacity?

A Tho capaoity of an ana tonic t 1 assistant on the nodical and
anatonical laboratory.

Q Witness, during the courso of this interrogation inosnuch
as wo aro both s peakin g in tho English language, if you will kindly
hesitate for a nooont before you answer ny question it will bo helpful
to the Goman interpreter and tho court reporters.

A Yes, sir.

THZ FHESIDEI.Tx Just a a ocajnt, counsel. Dr. Tipp, docs tho
Tribunal understand that at this so s si on you are acting as counsol for
defendants Bockor-Freysong an d Schroedor?


3C Jun-U-iE-2-3-Kinabuck (int. Racier)
Court So# I, Case !lo. 1. ,


DR. TI?P: Yes, Hr. President.

TiE PRESIDE?*! i The questions propounded to the witness before
your arrival wcro siaply as to his ago and his ©durational qualifica¬
tions and tho fact that ho is a Dutch citizen#

DR. TIPPt Thank you, lir. Frosidont.

Q (9y Ur. Hardy) Now, Hr. Brcers, would you kindly toll tho
Court when you rx>ro first arrcstod by tho Gestapo and for what reason?

A 1 was first arrested by tho Gestapo on tho 21st of July
19h2 for underground activity and spy work.

Q ?or nhco woro you performing this underground activity and
spy work?

A This underground activity I was performing for tho so-callod
O.D., Ordo Bionat. That was a Dutch underground organisation. And tho
spy work I wns porforning for tho I.D., tto Inlichtingon Dionot. That
was an organization forced for tho English intelligence.

Q Hitnoss, wore you ovor arrostod or in tho custody of tho
polico for any criao prior to this arrest by tho Gestapo in July, 19^2?

A No, sir.

Q Now, of tor your arrest in July 19 12, would you kindly toll
the Tribunal briefly what happonod to you?

JUDGE SEBRlNGt Hr. Hardy, I think tho Tribunal would liko to
know whother or not this can was triod, and if so, by what sort of
court*

HARDY: That's what this question ccnprisos, Your Honor.

A When I was arrostod on tho 21st of July, I was brought to
tho prison of Schcroningen in Holland and there I was intorrogatod
about ny spy work and that lasted about cloven days. Then I was, with¬
out a trial, condonnod to death and they told ue I shall bo shot down
tho next coming, but tho next coming they brought no before ono of
the high ranking officers of the S.D. and ho said to nc that it was an
error and I should forgot it. Then afterwards I was intorrogatod for
the 0.D, case and after five nonths transported to the prison of Haren,


10338


30 Jun-*W«-2-^-Sinab uck (Int. Ranler)

Court So. I, Case No. 1.

also in Holland, and in Rarer. I was interrogated fcr the case of tho
I.D., spy work cose, and a abort tiso afterwards in Haren we got a
trial for the O.D. caso. After five nonths in Haren I was transported
to Utrecht aixi in Utrecht I had the trial-for tho spy work case. In
these two trials I was detached. Tho Gomans called that — I don't
rosoebor the nano — "Abt re tuning ", I was Abtrcnnung and thon aftor
five nonths in Utrecht they transported do to Amorsfoorth, and in
Amorsfoorth I only was about throe wools and then bocano transported
to Hatswoilor.

Q Holl, now, witnoss, after you had boon tried twico for sit¬
ing And for other underground activities, was sontonco passed in your
caso?

A No, thoro was no sontonco. Tho only two possibilities
were sontonco to death or Abtrcnnung. You could bo sentenced to donth
or you could bo dotachod free tho jrocoss. You would bo Abtronnung.

Q You roan acquitted?

A Acquitted, yos.

Q And woro you thon acquitted after those two trials?

A Yos, sir.

Q Well, thon, for what reasons woro you sent to tho concent¬
ration canp Natzwoiler?

A I was thoro with about 1*0 othor pooplo and thoso pooplo
wore all of these two trials, and wo woro sent to Go many as "Hacht
und Nobel Kaoftlingo" and Katrwoilor was a canp ostablishod, I boliovo,
especially for "HOcht und Nobol Haoftlingo.*

Q Tihon did you arrivo at the concentration emp Natzwoilor?

A I arrived at tho end of October, 19U3.

Q Aixi how long did you resain in tho Natrweiler concentration

canp?

A ttatil the Uth of Scptorfcer 19U

Q And thon whom did you go?

A And then we wore transported to the concentration canp Dachau.


10389


30 Jun-JWB-2-5-yinabuck (int. Easier)
Court !fe. I, Caao No. 1.


Q Ard you stayed there until the liberation?

A Yos, sir.

Q ./ill you kindly toll tho Tribunal what your duties woro
when you first arrived at the concentration ccnp Xatzweiler?*

A At first, tho first tiao for ebout tho first three weo!.s
about, I had ay work in heavy coo and, callod "strassonbiu".


JUMLSls Stroetbuildin",


A (Cont'd) And thon I bccano ill and I cano to the so-callod

"Sehonung". Sehonung was a barrack whore wo could do light work until

we would bo good o no ugh to again do tho hard work, and then I rado a

• *


portrait of ono of the people thoro and so thoy saw that I was a


dr aft stun and I got a Job as tho official draftsman of tho Con andor,
"Schriftonnalor dor Kccr-andantur".


Q hell thon, at any tino did you work in the coup hospital?
A loa * that cano aftorwards. That was tho ond of April or
the boginning of liay, 19U*, that I was callod into tho hospital by


tho chiof physician, SS physician of tho canp. Dr. Platsor, and ho
askod no, "You are a biologist", and ho said, "Can you do booo boot-
oriologiool work?" I answorod hia, "I an a ccoporativo anatomist,
but when you givo no litoraturo and I havo soco tino to work in, I
can do tho work." So ho said, "?roa now on you aro an assistant cf


tho hospital." And fror. othor pooplo, prisoners of tho coap, I hoard
that I was now an assistant of Dr. Kogon and that Dr. Hagen would do
experimental work about typhus and thoro should bo built a laboratory
for no, but it was at that tino that tho Americans already landed and
caao nearer and nearer and so I think Profossor Hagen ditto't liko to


taako soma exporiaonts in a concentration canp with human beings, and
so I never saw in this quality as an assistant of Professor Hagen, I
never saw him. But while I was an anatenist. Dr. Bogarts - Gcorgos
Bogart* —


10390


30 June 4’’-Hj’jC-3-1—C~rce 3 (easier)
Co^t I


<1 Jest a sorent, witness, before you go into that subject. In
sunoatlon thee in April or May of the year 1944 you bcceDO an on 9 latent
in the caap hospital?

A Tes sir.

It And it was ycur understanding that you were to work ao an
assistant to Dr. Heagen?

A Tos sir.

<4 But, you ne-ror did in fact work as assistant to Dr. HnagenT

A Ho sir.

*4 Did Dr. Haagen evor appear at tho errp?

A Yet sir.

tt But you never talked to hie?

A Ho sir.

*4 You don't know whether ho was porforsing any work in tho easy
after X*y 1944?

A Yes oir, thoro was nany gossips about that in tho ensp.

<i But, fres your own knowledge you don't know that ho was work¬
ing with typhus?

A Ho sir, not oxactly.

<4 v hat do you knew iron hearsay?

A Froa hearsay that he was experimenting with typhus and ucod
for that purposo tho prisoners of the c*=p end ho used tho gypeloe
for that, they said.

14 rf hcrc did you hear that?

A I hoard that in the hospital froa the caap, tho prisoner
physician, and fron tho prisoner nurses. They arc tho pooplo who
told sc that.

^ And that wan after Kay 1944 that Haagen was euppooodly con¬
ducting this work?

A Tea sir. I don't know that oxactly for I should bo his
assistant but I never spw hi= in this quality so when he should havo
worked afterwards I think I should act as hie assistant.


10391


30 Juno A7-X JjC_3-2_C-ro8s
Court I


 3ut you had ncvor teen his before the tine you voro ordered
to be hia es«istant?

A Ye* sir, -he a he =adc hio rounds through the ca=p I am his '

aone tines.

k I see. And the reason why you never becrac hio a30letant woa
because a special laboratory to be built was not in fact built?

A So.

And who told you that a laboratory was to be built?

A That -a* told to sc. I scan, aloo by cno of tho prisoners
who wero working in tho hoopifcal.

-I see. Wen, now this Job of yours fell through as assistant
to Dr. Kaagen what did you do then?

A *’o I had nothing to do and then I sot Goorgo Bogarts who was
a prisoner, too, and a 3clgian surgclon and he had to sake tho autop¬
sies -for the hospital, the nor-v*l autopsios, who wero ordorod by tho
prisor.or physicians. When soacbody was suspected to have boon diod
by typhus we should look aftor that and give a report, and ho ookod
ao, George 3ogart s , if I would like to assist hia by hie work and oo
I bccaso his assistant.

it Did you evor perforn autopsies on soac gypsies?

A Yoa sir. That was one oorning. I was called by 3 0 gartz and
ho said, "Sow wo hevc a Job, I don't liko it but w 0 havo to do it."

THL PEboIQ*. T: Witness, about what date was that?

A i don't know oxactly the dato but it con have boon in May or

Juno.

3T KB. HARDY: Of 19^7
A Of 1944.

Continue witness.

A He said, "They have poisoned with ga* sono gypsies and tho
corpses of the dead we'll havo to sake a section of." So wo vent
to the crematory *nd there was a section roon thorc whore we found on
the table a nrked corpse of a gypsy which was a yung rttn in a goed


10392


30 Juno 47_X-7jC_3_3_GToss (Ba-ler)
Ccurt I


state, a good physical state. And wo saw there that there wore
blue colored spots on his skin. *e waited for a absent and then
c«*=o la a. Geraar. ia civics, he was wearing knickerbockers, and ho
was accompanied by an assistant and this assistant had with him
ocse apparatus and photograph apparatus and photo cameras. And
now we sterted oa tho direction of this German, wo started our autopsy.

v* Do you know «ho that Genoa was?

A I asked afterwards and people told me it was E^gen but whon
I was afterwards — whon afterwards I was - they shoved me photograao
I know oxactly that it war Eirt.

Shat it was Professor Kirt?

A Professor Hirt, yos.

^ X see. Continue.

A Vc made tho autopsy In a. common way beginning with a longitu¬
dinal cut through tho skin of the thorax :*id then prepared the thor-x
misclos and aftorwards cut the ribs and put up the stornun with tho
ribs so that we could see tho inner of tho thorax. A n d thon it was
vory good to eoo that the lungs were edematous. Th.y voro so very
owollon that the triangle of the heart was covorod totally by tho odgeo
of tho two lungs. And wo had to toko out tho lntootinca of the thor-x
aftor they wore filmed on tho spot. A a d wo put them down on tho sec¬
tion tablo and they wore filmed again and they wore also taking photo-
grasw.

Was it obvious from tho autopsy Just what the cauao of donth
woa in tho ease of these two corpses?

A I discussed it afterwards with Dr. Bogartz and wo crxio to tho
conclusion that this man was poisoned with " gas offeetlag tho res¬
piratory intestines, the respiratory system. ?or when we undo tho sec¬
tion through tho larynx we saw that tho mucosa, was owe lien and very red.
Afterwards we had to take little samples of tho intestines and had to
put them in little bottles with alcohol rad it seems that it was for
the purposo of making histologicel investigations afterwards.


10393


30 June 47-*-' jC_3_4_G r o.i (Hosier
Court I


I don't lenov if these histologieel investigations wore done in the
pathological section of the hospital of the camp or that Dr. Hirt
took these sables with hin outside the ea^>. And after tho
autopsy Dr. Hirt told sc h»# to write down. Ho dictated no tho pro¬
tocol and I wrote it down it was later typed by the administration
roes of tho hospital of the camp.

V* Sow, at those first 2 autopsies who wag present?

A Present was Professor Hirt, an assistant, and I bcliovo thoro
was anothor assistant one tine, a second assistant, ard thoro was C- O orgo
Bogart* and ae end that wero tho pocplc prosent who vero thcro.

 3id Profossor Haagtn appear at ar$r tlno during the courso of
tho autopsy? . ,

A Gno tine Dr. Haagon ontcred and ho was accompanied by a blondo
girl and by some of the officers of the car*. I believe he was making
his round through the camp and ho would liko to see what happonod
horc and to show it to this blonde girl.

rf oll, now when Profossor Haagon c-ao in vero you performing an
autopsy on an lnmato?

A Tos, I was performing an autopsy on « gypsy.

(4 that a difforont case than; tho two cages you told us
nbout ?

1 Yes, it was one of those two eases.

*4 1 *«o. Did Dr. Haagon ask any questions or did he aoroly Just
atop in, look, and leovo.

A He stoppod in and ho talked with Dr. Hirt and tho blondo girl
steyod in the opening of tho door and th.n aft or eomo talking ho wont
again. I don't know if they talked about these experiments or if they
was talking about something olse.

x i SCO. Did you ever ace Professor Eargee in uniform?

A Yes sir.

v hat typo of uniform did he wear? That is the uniform of the
SS, or the Vohrmacht, of the Luftwaffe, or the £avy, or what?


10394


30 *uno 4’-K-JjCU«-GroB« (Hauler)
Court I


A I seen it was not the conaon unifora wo sthere and I
believe it vm the blue uniform of the Luftwaffe.

<4 Did ProfeoBor Hirt wear e uniforn when he wpe at tho map?

A I don't think bo. I scan the two or three tioco I era/ hin
ho was in knickorbockers.

H I boo. *ow after tho 2 AUtopelee on the #7psics did you ever
porfora any other autopsies on £y-siea who had supposedly boon
poisoned by gas?

A Ho sir.

k Did you ever perforn autopsies on any other lnaatoo who woro
used in experiments?

A Ho Bir.

H ?hcn tho extent of your knowlodsc in your capacity as an autop¬
sy ran in connection with experiments io the two eases of gypsies whom
you autopeied and diagnosed as haring died as the causo of (as
poisoning?

A Yog sir.

H I hare no further questions, your Honor.


10395


3C June-iwiJ-4-l-XrOsser (3ader)

Court 2

7=2 PR2SIHZ-1: Witness, do I understand you to tostlfy that
year findings In the autopsy of tho ceuso of death of these two
£7psios was tho scco, tfaet is, the ceuso of doath was tho seco in
each coso?

*. 70s, Sir, it was ‘the vase.

PH2SID1ST: Counsel for defendants negr crose-exmino.

cross aumusies

37 DS.2IP? (Counsel for thedofondents Schroedor er-d Becker-Proysoug:)

3. Witness, if I understood you correctly, tho ctpp physician,

Dr. Platzor, roquostod you to boccco Profossor Haagon's assistant,
isn't that right?

A. Bo, that is cot right. Dr. Plat tor aelrod no to bocouo an
assistant in the hospital but ho did not uentioc tho wsjo of Dr. Hoagon.

0 ,. dad who did ash you to carry out Haugen*■ bactorlologicol
work end bocaio his assistant!

Am It was only Dr. Platsor who ordorod uo to bom assistant
in tho hospital and I afterwards ho„rd frco tho prisonor^physloiano
lr. tho cctqi that X should work fer Dr. Haakon.

3, If I understood you corroctly, you novor actually worked
for Haag on, did youl

im I never actually worfcod for Eaagoa.

3 . Tou also told us that, free your own knoVlodgo, you could
not toll ue \fcothor Haogon, eftor Uoy 19%4, carriod out any otpori-
nor.ts in tho concentration cicp, isn't that ri^ht?

A . los. I don't soy oxoctly that I know about that but thoro
was nuch gossip about that in cmxp.

3. 7ou have no knowledge of your own about that?

A . I have no Jacvlodgc of ay own about that.

3 . Bow as to tho question of autepsios, witness. Tou woro
tolling us beforo that you assisted in tho case of 2 taitopsios and
that tho ceuso of de«th in tho case® of those 2 autopsies was found


10396


30 Juno-4tf-4-2-t«a«or (B<alr)
Court I


to bo saa poisoning or disintegration of the lung bocanse of gas, is
that right?

A . That is right.

Lot no establish, witness, that tho acn that participated
in these autepsios was Profossor Eirt, not Profosaor Eoagon.

A • Suit is right.

Turthornoro, witness, you woro at-oiag th<* Profosaor Haagon
at ono tine attaddod ono auch autopay, ecccnpnniod by a noobor of
tho canp and a blond laiy, to whoc ho obvicualy intondod to-shov
tho occp. In that connoction, wltnoaa, lot no oak you waa on on too ay
In tho concentration c«p of Hatraoilor accothlng that attractod
particular ettontioa, or woro corpaoa autopaiod thoro on froquent
occoaionat

A . ttoro woro outopaioa on froquont ocean Iona but I thought
that this dioaoctlon drew tho ottontion and that thoroforo ho ctno to
ohow it pertug>o to that girl or that ho would boo what wo woro doing
on hia round through tho wep, whoro ho won tho noln doctor of tho
crop who c.iio every wook and aaiotL'JOa ovory wook to look aft or tho
barracka with typhus patient a.

Q. Tory well, witness. You Just told ua that Hoogen cioo to tho
oaxp onoo a wodc or noro of tan than th t* and looked at tho typhus
barracks. Could you doacribo thceo typhus barracks to tho Tribunal?
Vho was in thoro?

A . In thoso typhus barracks woro laying tho typhus patients.
Those typhus barracks woro a i tun tod in tho lowest part of thoaop.

Tho oeSV was built on tho north sido of a nountoin in tho -Isnco
and tho barracks woro laying on terraces and wo hod 2 rows of torrnco-q
when you ceco in tho uain ontronco wo hod 2 rows of barracks oh your
loft hand and between thoso 2 rows of barr Q cks wo hod a so-collod
appcU-oloce (roll-call square) also in terrapos.


10397


30 Juio4*-MJ-4-34ressor (Sanl«r)

Court I

v, V itr.css, if I understood you correctly, wore innate pationta,
typhus patients, put into those typhys barracks?

^ res, »ir.

Q* Z&V vor « as it night be derived free your testimony,
subjocts who had boon used for experiments but they were peoplo uho
had fallen ill of typhus?

a* Ho but thore was a secret port of ono of the blocks and no¬
body of us could onter it; it was forbidden; and there should bo these
experiments with gypsies. Most of it I hoard by tho gossip in tho crap
and by crap physicians who said they could stato it. I never saw it
nysolf.

In that ooso you havo no knowledge of what woo going on in
tho a^iorimental barracks?

a • Ho, X havo no kr.owlodgo about th<t.

Tory woll, witnots, ono furthor quostion. Do you know my~
thing about tho foot that in the.eprlng or suaior of 19V. fe typhus
epidemic had brokon out in Natswoilor, or do you know nothing about it?

A. Tow, sir; thoro was a typhus epidemic beginning in tho wintor
of 19-13-in 43 —44.

Veil, this epidemic startod at a time when you woro already
in tho crap, or was that boforc your tino?

jU That was n now epidemic; when I was clroady in tho emp it
startod,

• Could you toll tho Tribunal, witness, perhaps you know it
boccuso of your connection with the crap physicians, how many pationte
thoro wore in tho crap at that tine?

A . I do not know that. I cannot giro any offoctivo nuubor of
thoso patients.

% . Do you know, witness, whether, during tho cocrso of this
ttiidcnic, thoro woro any deaths?

a. Tos, sir, n®y death coses.


10393


30 Jane Wtf - t . f lwc (&d#r)

Court I


4 =• revort once core to Hr. Eaagen. Ton had not actually

cooperated vith Prof ee tor Haag on, had you?

J- So, sir.

3. Hey I furthor establish that you know nothing about what Hr.
Harden hod dono in the spring and iuxor of 194-1, free your own
knowledge?

A . So, sir, I do not exactly know that free ay own knowlodgo.
DB. TXPPi Thank you. I havo no furthor quoetions to tho iritnoss.
-££ PHESID2HI: aro thoro any othor question* to this wit no on by
nny dofonso counaol?

3T SB* 9ASLX2 (Counsol for defendant Hovcn):

Vltnoss, do you know tho City Councillor of ^utordrei, Stnd-
trat Soogcrs?

A. So, Z do not know hi::.

Do you know a IXitchiian by tho neeo of Plock?

A. You, but I do not know bin personally. X do not know hin
porgonally.

HH. EAHDYt Your Honor. X sutolt that this oroos-oxosvinr.tion on
tho part of dofonso counsol mist bo llulted to that Z brought «q> In
dlroct exmlnaticn.

THE PBZSXXOSTs Objection ovorrulod. Counool aey oxtfiino tho
wltnoos goaorally.

0 ,. V hat is Plock'o roputntico in Holland?

A. I do not know that oxoctly. I cannot givo any infornation
about that.

Do you know a Dutch—nr* with tho necc of Boron Palland von

Srdor?

A . So, X do not know Liu.

Q . Do you know a Dutchman with tho naio of Jan Hobert?

A. So, sir, I do not know hlu.

BH. OjaUT: Thank you, I have not furthor questions.


10399


30 June4M&-4-5-Lesser (Easier)

Court I

7ZZ PHZsrDffiT: any further cxculn-tioa of this witness by
defosse eounsolT - .

3T JTJZGZ S225I*JGj

Q.. u’itr.oao, will you bo good enough to sasver a fov questions
for tho Tribunal, please? as Z understand your toetiuory, you woro
arroctod by the Gestapo on tho 21st day of July, 19-12?

A. Yes, sir.

CL and you woro then given a trial for underground rooiatnneo
activity end for spy intolligocco activity end woro acquittod? You
woro acquittod?

i. Yos, sir.

3y what typo cf Court, or groin, woro you triod, do you know?

A . Yos, sir. Tho first trial was by tho Vohrcacht. That was

an O.D. trial. That was a trial in Hc-ron. Bio oocond trial.

That was a trial whoro?

\ In Eaaroh, H-a-a-r-o-n. an;', tho first trial was in Utrocht.

Q. Do you noon tho firot or socowl trial?

A . Bio socond trial was in Dtrocht, undor tho diroctlon of tho
Luftvaffo.

You then woro in 2 trials by a nllitaiy court or ccunission
of oaio sort?

A » Yos, sir.

Tho first ono by tho Vohmocht?

a. Yos, sir.

CL Tho socond one by tho Luftwaffe?

A . Yos, sir.


10WX>


30 Jvno-T>:SD-^-l-tialqy (Int.,Raalor'
Coort Ifo. I


^ Ad than cs I understand “;c cr remitted upon :cth charges?

A Tea Sir.

C !5rrrr 1 -tv; after thrt uas it bofora y-iu -~3-o tn!:en in custody and
3ont t: ilatsmjilcr?

A I 'em already in custody. I never creofrco. I ’ns in custody
froi: tiic 21st of July ~nd I <ns brought to Uctsi&ilor.

n By uiicc

A Djr the Greon Polico.

'i And ifhct 3ort of an organization *.ma t!:at, do you 'crorr?

A Tiio Croon ?~llco aaa an organisation c hoc to nrdntain tho order
in t',10 stato, and warn always helping *..1ica transports vor. going to guard
uo, 'out tiio transport fuolirer .rs a an Tree tho >.D. naiad Hoirich,

n . foro -*ou told for tdiat rsca< n . ou auo boing rotaiiwd In custody
after your acquittal or for trtrt taaoon ; /a -jv ; boing transported to
Hats * roller?

A ifo, thoy never arid it t' us. It a?nn:r. that pocplo -.iho uoro
acquitted Aroro brought to coocontration c .-;.1 t3»oy to 'roo.

o Tlion you -..•ore nevor advisod »iy you .ere custdy and v/oro
’icing transported tc Hats 'oiler?

A ilo, sir, thoy suspected r», but tiio;' had no ovidonco against no.

r \ ■ 'as anything told you after you after you nro acquitted an to
irisy you 'inra boing transported to ilat» tdlor?

A Vo, sir.

1 Hoir awry pooplo mro in your transport?

A Dotveor. 150 and 170.

0 And bar vara you ccnvoycd to i'ctnroiXjr?

A Tilth a train.

r . And that train, as I ur/ /stand, tao r.-Jcr tho supervision of
an S.D. officor?

A los, Paul ih. inrich.

O Ho vra.s a C-ernar.?

A He was a Gerren.


10401


30 Juno -:>-:5!)-5-2-:ilc7 (Ir.t., - * r)

Court I

And for what rurpo3c3 -.rar.' you sent to Hatswoilcr, you said some¬
thing about the Itacht tod HoVol,

A Tho H naht u nd Ncbcl.

Q You were ir. that group end under that Yacht und h'cbol dccroo?
nos do you bn-a that?

A ' o an; cno tiro in AraorsfoartSi tdwn uniting Ter our transport -.re
oxr Heinrich who visited us and talhod to us and ho had a paper in Isis
I land 'nd it read sax thing li!w "Ifosht und i!cbcl Hr lasso."

n . C£n you say tc what oztont free your own knewlodgo—

A 2o9, fro:: :y cam knowledge.

H Can you say to what extent fro:: ;ovr vn kncralod o other citizens

free you country were put in similar irons'.jorts Ter the concentration coups?

• /

A ’.os, sir. Af tor.:■or As there «ao other .'ooplc iooo to tho canp.
‘Jhen ire ccno in tho ccr.p vo had vJ * nit:, rod, — whet do you call
that, — re hr cl tc point lotto -3 r. -,wr clotiics.

Q Stoncil letters of so:io sort?

A Yes/ t re ::'s cn our back, and on cur lo. on our broochos.

r . : fas that tnso cf ell the pooplo -ho cr;ie ir. under that dccroo?

•

A Yes, only :or tho pcoplo S\o co n in under that dooroo.

n - You over seo a docuront or :»par of a* y kind while you uoro
in tho canp which denoted tho typo of custody under • :ch you rraro hold,
whether you •••ro hold as a political price - r, a biblo research:r, or a
professional criminal or a race pointer w&lo yw. -era hold?

- rhenweeam in wo uoro ad'anted in the Politi3cho Abtollung,
tho political depart:isnt and era 3 -,r './u ..y -filled out and they wroto

down our nxos and tixe filled into oa-ars or. tho Yacht und h’obol, and
aftorrards -.ton tc cacx to Dachau t fir t I nroto, — at first I could
write a letter. It was forbid Jon for ‘Ac cht und Hobol to -rrito a letter
or rccci'-o parcels or ether things, end I wrote a letter t-.rico, and tho
third tine I was writing, then one cf the cr-aar. 13 said tc re that I could
not write for I was still Itecht -ind Kbbol.

r And \iiz. t did you understand that to aeon?


10,02


30 Juno-r:-:'D-5-3-4fcl=7 (int., Ibr-lar)

Coart llo. I


-• cht and ,’icbol rseant that you rurc >: in prison, ncbcct r ’:ncw
where, 70 U coalite't write letters to hcoo ar.c’ you couldn't rocoivo per cols.
The people rt hono didn't knew wfaoro you aero and re should ^0 :t night
nd Bacht und Babel forever.

n . And do you knew wfaother cr net ti» record which shewed your
none, rhero you cer» Tron end the rcascr. for your custody ms kept on
file there?

?cs, sir, it )/cs tent there, but I never sew it.

Jl* ' 3 3*3£OjJOt I soo. Then!: p-t, I hr.vp r.o further questions.

Of TIT. KU3ECIT:

n - -'itnaso, rof erring to tkoso trie Is t :'t you Jiart, hew rsany Judges
sot on these trials, one nan or vre than eno?

A There WTO about Tour or five Judaea nth tIjo resident. Tl»
prooif'ont was in the first trial of the oh-.-cht, and tho JtLehter of
t 2 j° Xnfferaffo, his neno traa KIis^j, and in the soccnd trial of tho Luftwaffo
it irao Judjo Prr -ocholo.

n . ” .re you represented by counsol?

'&*> sir. Bo had G.-man c on sc Is.

TIC F?.l^IT'C;rr: ir o furth;r qu:stions,

::n. G.VU-: Gawlik counsel for "o-cr. "r. ftvsident, I havo a nuribor
cf othor questions in addition to tho questions you just put.

r l How long were you arre3t.d?

A Fron the 21st of July 19.' ' vr/.i: t: e 2Tth of pril 1 %$,

* it possiblo Shat Bacht -nd lex;? ; r.vV .3 .-are over roloascd
and under *rhr.t conditions would 0 ivl-j us jd?

A I havo r.jvar hoard of a case \-t Jla.cht rad Dobol was rcleasod,
for rsoot of then r-.ro sent to o: tjr.iv.ti'r. -ruvs, l±: ro -y case.

Q In what concentration caxrj rr a ro you?

•

A In "oil and-in Amjr3focrth.

Q I cr speaking of Gemacy now.

In porrnny in Karsvoiler and afterwards in fackau.


10A03


30 nicy (int., H a r l er )

Goart Eo. I

' "r— statements therefore rAy refer to the camps of I^itstroilor
and Dachau?

A "C 3 , sir.

* IT I noc iat to 70u, .fit.-^33/ that a erxn \:ysician of another
ccnp has succeeded in jotting a largo r.*c:>cr of Uacht ’.’nd Hoool innates
roloesed "culd yen agree uith me that tlia *./a 3 or. exception?

A 'foa, sir.

:JP.. CA Ur.: Thank yon. I havo no furth r qrcstions.

THS P.l ’Sliarr- Arc there any ether cvesti-n cf the uitn-ss?

Does tho^Prcsccuti^n desire to conduct rodirtet cnarlnotion?


10JAU


30 Juno 4 7 -'0'JC_6_l-Mcuhan (Snnlur)
Court I


use? ilAKIHATIO?

3Y HE. EaHTT:

H "ltness, before your two trials you stato that you wore first
arrested by the Qcetepo in July of 1942 and then you wero condcancd
to death without a trial?

A Yos sir. I

k Mow, vho eendoenod you to death without a trial in tho first
instance?

a 1 was interrogated about clover. days and on tho evening of tho
10th day there cane in an officer of the SD, and ho had a papor in his
hand and he told so that I was condcancd to death by a Stnndgcricht.

I don't know what court nartirl and then ho anid I would bo chot down
tho next naming for spy work and political activities.

H And then tho next rvorning you wero actually blind-foldod?

A Yes, I was blindfolded and handcuffod and they took no with
then. I thought X should havo been shot, but they brought no to ono
or another roon I don't know whore and then thoy put ae boforo a high
ranking officor, I believe an Cbcrgrupponfuchror of the SD. T^is aan
aeked ex oobi questions and then he said to ae, "You aust ooc this
whole caso no an error ar.d you auct forget it and you sust never sponk
about it."

H Did he thon roloaao ycu and lot you return hone or keep you
in Jail?

A Ho, I was still kept in Jril.

x Then you later had the two triale?

A Yes sir.

k In these particular transports in which a'a.cht und Hebei inmates
wero in; do you know what happened to all the “acht und Hebol innatos
when they arrived at tho c*cp?

A Tes sir, nest of us ease in theso heavy commands of "Strasson-

bau."

k ®id they extersinato any of tho *acht und Hebei prisoners?

10605

_.


30 June 47 -X-JjC_6-2JCeehes (BeaUr)

Court I

A Io«j neny of then ve-o slain in thoir work while working
with tho carriage.

t< V as it known thft the eyston was to oxtonslnato Saefct und
Hebei prlsor.oreJ

A Yea sir, it was a. so-called .exteraination ca-p rad the Hr.cht
und Sobol -Haeftlingo had to be treated worse than the others.

Q I see. I hare no furthor questions, your Honor.

THI FBZSIEBB: Tho Secretary will file for the record tho
certificate fro- Captain Boy A. Martin, captain Modlcal Corps, Prison
Physician, t’. S. Airjy. stating that the defendant H C rta Oberhrueer is
a pa.tlout in the 3°Sth st-tion hospital, U* S. Arsy. Tho diagnosis
is acute gastroenteritis. The Secretary will file the certificate.

Tho Tribunal will new bo in roccso.

(•* recces wes taken.)


10UJ6


Court So. 1

30 Jus 47-H-7-l-SBi4inrtha (Yon Schon)


TEI HAESEAL: the Tribunal is egain ia session.

-J-. HARTY: The prosecution has no further cuestions to out to


this vitness, rroers.

CHI PHISD3ZSCs The witness 3roers is excused free the witness stand.

EA2JY: rofore I proceed to the next vitness, Ycur Honor, the
oueetion of tho fond introduction of the orosecution'6 docuaents which
have bo«a rterked for identification is one which tho Tribunal ditcusoed
in the nresur.ee of the prosecution and the defense counsel at a neoting
in Charters several weeks ego, and the Tribunal stated that they vould
look over tho docuaents and then lndicr.to vfcich onoa or take an rssum-
tion that they would all be subjected to objections and so forth. Sow,
in order to assist the Tribunal in that natter I have now prepared two
sots of all the docuuonts narked for identification, with ar. index.

I will have, bofore tho end of the day or by toaorrow a or n in/;, additional
conpleto sets prepared and likewise caybo one or two for doftnoo counsel.
Xverybody has copiot of tfcoso particular docur.ontc but ! will glvo theso
two sets to the Tribunal now i n the porlod of tho next half a day or
this evening and they can look over thoso two sets and instruct us in u
cost uxpoditious way to introduce thoso for foraal accontonco.

THI r2SSIDLST: Eas tho prosecution ary cvldonco to lntroduco thlo
afternoon?

J®. H A R DT: I have a witness to call now. Your Honor, and this
aftornoon I have no ovldonco to introduce, other than theso docunonto
which arc sarked for identification. And if it is possible for no to got
all book* together, that is, two or throe aoro books together, by this
afternoon, I will be able to take up the identification problcc. Aftor
that tine the prosecution say have one aore witness to call and Bay have
two or throe other aiscellenoais rebuttal docuaents; other than this,
wo havo no further teeticony to offer.

SR. GAn.II: «r. President, I ask the prosecution first to subsit
a list of docuaents which ere offered really for identification up to
now and which are finally to be edcitted in evidonco, eo that vc will


1C407


Court So. 1

20 Jan 47-K-7-2-ISi-itariha (Yon Schon)


hfve a period of twenty-four hours to exasine these documents.

I

13. EAEUY: Of course. Tour Honor, that Is unnecessary but I will
have tho list. The twenty-four-hour period does not ^soly here. The
defense has had oooe of thee since January 26th.

TEE PRESIDES*: These documents have already boon offered to the
Tribunal and sarkod for identification and conies dolivored to defense
counsel. I see no occasion for any further delay in the oroccedingo.

2*1. GA’EHC: Hr. President, it is not a miostion of tho subaisalon
of the docuronts, but as long as the docunents were only offered for
identification ve had no forsal objections. Scv, when these docunents
are to bo adaittod finally, have to detornlne vhothor there aro any
formal objections. I as a<.rely asking for a list of the nunbers.

KR. HAHTf: Ke vlU get that. Your Honor, in due course.

THE Pr-iSIEEST: Tho list will bo delivered to counsel for tho
dofondants.

Ir*


10A03


Coart So. 1

50 Jan -iT-fc-B-l-iEi-Priaeau (7on Schon)


EAHUT: At this tire. Tour Honor, the prosecution wishes to
call tho witness Gerrid Kendrick Sales to tho witness stand.

THZ PB2SZZS57: The Marshal will suaron the witness Gorrid Sales
to tho witness stand.

*S. EAHDT: The witness's first nano is spelled G-e-r-r-i-d, rather
than the w*y it is soelled on the notice. Kis niddla nano is swelled
H-o-n-d-r-i-c-k, rather than tho way it is socllod in the notlco. Tho
last nano is the seee - B-a-l-e-s.

Oils witness will testify in tho Goraan language, Your Honor.

(CBKRRID H a ga iac KALIS, a witness, took tho stand and testified as
follows.)

JUIOa SH3RIFG: Please hold uo your right hand and he sworn.

! swear by God, tho Alalghty ond Caniscient, that I will socak tho
ouro truth and will withhold and add nothin*.

(The witness rcpcatod tho oath.)


Proceed.


BY AH. HARDY!


DIHSC7 HXAi.IKAT IC 2 i


Q. Vltness, do you hear in tho Gorsan languago?

A. Yes.


Q. Vltnoss, during the cwirse of this interrogation, after I pro¬
pound a Question to you, you will kindly hesitate a sooent before you
answer to onah'lo the interpreters to put the cucation Into tho Goman
language and the answer hack to no in the English,
litness, what is your full neno?

A. Kales, Gerrid Kendrick,
q. Vhac voro you horn?

A. On 1 October 1515.

Qa "here were you horn?

A. In Kottcrdaa.

Q. You ore a Dutch citlsen?

A. Yos.


10609


Court So. 1

33 Jun 47-#-6-2-£24-?riceau (Ton Schon)


v Vould you outline to the Tribunal you educational background?

A. Public aehool.

Q. Sid you go any further than public school?

A. So.

0. Ho «any year* of school did you ha to in total?

A. light years.

Q. h’hat vas your occupation or lor to the tine that you were
arrestod by the Gestapo?

A. I van a fashion designer and draftsnan.

0. Vltneas, *hen were you firet arrested by tho Gestaool
A. Cn 2C August - only one day.

Q, ‘.‘hat year?

A. 1940.

Q. Vcro you ever arrested for any crises orior to tho arrest by
tho Gestapo?

A. So, nevor.

Q. Shat was the purpose for *hich you wore arreotod in Auguct 1940
by tho Gostapo?

A. I lna Gostapo raid on the rceietanco aovonent.

Q. Vould you reaccber whother or not you wore givon a trial after
your arrost by tho Gestaoo for underground activltioe?

A. Tos. .

Q. You wore givon a trial?

A. So.

Q. v oll, did thoy sorely keop you In orison or did thoy release
you after having arrested you In August 1940?

A. I vas freed by the Dutch oolice. Later I wbf rearrestod again
on 13 Sovonbor 1940 until 1946.

Q, And when 70 U vere arrested on 1? Keren bar - that is, rearrestod
vcro you then givon a trial?

A. Tas.

Q, And what was the rosult of that trial?


10U0


Court So. 1

SC Jus 47-M-&-«Ek-?ri=cau (Vos Schoc)


A. Va were separated aai vc were sent to the concentration casp
ftaohCBMld*

^ "all, at that trial did they pass sentence on you?

A. So.

Q. Did you hare a trial before a court of Judges?

A. It vaa a court aartlal. I vos not conr^ctcd.

Q. Hov cany sen aat on that court sartlal? Did ycu apeear bofaro a
court sartlal board, a group of sen?

A. I don't raacaber exactly.

Q. And then you were sent to the Puchenvnld concentration casp?

A# Toa.

Q. Vben did ywi arrlre in the Buchca«ald concentration case?

A. 16 April 1941.

Q. Hov long did you rcaain In the Buchcnvald concentration eaap?

A. Until Karcfc 1942.

Q. And then vhera did you go?

A. Thor. I vna sent on a transport to Hotroilor, concentration coop
fctivollcr in Alaace.

Q, How long did you renaln in Snttvoilor - froc March 1942 until

vfcen?

A. 7rca 14 March 1942 until 4 Septcabor 1944.

Q, And then what happened to you?

A. Ikon vc vere tranaferred to Dachau.

Q. How long did you roealn in De.cheu?

A. Until the liberation by the Asericona on Sunday, 29 Aoril 1945.

Q, After you were transferred fros ruchonvald to the Satrwollor

concentration can© in Karch 1942, vhat work detail ore you assigned to?

A. Jlrat I worked on barracks construction and then transoort columns,

the atone quarry, the HAST, and I went through all the details In the caao.
vhen

Q, Veil,/did you first becaco an assistant nurse.

A. Sot saber 1942, perhaps - assistant nurse.

Q. And what were your duties there in the hospital?


1C411


Court So. 1

3C Jon 47-*i-6-4-n2<-?ri=eeu (Von Schon)


A. I vas used as a nurse only *dwn the Ahnenorbo research station
was e.t up.

"hat is this um "Ahnenerbe* that you sentioned?

A. Ahnenorbe was a erocriaectal station that vas sot up in a
special dopartaont of the hospital, the prisoners' hospital.

Q, Vhen vas this Ahnenerbe research institute, as you call it, sot
up in the urisonors' hospital in Katzveiler, on what day - in Kovcobor
1942 - the sace tise that you vore there?

A. Sovosbcr 1942, in tho course of the aonth of i'oYcober.

Q. And yew vero assigned to voric nt this cxporinental or research
station, is that right?

A. Yes.

<^0 Do you knov anything about exooriaents bolng conducted on hucan
beings in SatsveHer]

A. Vhon tho first expcrlaonts vere carried out, a tost, a burning
tost, on tho eras and the body—

Q. Wore thoao expcrlaonts with gao?

A. I think - Z can't say because Z as not a doctor. Z con only
toll you vhat I oav, tho orocodurc.

Q. Vill you toll tho Tribunal Just vhat wr.o dono to the inmates in
this turning procodura?

A. Vhcn the orccriconts vore started, there vero 14 Oercan orisonors.
First those people voro givon tho i*r=y food. They wore fod a littlo
vith tho arsy food and then the experiment* stertod. The orofeseors
case fros Strassbourg and on theso 15 peoole on their lover nrn they
rubbed socothing that ves yollov caterial, and then tho oeoolc vero told
they had to go to bed and keep their sleeves up. Most of the ocoolc
lost consciousness and carts of th>-ir body *cre burned. After 24 hours
they vero covered vith vouads. Zt had oaten uo to tholr uoror arm and
then the parts of their body that voro touched by their arns.

22 . TIP? (Counsel for defendants Schroeder and Bccker-Preyseng):

Mr. President, tho vitness is testifying in Sc man but he is ur.cccprehcn-


1C412


Court So. 1

3C Jon 47-K-8-5-£Bi-?rlse«u (Ton Schon)


sible* He Is apparently a Dutc h m an and does not speak German “oil
enough to testify la Gerxan bo that it cer be understood. Since the
testlcony is apparently rather poor, it night he advisable to here the
vitness testify in his aothor tongue, that it, in Dutch, and to have an
interpreter. ^

!£. EABJTf: Vhat does the Interpreter think of that? Are you able
to interpret this nan's Gernan into English! I an talking to Hiss von
Schon.

TEX I ST * 3P E£I13: The Goman is rather difficult, Kr. Hardy.

H?.. EARDYj Is it understandable enough so that the testisony
here is clear; so it con be translated into English!

TEE LiTXAPHXTXa: I think that so far I have understood the vitnooe.

THX VISSXSSl I speak Gcrcan as I have loarnod it.

.a. KA HD?: Your Honor, ny interrogators hovo talked to this vit-
r.cso all day yesterday and had no difficulty vhat* 0 over in undemanding
hia. I think Xlsa von Schon has dono a crcfitcblo Job in translating
this corning and the ovldsnce sho has given coincides vith tho interro¬
gations glvon by tho vitness yesterday, and vo aro not in a position to
out in a Dutch translator.

JUDGE SZBSISOt I vould ask whether or not the translator In tho
box vho is listening can understand voll enough to translate vhatevor
the witness lc saying into Ocracn for the- benefit of those counsel vho
ero apparently having difficulty vith their version of their mother
tongue.


10U3


30 Juno-H-W-G-l-Eincbock (Ton Schoa)
Court 2, Cose I


ia » HaL-ST: I* that question addressed to Hr. Lecn?

SZ3EIE5: It is addressed tc whoa it ncy concern.

:;b« EAHTT: Hoy I put two or threo questions to tho witnoos,
ycur Honor?

$>• (3y Hr. Hardy) : V itness, whoa you were in the Hatrwoilor
concentration c*p what language did you talk?

i. Goman.

that languogo did you talk vhon you woro in tho Dachau con¬
centration caap?

i. Only Goman.

KH. HiPDY: That's all, year Honor.

iSZ PPZSIDHIff: It cppOaTS that tho translators aro satisfied
that they arc getting tho gist and translating vhet tho witnoos has
sold. I think wo nay procood.

(^r Hr. Hardy): Vltnoss, you woro describing tho d»t nils of
tho oaporinonts which you feforrod to as burning ©xporinonts. Will
you continue your description of thoso experiments?

k • I have already said whon tho notorial was put on tho
lovor c.ru tho pooplo woro put to bod.

DE. TIPP: Mr. Prosldont, tho witnoss has Juot usod tho word
•prooedd" and nono of us knows what the* yord ooans. Porhiqjc tho ir>-
torprotor understood it. I did not.

KH. RAHDT: 3io word noons lowor ora, your Honor.

THZ ?32SID2‘T: ¥ oil, I would ask tho intoiprotor tho nooning

of that word.

liESPRZTZH 70S SCSOE: I asaaaod that tho witness was using
tho 7reach word •procodo", your Honor, which Z translated as "notorial*.

TEZ ??J5lDfifI: Counsol st.los that no interpreter f roo tho Dutch
language is arailablo? __ S'

SlHDT: Ho, your Honor and tho procecution fools that thoro
is no nocossity for it. This can was caraollod to spook Oorann fron


1004


30 9-2-Sinat"rck (7oa Schon)

Court I, C oae I

Scvccbor 1942 until ipril 1945, and the Gomans cortainly understood
hie at that ties.

TE2 ?H2SlD17r: Ho one knows whothor they did or not and it a cy
bo that When one is engaging in conversation tint questions can bo
oskod back end forth until the conning is oscortainod.

12. HARDY: I thick this objection is boing pushed a littlo too
far, Sfce objection is ovor tho uso of one word ■naterial" or "lower
am", whichever one th(y aro roforrirg to, I don't know whothor they
have an objection to cny of the other words th*£ ho has usod.

THE PRESIDE.”: Veil, I wonder if tho Goman reporters aro nblo
to transcribe what ho is saying in Goman.

2LS SECRETARY GS.SUL: They writo what they hoar rogardlons of
what it is,

mt. HAPDY: Well, do they understand what thoy aro writing?

T3T? SECRETaRT G2fER*L: Ho.

13U HARDY: I haven't any solution, your Honor. V hot languages
do you speak, witnoss? Do you also spook tho Trench languogo?

THE VZTHXSS: So.

12. EAHDY: You speck only tho Dutch laigucgo?

72Z '-1TUSSS: Dutch and Goman.

UP. HARDY: Dutch ond^Goroan. Havo youaror hod any caaplaints
about ycur ability to spook Gcrnan boforo this tino?

2£S VTBQSS: Ho novor.

DR. DIP?* Hr. Prosident, if I coy ccmont on this, it ic not Jo
bo donlod that tho witnoss does snook to scoo oxtont Gorocn. But wh n t
ho oortainly cannot explain in his broken Goman ore thoso technical
expressions, andwj know that in those points on which tho witnoss is
to bo oxmined—lost ojporiaonts, porhejs typhus oxporiasats indivi¬
dual technical expressions aro inportant and Z m sure that the wib-

S will not bo able to give thaa in Goman. Sat is the objection
I have.


100.5


30 Jco g -M J - . ^-5-Hlnabuck (Tea Schoa)
Court X, C ose I


?~JSIDE7T: V oil, if the witness doos not know the t echnicrl
espresoiens ho cannot oven atteept to give then, but the witness ought
to bo cble to soy what he has seen, and thentfco intorprotation of what
he has soon nay be for a technicd witnoss to interpret. Tho nnttor
oaf proceed until at least It boccoo further complicated than It
nop oars new.

12* H^lSDY: Would the witness chooso to testify In tho Dutch
language?

Z23 •JiraiSS: I hove no difficulty in Goman.

SH 2 pazsina.-?: V ell, tho natter nay procoed. I will Instruct
tho interpreters that If they find difficulties in tho translation
and don«t understand It, that they will iaaodintoly ad vino the Tri¬
bunal to that effoct. I will also instruct tho witnoss to spook vory
slowly and distinctly.

TEI :.1TKISS: Tes.

Q . (2^ Kr, Hardy): Sow, witnooo, would you continuo your

alienation of what you saw ir. tho oxpcrlnontnl station concoming
these burning ojperlaents?

i. As I havo airoo<4' eoid, tho uctoriol that was put on thoir
oxng hod the effoct that their arcs woro burnod and othor ports of
thoir body too. Thon tho pooplo woro unconscious for a fow deys
end they woro blind bocouso there was on offoct on tho oyos. S coo
died, threo. *ad others in tho course of tho nonth bccaao noro or
less invalids and woro sont back to tho ctcp.

Q. Sow, witnoss, do you know vhothor or not any of those ox-
poriaontal subjocts diod? Did you scf throo?

A. Too.

Q, Do you know what kind of gas was usod in these burning
Qxporiaents?

A. So.


10U6


30 wano-M-itf—S-4-Hinabuck (Yon Schcn)
Coart I, Case I


Q. Ton don't kncv that?

A. Ho.

z. How, was tho result of thcso burnings tcrrlblo and atrocious
looking to you; -that Is, tho wounds creaSod?

A. Tos, terrible.

Z* Bo you know tho ntoeo of tho doctor* who porfomed thoso
gas bum caporincats?

A. Prof eesor Hlrt and Blckonbjch.

0.. Professor Hlrt, who wcs Profossor hlrt?

Professor Hlrt, as for ns wo know, was free the University
of Strasbourg.

Q. Jnd who was Profossor 3lckeabach?

A. That was a collooguo of his or an assocltto of his or
stoothing like that.

^4How nany tine* did yousoo Profossor Hlrt porfornlng such
gas bum ccperlcents?

A. How often?

Z Tos.

s Tho experiment with tho flftoen pooplo, that wa* only onco.

3. Bid Bickcnbach assist hln in thefc ontlro axporimontal soriOB
of the f if toon pooploj

A. Ho was thoro several t imoe. I ru not corttln, but I think
he carriod on tho ojuclnation and Profossor Hlrt h«i an autopsy on
a person who had dlod in tho room of tho ^hnonorbo station.

3.. now long did those gas bum experiments last, for a period
of Bovoral months or just a week or os?

A. Tho treatnont lasted a noon on ono &a? and ton t ho pooplo
wore sick for scco time, for scoo months, free April and Kay, *43
cpproxlmately.

r .. And these three experimental subjects *&o dlod in tho gas
experiments, did you see than?


10U7


30 Juao-iJ-HJ-^-S-Sinabuck (Voa S choa)

Ccnrt Z, C aso Z

A. Teg, Z saw thaa.

Did you know to nrco of aa lrc^to nocod Hell?

A. Ho wag the auroo la this ward.

<U V hat type of-a can wag hi? V R s ho o very docent character
or waa he a rogue or what description could you give uo about hie?

A. Ho was a political priooaor. Eo hadbooa ia tho coacontrw-
tioa crop for cany years. Eo was very decent to thoao follow
prisoners, and he did a groat doal for tho pooplo in tho oxporiuontnl
station. Othorwieo noro than throo would havo died.

LER. H*RDT: Zf you roc all, your Hoaore, tho tostiaony of tho wit-
nose Boll corrobcr&toa tho tosticory of this wltneso.

Q. Eow, witness, in a lator poriod of tiuo did you havo any know¬
ledge or coanoction with work by Professor Hogon?

i. Tea.

0„ 0*n ycu toll uo who Prof ossor Hogon is or was?

A . Profossor Hagen was a Zttftwaffo Officer or a profossor »&o
worked in Strasbourg at tho Uhlvorelty. Eo word tho Luftwoffo uni¬
form with tho staff of aosculopius on it, and ia Ootobor, 1943 op~
prorlz^toly, ho croo to Satxwoilor for tho first tino.


10U3

_ _ 4 tfj


30 June 47-iWfc-lO-l-Groes (Von Sdion)

Court I

fis ; - ni: 1,11:1 happenaS after Profosszx Hatton arrived in
October 1943?

A: Jnfc -lid y_«u say?

•l v “ t happened after Profess a* Haagen arrived in October

1943?

Shortly before that a transput of gypsies had ceoo frxi
the Birkenau carp near Auschiritz for cxporiucrtal purp.scn for
typhus experioonts. And then Kar"oi cr_x to Hatswcilcr -nd uxauined '
these people and had then X-rayod. And ilia finding was that he could
not use these people for his experimental purp-aes and I heard that
In the ..hncrwre station he told tho* canp d.ct.r .f U-.taweiler that
he couldn*t do anything with these people and h; sent a pr rtost to
Berlin and »*.id no had t_ hav- str-n^er people L x i.dla.tcly, also
gypaloa, Sh-rtly aftor thnt these first on. hundred of U»o ^rAip,
a larco part ;f then had already died on the way ant th.n \hilo
thoy were in fctzwcilor f 'r a fet; :iccks th~y were sent a \r.y again
-n the HLnclf-hrt (..nc'-nsl.n to Hc.*.v\.n) transport, that ..voa.ns the
transport re purple didn't have any destination and after A few
wccl:s, it cjj in Noverb^r 1943, the new people arrived. I can't
<jivv an exact number but it nao ebsut 90. These pcoplo wore exauined
a(*ain ant they wore found to be alri.ht. Th-n Professor linden divided
these ixople int tu r. os, 2 orou.-'s, he rr.de Ait .f theu. Oik ^roup
-unt to r-en one -.ad the thcr t. roon tw> ~.nl then he divided these
-.^in into cr-ups ene and tire. Then tha pooplo of the first ^roup
were elver, a vaccination ajainst typhus. Tho second -roup tr.s -iven
nothing. I think 10 t. 14 days Inter-All th„ people worv artificially
infected :dth‘ typhus. I can't tell you h at, I an not a dr tor, but
i t cjj there -.hen thoy did it. THcru :r-s a woaan there, too. In tho
cours- of this mttcr about 30 gypsies died. And, the rest La tho course
f the a-nfch, until Lcr$h- or ..pril, tnc people had recovered to a


10419


30 June tf-«:-Bi-10-2-Gr:>33 (7an Schon)
Court I


certain axtonfc cad were sent to Crap Kockrx-Sltz. «s I said, about
30 died. I have evidence of that.

1: Jvat evidence Jo-you kcv. of that, witness, that 30 of the so
subjects use- in the typhus oeporLaonts died?

A: I sai- about 30. A have the death records of ^atzwoilcr.
..’hen I was put on transport to Dachau I stole the death records. I
copied thoa so that I caul.' use thea lat*x and under great difficulty
I took then :ith at to Dachau.

Qs An- d these records sh-\: that 30 -f these cxpcrizxntal
subjects died in the typhus experiments?

A* Yes.

Q: Ho./, witness, reviewi eg. yair statement concerning the typhus
experiments y -u state tlr.t in Oct.bcr 1943 - transport of 100 gypsies
arrived from Auschwitz concentration coop to be use! in the typhus
experiments. Is that correct?

A* Yco.

Q: And then these 100 gypsies ware not used as experimental
sttojocts because their state if health did not pumit it and Haogen

0

himself then c-/-plai/td about it arxj askod f r furthor gypsies to be
s»nt to hixi at Katzwciler, is that c rroct?

. A: Yes.

< 1 : And then the further gyysius arrived?

A: Yes. . £

1: And tren the further yypsl.3 arrived?

As Yes.

}s Thcro were about 90 you said, in that second group?

As Yes.

'Is And this experixxrial gr-up wore physically fit so that they
could endure the uxpcrlncnts to the satisfaction of Hasgen, is that
correct?

As Yes, tney had recently been released fr-n the .^ehrrrcht and


10420


30 June 47-ii-ai-10-3-Gros9- (Van Scion)

Court I


the SS and 3ont to the c-nccntrr.tion canp.

New, these jriswicrs they wore, that is the 90 prisoners
the gypsies were th~y well foil bcfxe the cuuoncuxnt of the
export cents?

;.s 5Jcll,fod.

Q* For a period of hew long?

As I conn ’.rficn they cana in they wore well fod. Ttey hadn't
bocn in a concentreticn eaqp such - lone tine as wo had ar as other
gypsies had. Thoy had just recently been arrested.

Qt Yos, I aco. ./ell then after thoir arrival thoy were

e

divided into two gr-tipa?

A: Yes.

Q: In the cxporirxntal station ^hnonorboT

As Yes.

Os An! then Profess jt Harden vaccinated one ,3 roup and did n-t
vaccinate the .ther, is that correct?

As Hot the .ther .ns, that's ri^it.

qz .fore y.u in a p.siti on t. see the vaccinations take place?

As Yos.

•Is Then after a period of a mu bur of days Professor Haakon
returned and injectv- these two groups -.dth artificial infected typhus?

As Yes.

Os Did you see hr; inject -.dth artificial infected typhus?

I ir.s ttorc. The people wore all stripped naked and fehwn I
had tc lino tho pc-pL. up and brin^, thou into the root* where it was
done and I saw h-w they wore innecuLatcd.

Q: Icnoculato- or inflected?

• •

As Injected. I cannot tell you what it was in Joe ted into thee.

."Js .ell, h m Cj y u know that this was an artificial typhus
that they sjcxv in£ctod with? Hoi* do you kn.w but that it was so at


10L21


30 June t7-->-PJ-10-VGr;cs (Von Schon)
Court I


sort of another vaccination?

A: That res no »ocret. A nunber of "uirca pigs tsr: white .vice
been us~, had already b-cn injecta- before we had prisoner doctors
and they ware able to Judjc tit sc eases.

1: dnd the prisoner doctors.stated that these subjects wcr~
artificially infected with livo typhus?

A: Yos.

Qs Bo:/ in any event after this infection did the experimental
subjects jet decidedly sick?

A: Yes.

O: Did you sot- then yourself?

A: Yc3, 1 nursed thua.

Q: .nd yew sy that »tt cf then died, 30 died as a matter of

fact?

A: Yes.

Ha.* often did Hanjen visit this cxpcriaortal sta.tion?

A: In the first days c£ the coporiront he ease 2 or oven 3 tin»s
a day. Later he cao. cvezy .*.y, s cxotL.ec ho came on Sunday too.

1* .nd you say h. wore the unifora cf a. Luftuaffo officor?

A: Yes, I ascertain of that.

«">: Can you ruxufcer what ranJ: he hold?

A: Stab carat.

!: Did he ever woar civilian dothC3?

Chcc or twice. I Saw him ir. a blue suit and .-nee in a. jrcy

suit.

1 : liou, can you tell us whether or net these experinents of
Haajen, that is the typical.typhus cotTcrincriis conducted in the
mcpcriruntal station of the .hnenerbe had any association with the
typhus cnidoaic that «.s ra^inj in Hatsixiler?

A: Ho, certainly not.

Ifcn of these people that survived the typhus experiments >h.at


1CA22


30 Juno IS -ir-R>l&-5-Grc8 s (Vor. Sen an)
Court I


happened to thee?

»y won- put on a trmspert to Hcckar-Eltz.

}: OH, wore any of thoc used in other experiments?

As Yes.

-}: -.rill you tell us about that please?

.Joait liny 19C4 Kaijon ccoo back and asked fer the two rooms of
the .ihncccrbc o^ain. They wore already fliil «f patients, the phlcg-
nons, and foot and lcj wou&ds, etc., custaaary diseases in the camp,
and ho asked for those two rcoao a 0 nin and experiments be‘an - ^assirv;
experiments. Ho used soco of theso _ypsios who had already been used
once ::ith the typhus exjx rirx rt a and soto jrjups who were .already in
the c*xp. Than h; had fair ;noups of .rypsics. He took ono *;roup
after tiic other down to the jx room and brought thon back up r,;ain.

I knoir very veil Haajon went don idth these people and he cano back
up with tlic, too. .;hat hapjonod down there at Stutthof, whoro the
das chamber tea, I don't know but I .nly toot when they came back
they wore in a very bad way. They oouldn't breathe,etc. Professor
H-.ajen fitfl several wf tiiv. jr-ups started with tic oxyjcn apparatus
'.a: then javc instructions first ev«.ry i hair, then every hour, then
every 2 h.urs, that the boil., pressufe r.a taken and breathin.;, etc.
Soco of these people* died, too.

q: Hov do ycu Know they died, witness?

Because I nursed then .A>*sclf and because I had tc tako then

rrit c.i they ‘led. I know with. certainly that, they died of lun^
edena.

Q: .‘ell .low y-u cay that Haakon ordered then to the poison

-Xix.rluort3, to b- U3ed in the poison exporia-nts, these 8 p_cplc?

I don't unlorstand you.

H; Did Baa^en himself select these gypsies to be mod in the
p - is on- oxpc ri cents?

A: Yes.


30 Jane VMi-W-lG- 6 -Gros 3 (Von 3chon)

Court I

*2: How, these poison experiments ere a t to confiisou tdth
chc aq»riaents by Professr Hirt .-*<! Bickcnbcch, is thnt correct?

A: "o, thr.t vr.s soaothinj entirely different.

0 : Hon -.dtness, in these experiments did the cacpo-i.'xnt.'J.
subjects volunteer? That is in the first experiments of Hirt e.nl
Bickcnbnch, the typhus experiments of Itu^on, on: th.se poise,. 1 u r. s
experiments of Hansen?

A: Yes.


10A2A


30 ftao-S^SD-rU-l-Lsssor (Int., von Schoon)
C urt Pc* I


o The c:a>orirontal subjeotod volunteered?

A In the first crpc:i_ont tkcro -:crc Gorr-nn v-luntcors, pr-Joaoionrl
criminals and :•/ rascruals - they -.:;rc Tbluntcors. msabar i people vol¬
unteered for thon but they Ivid boon prorised tljoir fTooAxi 1“ f.;oy
ed* L-. tho second osqwrlr.ont, the Ha-gon typhus oxpsrlaents, they dofin-
itc 2 y -rorc not voluntcors, definitely not. I talked to theso people
-- r hours and days. In the third o.vpcrl r o r .t I sew hr.r the people criod
•*« ^'-er '^ro Ticked out after the second c rporlrent and tlvcy cried
but they couldn't do anything but do it - tl oy ; uldn't 3 ot rat cf it
bocauso they -roro gypsies; definitely they roro act volunteers.

n •’oil, then, in tho first e:-peri:or.t you stato that the l£

subjocts used TToro fsrnar Tohxr acht soldiers •.■'.so voro sent to c ->ucontration

crapa for sore breach of duty, is that right?

• •

A Yes, acre cf then; :x>st -f tho:: uro cririnal* and hr sonurla.

And ttioy absolutely vsluntoorod — you arc suro of that?

A -co. And th.oy are offarod c pardon if thoy ..ont through tko
onnerinents? •- —

- las.

0 Did they ovor got it?

A Ho.

* tho coporinont ritli gas bums, ;:;rj tho oxpcrinontal subjects
exclusively Gernano *r *JCre -h :ro so:o Poles or Calebs or Austrians or
Russians cr French: »n used?

A Ho. Tlvoro -ore :ly C-: mans in tho first oxpariixjnt.

in tho typhus nrwiconts ;* u stato that thoy *?oro docidocQy
not volunteers?

A Decidedly not.

n - • rv - i;crG thoy of just tho Caman nationality cr -ore tho gypsi:s
r.nd tho poeplo used in tho typhus axperinor.i3 of various raticnclitiea?

A Various nationalities,

n . .'ay cf tho relish?

. ?:los, Cz>.c'\a, :r*3t!y r~l;3 or.’ Czechs, 3nro Hungarians and thon

10.25


30 Jtao-i3B-ll-2-lc3scr (Int., vcn Schocn)
Court Be. I


som Goxasn gypsies.

0 . How those aiojccts U 3 cd in tho raa oxporironta, t;o poison gr - 3
axparimr.ts by Haagon, y:u ate to that thoy-rcro not volunteers rise?

L'o, they troro not.

P “icy wero not?

A I!e.

H TToro they also of various nationalities?

Yes.

0 :kr.7, rita-33, you have stated horc tint you had an opportunity
to copy tho doath books cf tie Batsooilcr Cerp* Dc you hrvo tlxo copies
that you uado with y:u or -re they i- ycur possession? r'

1 Yes.

Covld you oxnlnln tc tho Tribunal....

Tie EC3EOT: I -.euld like tc ash tho ’.ritnoss a question boforo
ycu proceed arQ- fi-rthcr. itr.333, roforring tc tho last cr.-perinont
concerning -.Mich you testified, ycu said that t'.io exportxsntal subjocts
wore of various nationalities, "iat nationalities ::aro they?

A Caiciis and Poles and 1 Hungarian.

• 0

T!E ?r;:ir:irr: Proceed, conusol.

(l lloar, ucuid ycu explain tc do Tribunal Just whet theso books and
ccpios aro that ;xu hero rx.do and muld ycu try to point out to die
Tribunal ubrt doaths ere listed in die book3 \rhich crincido idth your
testimony that doaths recurred in those particular oxporiuonta? Tould
it bo possible tc do that fror^i study of your books?

A Yos.

C .."cull you do that for us and toll us just what tho books purport
to be?

A Yes." I iiavo those books hero. c did not havo tho norcs of t o
Gypsies, "o JukI just tho numbers and .‘.on they died m just Ait dorm
°1 CO";* 1 }'* 3 jL'psics* etc., but not tho cams and net tho Timbers oit'.ior.
To rcro :?t given these. In the last cxi*eriiecnt I do havo tho rare3 raid

10d26


30 Jtr'-o r ^:-:SD-U-3-I>:s3or / (int., vor£cbocn)
Ccurt !b. I


tfcc other pocple vbo died, died in Dachau bocauso in the naar.tixxi there
-sa the ovacuatlon fron Hats'.."oiler, "arc is tho bock.

* "ould kindly pc* those boobs up to tho Tribunal first, so
that they can lack at then?

(rook is passed up to tho Tribunal.)

Q Witness, is this book a copy? Is that tho original booh that './as
redo by yourself or other ircates?

That is a copy of tho original.

(J '.Tien nas that cop/ nado?

J. Until the last day of tho evacuation.

r . Sho uado that cep;/?

Uor.:agian prlsonur, a Luxe bourg prisoner, and rysolf.

Q lloo, >rill you point out to tlw Tribunal '/hat ontrlcs in that
book in’lea to tho deaths that you havo outlined horo in y vr tostlnory?

Yes.

0. hllo tho Tribunal is still looking at tho book 1 will a ok you
another question. Did ;• mover draft charts at tho oxpcrirontal station,
inoa ruch co you .zero a draftsman in civilian occupation?

/. You oocn did I nalcc drawings for Professor Haagon?

<> Yos.'

I kopt tho list of statistics that showod tho course of tho caco
history of tho last cxnorincnt; I naan froo hour to hour.

0 That is tho poison gas orperinont?

*

A TJ3 #

And did you *.»rk togeth.r in .airing that chart with fr of-so or

Season?

g It tras li!n this. Haagen w.-ntad so;!obody who cruld draw well end
ry Capo, the hospdtcl Capo, assigned no io do this bocauso I was already
•.forking tbora. hen I nado this list H&agon sat noxt to no and gavo no
instructions on hc*r I was to :‘o it.

Q “oil, ceuld ycu ascertain fron tills chart ^hotSur or not tho


cxpcrincntcl subjects had died?


10027


30 ■fcnc-:-I33-ii_4 i _Le 3Ser (Int., Ton Schocn)

Court 3o. I

- I dsn't taou. I don't roeenbor.

0 Tell, was Haagoo particularly interested in -/nether cr not these
subjects diod? Just vfvat was his interest in these csqvarircnts — do
"ou have any idea?

Tho course cf the disease and if people died they wore taken
dean to the crcmtorivo. I don't know heir nany, but an autopsy vra
Torfomad there.

o '.oil, not:, you state that by tho death books, li of thoso subjocts
uaod in tlvc gas experiiaents, poison gas erqvorinonts by Haegon, died.

Car. you point out what y:u naan by that by use of tho book?

Yes.

0 Totild you do that plo'so? hat pa^c in tho book would you find
that, and explain tho entry that you hr.vo there in tho bosk, and Just
nha.t it rsaans, tc tho Tribunal.

Yes. TSodnasi, Andreas; P-abstock, .'isko, bom 28 lay 1901..

There rraa an autopsy par f ex-nod cn Ivin. I lovcn that for certain.

0 . 'oil, now, was ho one of tho subjects used in tho :xpsri.jr.t?

- Yos.

0 How dc you Iswr that?

A Ho was in qy t/ard.

0. You lover; tho ncr.?

A Yes, I ’.over: all thoso poodle. I can roao.ibcr rnny of thon very
vroll. And BobstoeSc, I had to -rash hin, I rerarrber, bosauso ho vras to bo
tafcon tbrm to tho autepoy root!.

Il-PIJY: Do ycu havo a q*i03tion, your Hener?

DT T.Z ? niTllTSi Ihdor hat dato is tlvat annotation cor tain:d in
tho bo ole?

A At the end of June 19U!i.

1 Arc tho peges cf this be ok numbered?

A Ybs.

Zi 1R. SUSY:

'l Tsat pa^o i3 that on — that entry that you referred to?


lOt 28


30 Jure-!i-Ij3-ll-5-^o5Ser (Int., von Ichoac)
Court Ho. I


A Ho, there was just a nunber and it was entered under the .:or.t!i
oi June - at the end of the aonth of June - hut in the original boo!: there
-rorc the dates of death, June 1, June 2, etc. - but not in this copgr.

0 Veil, an/, is that copy ns&erad — is each page nurhorc-d? In

/ / J

otlibr words, is it paginated 1, 2 , 3, Up 5, otc. — the urges?

A Ho. Ho.

0 Veil, then, how could I find that or.try in that book. That would
be tile netiled for ne to identify what pr.go that is on?

TIC PRT5XZBR: I would surest that luring the noon hour.

A It says Jun^ ISili.

0 And the book joes through in calendar order, is that corroct? In
otlior words the first page of tho book starts with what date? ’..hat date
is tho first page?

A The first page begins 19U2.

0. And it goes through to rtiat date, to tho end of tho boo!;?

A August 19Ui.

0. And, now, there aro actually 2 bock, aron't thoro?

A One book for European and one book for Polish and Russian prisonors.
Tho Russian and Polish prisoners voro !»;it in a soprr.-te book. That is
tiiio booi:.

Q Vail, not/, ~*oro ary of tho doatiis in thc3o orporiwonts of pooplo
in tho second book - tho Russian and Polish prisoners?

A Only tho Rjlish peoplo and tho Russians. Hot the gyp3ic3. Cr.ly
Polos and Russians.

0 I see. Veil, now.

A Tes, those are all deaths.

' ould you give those boo’.n to vs so that no can off or then in
evidonce hero before this Tribunal, or c!o you wish to retain then?

• • y

A I would like to have then back later.

‘ Then could wo have thenjoproduccd and keep then On loan Iron you.
for a period of several weeks and roturn ikon to you at a later date?

A Tes.


10h29


30 Juno—7-.“D—H-6-Lessor (int., vor. Schocn)

Court Ho. I .

. EiiDY: IT your Honor please, I would liko to paginate tho
book, with permission of your Honors, *dth perhaps a red pencil, wo that
'o can re'or to then aoro thoroughly.

Tlil 7K3imfF: I -,ras about to suggest that tho boosts bo paginated

• • • m

with a red or blue pencil and carefully nunborod fron 1 on, and tho,...

IP.. ITJtDI: Other than haring tho *.ritnoss point out tho particulcr
death ir. the book I have no other questions to put to bin, your Honor.

E— 7T_131 pi; rr: ttis pagination can bo done during tho noon recess

today and, of c our so, dofonso counsol ’.rill have an opportunity to anaxaino
tho boola. I think they night oxanino then during tho noon recess also.
Givo tho books ir. tJio oustody of tho sccrotary of this court and thoy could
axanino tlics in his custody*

HUDIs Allrisht, your Honor. T.ion in Uict caso, your Honor,

I haro no further questions, oth.r than tho questions 1 wish to put to
Mn conebminj tho book and I cannot vary itoII put than without identifying
tho pc goo therein.

• • <

TH C P7.UIKT.rr: Tho Tribunal will nos bo in rococs until 1:30 o'clock*
(.*. rccosa was taken until 1330 hours.)


104*30


mi

30 J-jn-A-*£S—13—1-Weahan (Int. Ranlor)
Court Ho. X.


AFTERKOW SESSION

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 30 Juno 1?«7.)

GSHRIT H. KALB - Paired
Direct Exnnination (Continued)

THE laBS'iALs Thj Trlbmal is again in sesa on.

THE RCSIDEHTs Counsel nay prccov.d.

BY HR. HARDY i

Q Your Honors, I have five index .-s :f tho dccuainto, '..liich
have bcv.n narked for identification 2 nd vil'. b- ffor^d fcruelly in
the English language by dofenoo counsel by nuubors. No havj tho docu-
aont number, tho cxliibit md tho transcript page in which they ap p ear
in tho official record.

Tho pagination f tto Death book is ready.

Her, !&*• Kale, I should liko you to take tho Death Book,
which you havw $ado up and indieato to tho Tribunal, going through
tho Death book pago by page, tho death which rcsultod as a result of
tho experiments, that is, to ixuatos usod in tho oxporlxtonts and to
explain each death therein as you know it fron your own knowledge.

(The Book is handed tc tho witness).

TKJ iTO-iSIDEJT* There nre two becks; t.'»at bcok arc you oubiit-
ting to the witness?

BY HR. HARDYt

Q la only going tc subcait -no. Your Honor. The only one
be has is tho one that refers tc this situation. The ether ona is
a Polish and Russian death bock which h-o no connection with tho ex¬
periments at all.


10431


30 to- A ' I B-13-2-Meehan (Iat. Harder)

Cburt !fc. I»


Q Cn what pcge is the first pcge where a death appears?

A Page 16.

Q Page 16; zw,w which person there died as a result tf the
experiments?

A On Page 16 the B.V. iixaate 1219, Josef Rufer, hern on
9 Kerch 1896.

Q Now, which subject is he un that page, counting Cron the top,
rhich object is he on pcge 16?

A The eighth counting froti above.

Q That is the eighth nano counting free above, pngo l£>, is the
nano of a nan who died in the experiments; which experiments?


A That vas the first experiment of the Ahncnorbe.

Q That is tho gas burning experiments or tho typhus experi¬
ment or the poisonous gas experiments; which one?


A It was tho gas burning exporinont.


Q Now do you know froo your cam kncvlodgo whethor that nan
died or do ycu kn^» only free ycur knowledge -f tho book?

A I sow this cotfpec personally.

. Q Now is this one of the non of the group that volunteered?
A les.

Q Hell now, do you know what those first 15 nen used in the
gas tarn oxporinonts volunteered for?


A No, certainly not.

Q fell, did they volunteer for a dangerous exporinont or for
a liarnloss expori:»nt?

A They volunteered for a haroiess experiment.

Q Thon in othor words they did not expect to die as a result
of tho experiments?


A No.

Q "ere they warned that the experiments wore going to be vary


severe and jig lit cause death?
A No.


1QA32


30 Jnn-JL-®-13-3-Msohan (Int. Racier)

Court Ho. I.

Q New go to the next death as a result of experiments in that

OOOka

A This is on page 17* .

Q Will you count fron the top and tell us tte ranker of the
subject on the page, so that vo will have a proper reference. Hr. Nale?

A It is the 12th nano counting fron above.

Q On page 17j now what is the nae» thoro?

A Professional Criminal Ho. 1656, Karl Kirn, born on Hi Sop-
teeber, 1907.

Q And ifcat exceriaont was ho used in?

A He was used for the same experiment as in the caso boforo,
it was the gas burn experiment.

Q Do you personally know of that doath; did you soc that
corpeo also?

A Yes.

Q Kow, will you go to the next doath which occurrod as a ro-
sult of tho oxporiajnt? ,

A How wo cono to the third death caso ns a result of tho gas
bum experiments, it is tho 13th niuio ofl page 17 fron above. Profes¬
sional Criainnl, No. 13U6, Friodrich Drifts, bom 6 April 1905.

Q Does tho rocord show tho date of doath?

A Ho.

Q Can you tell no who tho r you saw. that corpse or not?

A Yes.

Q Now, will you turn to tho :»xt doath, which you liavo
writton down in that book, which occurrod as a result of sodo of the
experiments?

A fes, on page 38 you find oxperiaonts with typhus. The 12th
rnno counting free above, you find a group of 18 gypoios; none of tho
names arc sontionsd.

Q Wall, how do you know that refers to the gypsies that died
in tho typhus experiments?


10A33


Cc*.x; l>Om I


(Tnt. Rarlur)


A Eocause only gypsies were entered'into that book without
caeca or numbers, all other irmates snterod in this death book boar
a nano and mrsber.

Q Weren't there any other gypsies in tho canp other than tho
gypsies boirg usod for typhus experiments?

A Yes.

Q You said yes, do you .-nan tho re wore other gypsios or there .
sere hot other gypsies?

A In addition to those gypsies, there were other gypsies who
were normally registered in tho ca^p.

Q Could it be possible that ttocso deaths ruforred to othor
gypsios, that is gypsios other than those usod in tho typhus oxpori-
nonta?

A That is out of tho question.

Q Woll, now you e«o on pngo yf> .

A Pago 38.

Q Pttgo 38 there aro 18 blank spaces whoro tto vrxs should bo.

A Yos, there aro 18 gypsios who died ns a result of tho ex¬
periments.

Q oil, what does tho ontxy say in tho book on page 18 to
indicato that tboco wore 18 gypsios?

A Botwojn tho ^ast deaths and tho following doatha thcru aro
tho words, "13 Cypalos."

Q I soo and that is on .rhr.t lino on page 38; Lino No. 12?

A Tho 12th line fron above.

Q did you personally over soo any of those gypsies?

A I saw all of tten.

Q Did you see the corpses?

A Yos.-

Q Hot.- can you tell us fren which rocn in tho exparisontal
station those corpsos caao free, as I recollect your testinony, you
stated that Haagen divided his oxporinontal subjocts up into two groups,


10A3A


30 «fan-A-N3-13 ^ Mao han (Int. Ranlcr)
Court No. I.


ono group was in rocc no. 1 and one group was in rocn Ho. 2 ; nc *r do
you knew whoro thoso 18 gypsies wore in; roca 1 or rccc 2; do you
understand tho inport of ny question?

A Tea and I cannot tell you that oxactly, nost of then be¬
longed to tho group which was not fxotoctod.

<5 And that group was in which rocts, the ones that wore not
protoctcd I r»an.

A Ahnenorbo Roots 1.

Q And tho group that vor- vaccinated wore? in Root 2?

A Yos, thoy were housed in tho dressing roon, which was Root 2.

Q Near, will you go to tho noxt ontry in tho book, which in¬
dicates to you that these arc records of do at ha which occurred as a
result of experiments?

A Thon wo go over to page 39, the second lino down free
above; horc iw> have ono gypey, ho is entered in tho sane way that tho
othsr 18 are.

0 I soo — and tho next ontry?

A Os lino No. 5 counting free above, there is another gypsy.

Q On page 39?

“ Yos, pngo 39.

q Thon indieato tho noxt ontry.

A Os lino 7 you find anothor g;'psy onto rod.

q On pngo 39?

A Yos.

q Now, tho next ontry?

A Pago 39, line 11, you find tiiroo gypsies.

q And tho next entry?

•

A Njw, wo go over to pago UO, second lino from abovo - one

gypey*

Q And the noxt entry?

A Fourth lino frees abovo, 2 gypeics.

Q And tho rcxt?


101*35


30 Jun-A-1 '3-13-6-’cah3n (Int. Ranler)

c-i-rt ::o. i.


A Line 11 fron abow, one gypsy*

Q And tho rvixt entry?

A Now we go over to page k3, the 8th line fron above, 1 gypsy.

Q Yes...

A I rocoat line 6, page 1*3.

Q And the next?

A These are deaths causod as a r_sult of typhus experiments.

Q Sow, do you havo any further deaths, which aro recorded in
that death book, which you havo knowledge about?

I

A Yos.

Q Would you point those out, ploaso?

Q As a result of gas poisoning experiments you find on page
7l*i 7th lino froa above, the gypsy 6587, nano - Fodassy Andreas, pro-
sunably a Hungarian, ho was born on 12 February 1511.

Q And how do you know that that nroj referred to in that
entry is one and tho saco os the ran experimented on by Hacgen in tho
poison i,"s oxpcrironfcr?

A Bocnuso after tho nnna, tharo is tho lot tor "V" inserted.

Q And what does "V" nonn?

A I, ;yself, nado that notation for tho word "Vorsuch" for
oxporinont.

Q Did you see that oxporii»ntcl subjoct doad?

A Tcs.

Q Go to tho rvixt ontry, ploaso.

A How, wo stay on tho sria page, tho 8th lino fron abovo,
there you find the ^ypay 6516, tho nc:m of Kebstock Cirko, born on
28 Ifcy 1901.

Q NoW tho so two gypsies, on page 7k or is it — what page is

that?

A Yos.

Q FT’So 7k, is that true, pngo 7k?


A Yes


1GA36


30 J''f>-A-}g-13-7■ I b oh n n (Int» Healer)

Court I.


Q Those two gypsies you saw being subjected to poison gas ex¬
periments; is that right?


10437


so Juafr-£-K£-l4-l-Nurtha (Raaaler)

Coart I, Case I

A.«Uo, I saw then already as they were le4 lows.

Z. Hhat do you aesn by, you saw thee as they were led down?

A. These nea who were selected for this last experlnent wero
lod to the gas chseber la groups. &at was la the concentration
cnep, :iat swell or.

%. And then later you saw thee dead?

A . Tea, I lator saw these people dead.

a

L'lll you go to the next entry?

A. Tes, I should like to explain oao thing first, howovor.

%• Go right ahead.

A. Oie gypsy, Robstock, Cirko, I renoeborvory well, I rooeivod
tho order to wash hie to oloanse bin.

Q. Tou neon after he was dead?

a. Tos, after ho vns dead, and then X had to tako hin down to¬
wards the crematory into tho outopty roc*. Ho was to bo autopsied.

Did you eror wash any of the othor oxpcriaontal subjocts
aftor thoy diod?

\ Toe, oortaialy.

How nany, would you say?

A. An a rule, all of th«B woro woshod.

Did you wash any of the ojporiaontol eubjocts in tho typhuo
oxporirsonts after they diod?

A, Cortftinly.

Go to tho next entry, please.

/

A* How wo go over to page 75, socond lino free dboro. Horo
you havo tho gypsy, 6545, «ielbort Zckstoin; born on tho 2nd of
February, 19#. Ifcis is tho second line free above on page 75.

Did you soe hin dead also?

A. Toe.

*• 2o the next ontry, pleaso.

A. How we go to page 81. tho second line fre® bolow; bore is

10.38


cO Juno- ire'-\4- 2-Kurthe (Harrier)
Court I, Caso I


tha avay, 6564. tfao nmo Sfcelnhardt Midoti, Josef, bora on tho 27th
of August, 1913.

Q. Did you see his dead?

K Tos.

Co to tho noxt oatry, ploose.

At tho extrfee bottce of pa*o 81 you find tho gypsy, 6521,
probably a Osoch. His wbo is Rositska, Josof; bora on tho 18th
of Dcoaibor, 1909.

And you also saw hits dead?

Too.

Do you haro any othor entrios thoro rocordin* deaths as a
rosult of tho ojq?orlseats?

K Vo.

Zs that a cocplote list of thosa you know died as a rosult
of tho oxporineats you told tho Tribunal about this norning?

a. Tos, theoo oro tho lost cosos of which I was spooking,

“ itnocs, that book that you haro in your hand, do you
cortify that that is a truo extract of tho death book at Hatswoilor,
tnkon by yourself and two other innatos?

^ Two.

Q. Hhat is your hcoo address now?

4. Rot 6 or dm.

Wmt street nuibor, ploaso; so that vocanroturn this
book to you in due tlno, I want your nmo in the record and your
eddross, so that wo con fulfil tho preoiso of returning thoso things
to you after wo hove had thm reproduced.

A. Yes, Hales, Oorrid, Headrick; born—

Q. Vo don't need that. Just your street addross, whoro we can

6

nail this to you.

A. S lachekstroot, 87---Rottordm

<%. and tho nmo af that is Slcghek, is thr* correct?


10,39


CO Jfca*-2r4iJ-#urthc (Bailor) 14.3

Court I, Caso I

A. SI c«hekstract, 87--.

•. Shot is in EottcrtUcT

i. Eottordcc.

2 H*EDY: Tour Honor, at this tico I would liko to introduce
this death book as certified by the witness, and givo it a Proao-
cut ion oxhibit nacber. This wil not, of corse, bo introduced an on
oAiblt for identification, but as an exhibit fomally, and tho pro¬
cedure in offering an exhibit with njsaber and than having it repro¬
duced, does tho Tribunal wish that xiut duty be dlscho-god by tho
Prosocution or tho Socretary-Gonoral?

?R2SIDH5i That duty should be porforuod by tho Socrotary-
Conoral, who will bo custodian of tho voluao and will return it to
tho ownor after tho usefulness of the book has boon oorvod hero.

IB. H-fiDT: Thank you. I have no furthor questions, Tour Honor.

I trill nark that book os Prosocution's Exhibit 560 and cntltlo
tho book rather than givo it a doctsaont nunbor: ■Doath Book, Hat-
svollor,■ which is Exhibit 660.

TH3 PSESXBBR: Tho exhibit will bo recoivod in ovidonco with
tho undorstmdlng which I roferrod to a accent ago.

H2. EaPDT: Ho furthor questions, your Honor.

33Z PHjSIBHUI: I note theyvoaonco of Dr. Prooschcann, tho
attorn 0 ;* for tho Defendant Brack.

The Tribunal, Doctor, hae approved your application for tho
attendance of tho witness in tho Hussion Zono, with tho understand-
ing, hevovor, thrf tho affidavit which you desire to toko free this
wit nos 5 oust bo tdcon and presented to tho Tribunal prior to tho
close of tho evidence in tho case.


1OU0


so vuno-A-KJ-15-Priceai (Haxiier)

Court X, Cose X

SB* yrOSSCHHJBj Thank you, Mr. President*

7Z2 PHE6XS2T?: Crons examination of this witness by defense
counsel n*gr proceed.

CSOSS ZXJ4XHaIXCH

3V~2XSG2i3Bl (Counsel for defondant Slaversh

Q. Vitnegg, free March 1943 until 4 S opt« 2 ber 1944 you were
in HatswilorT

i. Tos.

Q. Tree vhon were you working as on osslstcnt nurso at tho oo-
criled department ahnanerbo?

A. 3vor since Hovasbor 1942.

q. Kovaibor 1942? Whoa did tho so-called burning oaporinente
start?

A. Shat was in Hovtobor 1942.

ft. Tory woll. Tho osporinental subjocts oree free outside or
had they boon soloctod in Hatsvoller?

A . Thoy woro soloctod In the c*ap itself.

Q. Tou havo already testified that thoso oxporinental subjocts
had voluntoorod? \

A. Tos.

Q. How do you know this fact?

A. 3h<y wore soloctod at the block and they were told that this
would bo a simplo aattor only for which they would recoivo hotter
nourishment. In riow of tho nood inside tho c.-cp these poople vol¬
unteered.

'Jho told that to theeo pocyle?

A. She man soloctod tho*.

<*. Shat wqb tho c®p physician?

A . She SS comp physician of Katsveiler.

She SS ctop physician of Hat swell or?

A. Tee.


10U1


50 Jun^-A-XJ-15-a-Priceou (Harder)

Court I, C oso I

Q* Vo re you personally present during that event?

A . So.

3. Jtol. vhoc did you learn what the crcp physician of Hnts-
uoiler told thee?

A . The persona told ne that themselves.

^ A witness has already testified,here, a witness who nloo
caie free Satzweiler, that Professor Hirt had hold a locture to
these experimental eubjocts about tho purposo of tho exporinonts
which ho intended.

Chat wosonly later. That only happenod after thqy had nl-
roedy boon solected.

• ait then Professor Hirt held a lecturo?

A . los, but then thoy woro already locatod ct thdt department,
that block.

Veil, thoso pooplo hod boon requested to voluntoor for
spoclrl oxporlaonto in tho cecp at Setswoller, tho crop physician
told than that this wasto bo on oxporlr.cnt, thon too pooplo woro o ont
to the station, and horo Dr. Hirt once aore oddrossod then?

Am Too, that is how it was—yog.

Tou wore spooking about the station ahnonorbo. How did
this station get this tune ■ahenorbo.■

Am Veil, I cannot toll you tint. I only know that that was
tho naio, Zt was no secret.

Veil, it neodn't bo a socrot. at any rrt o, wo havo estnb-
lishod that at the tlce you went to tint station tho nano "Station
ihnenorbe" alroody existed?

Am Yob, we hod reccivod this inforoation in ordor to sco that
tho drugs which wc received would not bo confused with tho drugs
that tho other lcuctos in tho coop had to roettvo. These drugs,
thoso solutions or ointnonts woro not bo be used for tho. .othor
innates.


10U*2


30 wuno-x -4(J-15-3-Prine<Bi (Zccclor)

Ccurt 1, Ouc I

Veil, you yourself nureod those ajperlnar.tal subjects?

i. Yos.

You vere saying that three cf these exporlnentd subjocta

died?

i. Tes.

Q. Yhen did they die? Con you ascertain that free your notosf

A . Tes. You will find that in ny book.

The date can be ascertained?

A . The nonth can bo ascertained.

Tory woU.

A. Z did not hare sufficient tine to noko on entry evory dry.

Q. Hove you el reedy roturned the book?

A . Tee, I hare.

I shall onco aoro hare the book handod to you in ordor to
onnblo you to oscortain tho nonth or tho nonths. during which theso
threo pocple hod diod in concoction with the burning oxporinonts.
Vould you ploeso select these throo nonths?

i. Doceuber 1943.

That refers to the three cosos of tho first exporlnent?

A » Yes, December 1942.

CU Ih what nannor was the cause of death osoortoinod?

A. That happened in the dressing rocu. Onco they wore dead
we imedir-toly reported that fact. Zither tho professor or the as¬
sistant erne along and examined theeo pocple. Dint was not our
uatter and once theso coxpeoe were released we trrnsforrod th«i to
the cr«cntoxy.

0. In that way you cannot say what exactly the cause of death
was in connection with these three pocple.

A . 2;cry hod high fever and then a severe relapse. They hrd
horrible wounds full of puss. They suffered terribly before they
diod.


10AA3


30 Juno-A-iiJ-15-4-Prii:eaa (Hauler)
Court I, Cose X


x. But, witness, X »ci asking you whether you know oxoctly
whet tho coxae of death was la these cases.

A • act X could not ascertain. I cm only tell you what

X ecw.

row, how big was thle so-called dopartcent ahnenerbe?

A • How do you neon—how a any pecplo?

Q. Veil, X tc asking you wae .lt cao barrack or woe It only
part of a barrack? How cany roocs were In there?

A . Vo had a roon Ho. 1 and a roco Ho. 2. Vo had a patholo¬
gical d op.-rtceut and a rooc for troatuents.

Q. V as this a barradks or a stono building?

A . Ho, it was part of a barracks, when you entered you found
it on your loft side, the left wing.

Q. Vos it a nomol wooden barracks?

A. Yes, a norcal wooden barrocks. That was repnlrod in tho
deorxtcont jfcnocorbe.

Q. Can you give us qTprodcately the si to of that barradks,
how long 1* was, how vide it was?

A . X think it was 96 asters.

q. 96.Deters long?

A • Yes, 96 netere long. I bellovo so. X cannot tell you
that with oertainty—about 7 netors wide.

0^ You think that this barracks was 96 cotors long?

A . Yos, it was Just an ordin ary concentration canp bnrrncks.

3. Here there uany such barracks in Hctzwoilor?

A . Certainly, at ttufi tine.

I beliovo that you aro in a position to ostinato appro:d-
nately what 96 netere aeons.

A . Tee.

3. Hut you still r*coin ct your opinion that it was 96 notors?

urn


30 Jaa»-JriiJ~15-Prir.ccxi (3gnlcr)

Court I, Caae X

A. 7®*, approximately 96 aatera, 90 netcra, acnething like
tket # X roclly didn't tok® too nuck lntoreat In that.

<U Tou vorc la Hatrvajler la tho ye*ra of 1943 and 1944?

^ lea.


10W.5


33 Juao-^y-16-l-Sinaimci: (Hauler)
Court I, C eso I


Ucm this barrack at th* time still designated <hnenorbo?

i. .

^ca there any notice attached to this barrack?

A. So.

'• '-'ell, if X understand you correctly the barrack «ai deslc-
nctod cs the Ahneaorbe barrack icon* the incatos?

a . Shat did not v apply to all of tho incatos, only those who

knov.

5 • led how did thoso few locates havo that knowlodgo?

A, In erery caip thoro aro nciors and ruaors pass fren ono to
another.

CU It ary rato you havo no exact catorial which culd tell us
la what connection this barrack was with the Xnstituto of jhnonerbo?

Am I didn't quito understand you, counsol.

In Berlin there was an institute callod ihnemorbo; do you
know that?

A, That nxgr bo. I don't know. I only know tin* thay rood rod
tholr nsolgrcente frou Borlln, X heard that onoo.

Q. and who received thoso osslgrcents you nro tdklng about?

A • Vail, 8 trassbourc, Strassbourg porhrps, tho professors of
Strasbourg.

0.. But you know nothing outhontlo about it personally?

i. Bo,

Vitness, this corning you wore tailing us thd the lottos
who voluntoerod for ttiose ejporicents wore prccisel that they would
be pardoned after the e^perinent. furthermore, you statod that that
was never carried out?

i. So.

In eso locates tfco were used for these burning eopericents,
did thoj- rtcdn in thrf barracks during the subsequent period?

Am SO.


10U6


30 Jun-i4(J-l$-2-Finabuek (H=ler)

Court I, C aso I


3- Veil, where wore they sent?

A . Fone of tfcm got away. 2iey all wore transferrod, they
all became iavollde end a« Invalid* they were sent hack to tho orcp.
Jcr sctio tino they were alloyed la the weaving Industry. However,
they couldn't work there. They were Just sitting around, and so one
after the other was seat away on Invalid transports and this Is how
thoy loft.

Wd you have rr. oj^ortunlty to observo these lmatos during
the subsequent period?

A . les.

Q. How cony lnnatos were there la Fat swell or?

A . la Hatgweller I think there were twelve hundred lmatoo,
twelvo hundred 1 mates. That.isiln the aother caip of Sat swell Sr.

Tho Hatswollor cmp had scdo outside branchos. I think in tho wholo
o *9 thoro woro abut sovoa thousand lnnatos, during the last poriod.

And do you noon to say tiu* you always had an opportunity to
obsorro theso tvolvo imotes who woro used for tho burning oaporlnents
and ascertain how long thoy rautood In the cmp7

A. 3iat Is not at all difficult. It wasn't at all difficult
to observo tho peoplo.

How, ono noro quostion. In tho case of the esporinontol sub¬
jects used for tho ozporlnonte of Dr. Haagcn, wore thoy also in the
dopnrtaont of *hnonorbo?

A . Yes, w a hod touicate thle dopartnont for the* particular
purposo bocauso It was filled with othor patients.

Q. A nd for whco was this department to be vacated?

A . Tor the research of ahnenorbe.

How do you know this latter fact, that this vacating was to
be carried out for tho Institute of ^menerbe?

A. Vo had rccolvod tho order th A this plooo was to be vacated
because peoplo would cme frm <juschwits. That is the official i&-


10U7


30 16-3-I*lca‘3iick (Homier)

Court I, Case I

fomctlon vo rocolvod.

Q, But that this evacuation vis to bo carried out on befcalf of
tho institute of hncerbe, hov did you know that?

A • 1 already told you that ve received on order that this plaoo
vas to bo vacated sicca it was to be used for tho ahntnerbe.

Did you ever see a written ordinance to that edfoct?
a. He.

Dho told you that? Who told you th* these barracks were
nooded by tho shnenorbe?

i. She occp physician of Hatsvoilor, tho SS emp physician.

Q. Did he toll you that porsonallyf

*• Ho, not no personally, but I was prosent. I received tho
ordor personally.

So 'dice was thecnap physician spooking?

K Ho was speaking to the kapo of tho hospital.

Hov, one none question in connection with the burning o:q>ori-

nonts, Tou were saying that Dr. Hlrt on froquent occasions vont to

Hatsvoilor to this station. Were you prosont on all those occasions?

A. Vhor.ovor the profossor crco to visit us vo were nostly on-

grgod in tho changing of dressings. Wo hod to bathe theso two pooplo

oaco every two hours sad on this occasion he sccotlnes cino in to o»-

%

aiine the pooplo. Ho ves occccponled by a non fron tho Luftvoffo who
photogrrqjhod theso people every day. Ho seeetines photographcd then
twico a day.

Since you ere saying that you vero at this station rogulprly,
you probably also have had an opportunity to observe vhothor visitors
free outside cone to that station?

.a. Certainly.

Did you recoive frequoat visits?
a. S onotines, not exactly frequent.

During the tine when the VP^us eaperinents were c arriod on.


10W.8


30 Jur.»-A4i«£-16-4-Sl:iebuck (Hgaler)
Court I, C asc I


did you hoar the aso Sievers—S levers?

A. I can't r«ne:bor.

Did you hoar this none Sievsrs neationod in connoction with
the burning ojperinents?

A. So, I cannot rscanber.

3H. I'ZlSOEtBXH: Mr. president, I hove no further questions.

, DH3 PfCSIDBfT: *ny other ovoaa ex/cl nation of thia witnoaa by
defonao counsel?

KS HAHDTj Before further oroea examination continues, your
Honor, if the croaa ex/ci nation and redirect ecrtfilnation, if any
of thia witneea, ore ccnplotod and thero le etlll tino loft thia
nftornoon, Dr, Tipp will be pr^>ared to proaont hia supplemental
document a for the. oaeo of Beckex*-7reysing, 10 ! oi tolling th n t
to the Tribunal bo they nay hero thoir supplouontal coploo avail¬
able.

PRDSIDHffTx Very woll.

cboss sljuii'a:i as

BY IE. 7RITZ (Counaol for defendant Boae)x

tfitnoaa, did yen know tho nurse, nolo nurae, Hollt
A • Yob.

Did you knew your countrynan, Broeret
A. Ye..

% Did you aleo know a cortti a Or and Joan 7
A . Orandjoan, yoe.

3- tfero they aleo at thia typhus esporincntol station?

A, Yob, ho workod there? b^ not at the Ahnonerbe departuont,

Z, Did thoso three pcopfw aleo taiov socethlng about the execu¬
tion of the axporinents as you described th*j todogr?.

i, Certtfcly. they oust have known about that but not in such
detail, certainly not about typhus because at that tino he von al¬
ready in 3cden-3odon. I noon Soil. But he know about the burning


10AA9


- 5 -

30 Jaso-rt-MJ-16-Slaaiccfc (H^tulor)

Court I, C aw I


erpcrlcents.

And how about tho other two, Orondjoaa and your countrycon?

A. Tee, they certainly know about thoso things but not to the
•cao dogroo ca 2. They wore not ai often prossnt cm I was.

L3, miZ: 2 hero no furthor question*. Mr. Provident.

caoss sunrs^cics

3T D3. TIPP (Counaol for defendants Bockor-Proysong and Schroodor)
Q. tfltaoss, If I understood you correctly, Profossor Hoafcon,
a* ycu a aid, for tho firot tlno entored Satsweiler In Octobor 19-13}
la that true?

\ To*.

^ Tou voro furthemor stying that at flrat a traneport of o-
bout a hundred oT>ale4 arrlTOd. Tou furthor sold that Profoaaor
Hanlon exccined this trcohort and thca *ont theio pooplo away be¬
cause they voro not physically strong onough; Is that t ruo?

A. To*.

ft* ifow » vltaoss, would you ploase toll us ifcan Profoaoor Hnrgon
atortod with his yoccI nations In Satswollor?

A . Shat was ^jproxii^xtaly In Horacbor 1943.
ft. Xs It posslblo, witnoso, that this vao buly In Doceubor
of 1943?

A. Ono naaent, please. It oust hose boon at tho end of

HoY«ibsr.

ft. Tory well. On how cany persons were these vaccination*
porfomed, vltneas? 2 m talking about the vecoinationa by Hr, Eargen.
A. Do you necn the beginning or tho end or Aat?
ft. I want to put this quostion to you . quite gonorally. Uhon
<iid Mr. Haagen atart to work with those izcatos?

A. I think that was. in Sovcuber, during the courso of Hot cub er

1943.

ft. And when wero these esperlnsnts concluded?


10^*50


30 Jun^-i>W^16-Hiaabuck(B£iXilcr)
Court I, Ceso I


A . a bout 4>rll, 1944, tho typhus experiuonts?

Yos, la other words free Sovtcber 1943 until ^rll of 1944,
How aany 1 mates did Kr, Rectos, u«o os experimental subjedts?

A. * pproxinatoly ninety.

5. You vero vying this aorning, If I understood you correctly,
wltnoaa, that thsso subjects wore divldod into two group*?

4. lea.

*'.• How naay persona did one such group ccupriso?

d. Self, They ware divided in exactly two groups.

0. Oould you pi oca 0 tell the Tribunal, witness, wh B t exactly
Ur. Hrxgen did with these groups? Tell us what ho did with tho first
group and then what he did with the second.

Am Tho first group received a protective vaccination.

Lot ce ask you, witness, if X understood you corroctly, you
oro not a physician?

1 • So, X ai not.

Q. How then cm you toll us exactly that Hr, Haag or. vacci¬
na tod these pooplo?

Am Veil, I ® a treinod nurse. I havo loomod the nursing
p ref 00 si on in Hat rw oil or.

Q . and within ths fraiowork of this eiuootion you gdnod
enough knowledge in order to toll us what Hr. Hnogon did with this
first group wos actually a protoctlvo vaccination?

a . Veil, we hod our physicians thero too rciong tho lrxantos,
and thqy know it Just os woll as X did.

Veil, who wore those im^to physicians, witnoss?

Am 7or instance, thore was a lXitch Physician, Dr. Irodit, \Aio
unfortunately died cf typhus.

0 ^ 'Jaa thoro another physician thero?

Am Ho, thore wasn't another physician in tho typhus station


10451


30 J'.no-.H'J-l6-7-SiaAtoack (Racier)
Cotirt I, Case I


per hap* Dr. Pealaaon froc Soway.
Q. Pculaaoal
i. Toa.


10.52


30 Jam U7.-.T!>l?-a.-Parrin (Int, Pnj-.lcr)
Court Mo. 1


I

Q Very well* Troll, you wore sayin* that !!r. liaapon was vacci¬
nating the first grew? against typhus. Can you tell us exactly what
vaccine he used?

1 Jfoi

Q How about the socorvl group?

^ f

A The.second group was noroly strongthonod with food and then
worked uppn anew.

3 The first group was vaccinated, and the second group was not,
Theso woro the stronger pooplo.

A The stronger poople woro usod for the second group.

Q And now you aro sayin. that after saw tixio ovorybotty startod
to work again, oil, what was tho longth of tirx, between thoso two
axporinonts?

A Only a few days.

Q Now, witness, it is inportnnt to knew what the socond work of
Haogen constituted. Tho prosocution askod you this Doming if Haag on
injootod into thoso irmatos artificial infoctious typhus vaccino, and
you said yus. Bitness, what do you understand by artificial infoctious
typhus vaccino?

Ifil. HARD?: Tho prosocution did not say vaccino.

Bf DR. TXPPt

Q Pardon no, what I Just uontlonod was typhus oodlun, artificial
infoctious typhus aodiua, what do yew ur. ‘orstand that to noon?

A I can't Judge that.

Q How Jo you know that it ;X3 artificial infoctious typhus?

A doll, wo hoard that — _

•

q One uinuto, witness. I don't want to hoar any conclusions from
you. Tho Tribunal wants to knew that you roally knew freu your knowlodgo,
and now you say that you cannot roally Judge whether it was really
artificial infectious typhus, that is, froa what you Just —


10A53


30 Juno u7-^-ATD-I7-2-Parrin (Infc. Easier)
Court No. 1


-5. HARDY* Your Honor, tho dofcnso put a question to the
witnoss and tho witness procooded to answer it, and ho interrupted hin.
I request that the witness bo pemittod to answer that quastion.

WE TKUOMLL* The witness nay answer the question. Tho interpreter
will road tho question.

BT DR. TIFPi

Q I an asking, since you cannot judge it, how do you know that
!ir. Haagon was using Artificial infectious typhus?

A Tho Professor spoke to tho inmto physician in this dopcrtnont
and made no secret of it. Ho told us about his v.oric, and that was whoi
wo woro all prosont.

Q ’oil, that did ho toll you about his work?

A Wall, I can»t repeat that to you axactly.

Q ’oil, in that caao hoi' can you maintain that ho usod artificial
infectious typhus if you cannot judgo that fron your own knowlod«o,anl
if you can no longer toll us what :*r. Haagon has told tho inmato
physician?

A V.oll, as far as I can Jidgo it, if ono rocoivos typhus normally,
ono gots it throujh lico or uncloan conditions, but tho so pooplo wero
entirely cloan. Thoroforo, th«jy rust havo boon infcctod with an
artificial nodiun. Evan if you aro ret a physician you can judgo that.

Q '/oil, witness, I an repeating that you aro raoroly giving us
a conclusion. But that that doos not constituto a knowlodgo. Finally,
lot no oatablish that you roally do not know whether Haakon actually
workod with infectious typhjs —

HR. ftJHffi !tay I suggest that dofonso counsol intorroqato tho
witnoss, not arguo with hin?

THE PRESIDENT* Counsel is procooding in order. You my pro coo d,
excepting a littlo naro slowly.

BY DR. UPPi

Q Very well, witnoss. Now, another question. Rhat was the suocaes
of tho introduction of tho vaccina, or this artificial infectious


10A5A


30 Jure 2j7-*o-».ri}-17-3—Perrin (let. Hffilar)

Court No. 1

typhus| will you please talk a little slorror?

It occurred just as in tho caso of tergal typhus* There ras
hish Iqyot, collapse, it is ordinary In the caso of typhus, one saw *
all tte normal synptcas of a typhus patient. Tho ono group which
received vaccinations did not show as sovero aynptcos as tho other .
croup, which did not receivo those vaccinations. In ottor words, thoy
H.J not experience such high fovers oxcopt in the caso of a few im*i-
vi duals. I knew that free ry own knowledge bocauso I measured tho
fever Lysolf.

Q In that caso you aro saying, witness, the patient h^d high
fever?

A Yoa.

Q I did not quito under star. 1 your further statement, ./hat do you
noan by "collapso", or "kollapioren"?

A Collapse, I think, mans if tho curvo eoos *“7 up and thon
suddenly drope down, as far as I oan judgo that as a rairso,

Q In other words, you aro sayin;; that tho inuates had high
foror, and that fovor dropped abruptly. ’That other synptaas did you
notico in tho caso of thoso inaatoo, witness?

A I can't toll you any other synptons.

Q In othor words, tho innotos had hi;;li fovor. Is high fovor

0

nocossarily a sign of typhus, witnosa?

A No, certainly not. But Profossor Haagon said publicly that
those woro typhus experiments.

Q Unfortunately, I aust once noro establish, vitno3s, that
'Jr. Haagon told 7<xi that thoso euro typhus experiments, !by I perhaps
put to you that ho nay have spoken of tophus vaccino experiments?

A That I cannot say, I really don't knew.

q In ary case, witness, you can't toll us with certainty from
your own knowledge that thoso inmates contacted typhus?

A No*

Q I think that this answers ay questions.


10A55


30 Amo U7-*’.-ATD-l7-k-Pcrrin (let. Parlor)

Court ffc» 1

A But I mist toll you ono thin;:, tho blood tests taken fron
thoso ircatos wore sent to Strassbcurg together with tests of all
the ncrnol typhus cases*

q I bog your pardon, witness, what do you ncan by normal typhus
casos?

W 0

A I ncan thoso casos which wore already in the canp, that is,
thoso v*o wore sont to the oacp suffering with typhus; but tho typhus
oases oono froa Auschrits.

q You woro saying that the Mood testa uoro sont to Strassbourg.

0

Ho", witness, you are not a , ijysician. At any rate, you woro working
long onough at a so-callod experimental station, aay I perhaps ask you
did you m t ary tlno hoar of tho so-<allod oil-Folix roaotion?

A Yoa.

Q Do you know what is noont by that?

A Yoe, in ty opinion this is tho blood tost according to f6il-
Follx. Tfcis is a blood oxnaination which was inventod ’ey oil-Folix.

Q I think wo understand each othor, witnoss. You aro saying
that tho T.'oil-Follx roaction is called aftor tho two non -..-ho usod this
tost for tho first tiro by tho nano of .'oil and Felix, hat doos ono
ostabllsh by this ~'eil-Folix roaction, do you know that?

A Tho state of tho blood* I cannot really juigo that.

Q Now, witno33, if I woro to toll you know that ono establishes,
by usin^ tho 'oil-Folix roactions what rosistanco thoro is to bo
found in tho blood, would that bo somethin,: now to you?

A Yos, I think so, but I forgot it agai*.

Q It any rato, you do kncr.r that thoso people who woro troatod
by Dr. Haagon roceivod high fovor, blcod tost 3 wore taken froa thoir
bodies, and you also kran that thoso blood tests were sent to Strass¬
bourg fOr exenimtdon together with blood tost3 of tho normal typhus
casos?

A Yos. But they my bara also boon sont to othor plncoo.

Q Very well. I don»t want to argue with you about that subject.

10A56


V-/

30 Jtxne h7-A-£TD-17-5-Pen-in (IWT. Heritor)

Court So. 1

it nos s, you wore a rnrso at this station, anl you asserted you nursed
these irsoatos ytxirself, is that truo?

A Tos.

Q Then did thoso feverish synptons occur?

A ell, I xoally can't toll you that oxactly I do not know tha
exaot course of tho illness.

Q How, witness, if you aro so well infor jo 1 about thoso "iattors,
you nust bo In a position to toll the Tribunal approxiaatoly whon

thoso sypptoos occurred aftor tiro -’ays, throo days, fourteen days?

0

A boll, I think thoy occurrod after 10 or 12 days.

Q And whon, witnoss, did tho indivi Mai people dio? I noan, tho
persons of whoa yew woro spoakin this aorttLng and this afternoon.

A Tcu noan as of what dato thoy died? I think that it startod
approxiaatcly at tho end of Docorhor 19U3.

Q Lot no clarify uj quostion. I aa new speaking of tho doath
casos as thoy aroso fron thi3 experimental group?

A los, I understand you.

*

Q As you woro raying this oxporinontal group was startod at tho
ond of Ifevocber or tho boginnin.: of Dooorfcor, an.! whon did tho first
doath casos occur?

A I think that thoso occurrod towar s tha aid llo of Doooabor.

Q Now, witnoss, oan you toll us with cortainty what tho oauso
of tho -loath was?

A No, I cannot toll you.

Q bhon Ud tho other death cases occur?

A During tho subsequent periods. Iwo cfays latur thoro was a ono,
a fow days later there was another one, an:! so on.

Q ‘Jo have tho doath book boforo us, witnoss, and I shall coao back

%

to that later; but couldn't you a-;certain by losing the death took exactly
whin theoo doath casos occurrod? Ifcy I porhaps help you? Tou woro
spca!di\; about tho 12th line of page 30.

10A57


30 ax rv !x7-*.-i.T>-17-6-P&rrin (1st. Saalar)
Court So. 1


L I bee ycur .pardon, I nako a cdstako. I think I cot c’atos
sijcoi up. I think I nado a nistako in riviup you acta of the da too* If
I correct qysulf, the experinents started approximtely at tho ndddle
cf MirtEber. Many yoare have passed sinco, and this is ny only help*
The croup of these 18 people was already enter©! in Novanber;

Q Jfow, witness, I mat ixit cone thin- to you. At first; you said

* •

that the oxperlnonts started at the cai of Ncveabor. Ifew, you say>
looking at tho book, that thero woro alroa.y loath cases in Novccber,
and in order to connect theso doath casco with tho oxporinonts you
are now sayinc thoy actually started in tho bocinnine of 'iovoubar.
Isn*t this error ciio to tho fact that ycu want to connect thoso death
cases with rhat you woro tolling us before?

A Ifo.

Q Now, witness, hew do you know that this croup of 18 cypsioa
which is ontorod hero are actually ..arsons who bolonrod to lbacon*s
Croup?

A Thqso people woro not ontorod with thoir naaos an* tholr
nunboro. I noan, the oonp acfalnistration beck, tho ooap rojiatry book,
whoro ovory inaatoswas ontorod with na-y , and nuabor.

Q' How do ycu know that?

A trail, I vb know it. Zroxv lmoto who ecooa to tho .'iatswoilor
concentretion ennp had to pass through tho hospital.


10A58


3C Jun-.'.-?3-l3—l-Lessor (Int. E-.ilcr)

°ourt !k>. I.

Q How do you know that Just this lypsy group waa not entered

thoro?

A i^cr.uso I waa present when they arrived. Thjy arrived on
q Sunday.

Q Wlun this experimental grou.’ onus to the hospital you, your¬
self, were present, witness?

 To a.

Q And on this occasion you foimd out tlut those persons wore
not ontorod?

A Certainly, I an quite sure of Uct.

Q Why wrs that, witnoso?

A I can't toll you.

Q Was that ordered specific lly — was it forbidden specif¬
ically that thoao pooplo bo ontoivd?

A I really can't toll you.

Q .dron't those nanoa ascertained at the experimental station?

A Oh yos, I know that one waa callod Joseph nnd ono had
another nano, but of course I can't toll you that with cort-inty now.

Q Witness, free tho fact that those inmates wore net ro(,istcrod
int ho crap at their arrival, nnd frou the fact that hero in the book
"w fird a group of 18 gypsios, without najoa, you concludo that tim aro
here concerned with tho pooplo Ceiling fron that group — but tint is
norely a conclusion on your port?

A lio, that is a fact. These people voro not onto rod.

Q Now witness, you aro saying th-- is a f-.ct but in that
connection I uust ask you tho following Who exactly rude the .ntrios
ihto tho doath book?

A Tho dorks — th_ in .ato clorks.

Q Hot yourself?

A Ho.

Q Well, in that case you roally cannot toll us *rhy this clerk


loft tho nanos out?


10A59


30 Jur.-.'»-lE-l3-2-I*.sser (Ir.t. Ranlor)
Court Ho. I.


A Soil, tho clerk did not Isv-w tlioir xvuxts.

Q Witness, whin this group arrived in the c,tp you wero ac¬
cidentally present?

A That was not an accident. That was quite narnal.

Q Wero you always there?

A Tos, I was always thoro when thoy arrived.

0 In that ease, do you nonn to say that in the- ease of a very
new influx of people into tho group, you wox\j present?

A Of course there were trar,s>xrts when I was not present but
e«eiy transport had to go through the hospital.

Q Mew iet rs establish the follcr.ing thing, witness. Can you
state that this group of 90 gypsies was tho only group whoso nanos
were not entered?

A Thoro were other gypoics.

Q Tou cean other groups whoso naitto were not entered?

A les.

Q ' ell, then, how can you tell us tliat those gypsies who have
no names ore identical with tho oxperinontal subjects?

A I can tell you that because the other parsons in the Fro-
ceding tram port arrived and left again and were not accepted into the
canp proper.

Q But witness, you cannot excludo, if I understand you cor¬
rectly, that other groupe arrived at the canp whoso names wore not
registered?

A Tes, but that was at an earlier data.

Q Well, how do you know that?

A A rurber of Jews, for instance, arrived at the canp, who
left a day later. They were not registered and they were not any death

cases.

Q At any rate, witress, I can establish that you yourself did
not register the so people into tho death book.

A Mo, not into the official death book.

10.60


30 Jurv-A- 3-1C-3—leaser (Int. toi l er )

Court IJo. I.

Q Let as furthercore state that your assuaption that these 18
•y.vsiaa care fren Haagon's exporiaorrts is only a concision on your
part. Witness, you have already said that you did not yourself enter
those oasos into the death book. Hob please toll us, witness, how
this copy originated which you Itavo submitted to the Tribunal.

A I was always Interested in getting hold of those names be¬
cause I, as a iXxtchwan, knew that one (by I rov’d bo free a rtf I did
want to knew who found his death fren our pooplo in order that 3 night
got back and say that these and theso poo.ie diod at the canp of Katz-
ireilar. All these pooplo roro Kacht uni .obol prisoners] they voro not
openly rogistorod; I only did that in the interest of ny citizons.

Q Do not cismdorstar/* mo, witi-oss. I do not in any way want
to rofrii.iortf you bocauao of that. I only want to find out how you got
the original doath book.

A Oh, I had accoss to it ovory day. I t.os in tho hospital and

I could tako hold of the original book every day. I could do that for

%

hours, if I wanted toj ovon if SS ptysioians 'urc present; it was some¬
thing quite ordinary.

Q Arri by using those entries in tho original book you conpllod
this copy *.rhich was subaittod by you?

A Tos, it »n»s copied by no.

Q Docs this copy corrc rv*-r.c r.itfc f.» original in all its do-

tails?

A Tos, exactly.

Q flitruss, lot me finish this typhus c:oplex. 1 should like
to know how Haagen's werk was boing carilod thro'^jh. You roro \rosont
whon the first group recrived those protoctiv: vaccinations. How wore
tho so vaccinations carried out?

A Professes- Haagon did thorn in collaboration with an assistant.

Q VThat I an asking you, rltnosr, is how were they vaccinated —
intramuscular, intravenous, cr how?

A I cannot tell you that exactly. I was standing at tho ont-


10461


30 Jun-A-: 3-13-L-Lesscr (Int. Rosier)
Court So. I.


ranco and it was ay duty to let t!x>sa roonlo in.

Q In that case you weren't present during the vaccination

itself?

A TToll, I rma in the rocj*

Q But you didn't boo whother Haagon inj acted or what to did?

A I re oily didn't ace whether it was intramuscular injection
or an intravenous injection.

Q And tho aocond treatuorit which you think trae an^infoctious
treateont, how was that carried through?

A It ay have toon do no in tho saj« '/ay. I can't toll you
that oxactly.

Q Witness, anothor quoatior. with rcforonco to tho doath book.

A little earlier, in tho ease of ono noso, you havo stated that you
knew oxactly that this doath car.u ns a roav.lt of tiv oxporijiiont, bo-
cauao you added a ■V" to that nano. hat does that "V" ncan?

A Tho V noanc Vorauch - o:cporii*; .t. I rarely indicated that
personally. That was not in th- doath book.

Q Tfitnoss, you ore a Dutchrian, aren't you? Do you uoo tho
Cfeixan language so often that ov.n in cr.ao of auch a notation you uao
a Gorman word?

A Mo, I really don't use tho tra-.n langurgu at all but at
that ti:o I certainly did. SorotL-vs, oft^r 7 cone hooo, and I can
toll you that, some Dutchman pointed out to no that I have to loam
to apeak Dutch pxoporly once noro. For 5 years I had to apoak Goman
and therefore I often saBo nistak.s in Dutch ~nd oven today it occura
that I nako a aistako.

Q Tou wore saying that you abbreviated tho Goman word "vor-
such" rrith a "7". Now, witrosE, let *. dc. art fron the typhus oxpori-
rants and go over to tho further work of r. Haakon. You wore tolling 1
us that lr. Kaagen, in bay of 19U-'., one. ixu\) went to Natxwoiljr, is
that true?

/s

A I havo said that either tho ond cf A Til or the beginning
\


lCtf.62


3C Jun-A-IS-iS-5-lessor (Int. ft~lcr)

Court So. I.


of May*

Q During this tine, witaaos, was anoth-r typhus vaccination
or sooothlag carried through?

A I can't toll you that exactly* I only know that Professor
Haagon, in the caso of nomal typhus pat ents, had ordered blood tests
to bo carried through and soootincs car.iod then through hinsoif.

Q Sow, witness, if I understand you correctly, there wore nor-
aol typhus cases in the canp too?

A Yoa.

Q V.'oro thjy very rasaorous intho sun or of I9hh or tho spring

of 19Ui?

A Woll, thoro woro about U0 cne^c. I was not working in that
dopertnont and I really can't to?.l you that exactly but I do think
there wuro about 1*0 or 50 cases.

Q Isn't it tru,, witness, that in tho spring or aunrer of
I 9 UI 4 thoro was a regular typhus opideaio In tho caap?

A Ho.

Q Witness, you yourself »*»r-. not a nurs^ in the typhus block
v*.ro you?

A No.

Q Do you know tho witless Grardjoan?

A Yes.

Q Do you think Grandjoan is a reliable and crodiblo parson?

A Yoc,

Q Nor if I tell you rxn: that !V. Grandjoan, hero as a ritnosa
before this Tribunal, has appoared in tho sr-ao wry as you have, and
has testified, under oath, that .. s a nurc. in the typhus block
and that the nuabor of typhu3 cases in t '10 spring and sunm-r of 19Uli
•mounted to 1200, would you say that ir. Grandjoan has lied?

A Certainly.

Q 3ut you uor>- just telling us that r. Qrandjoan tea a re¬
liable nan. Now you say that ho has liod. «hy?


100)3


JC Jur.-A-’E-lS-6-lessi.r (Int* Ba a l- r)
Court He. i.


A In tho whole cep there vx,r>. only about 1200 jxoplu and I
a- new talking about the Metzwoi? or IDthor C'*ip. At tha cost there
ware 2 ,OCO at th- last oewnt.

Q "itivjsc, perhaps this apparent contradiction can b_ cloarod
up that C-randjoan certainly did not say that tteso 1200 casus occurred
at one tiro but that, one after another, throughout ttv; year, tho re
wore 1200 casos.

A toll, that is possible.

:R. HARDY: Your Honor, I :rich when defense, counsel refers to
the testimony of Grandjoan ho quotes the rocc-tf exactly as Or and jo an
tostifiod. I think this will deceive tho iritnoss here.

DR. TIPP: I haven't tho tosti_x>ny of Grandjean beforo no
but I shall bo able to ascertain tho exact pago nunber during tho ro-
co6S and will thon bo able to ii-T *xi the Tribunal" as to when ho ap¬
peared.

IR. IIARDY: There wen: a mt;bor of cases in cnaps outsido
*

tho Mother Camp, as Grandjoan tostifiod.

TftJ HCSIDCffT: Tho Tribunal will now bo in rocosa and thon
tho aatt^r nay bo investigated.

(A recess was taken.)


30 Jttn-A-13-2 C-i-l-c h*n (int. von Sc hen)

Court No. I.

TH3 lARSIAL* The Tribunal la again in session*

DR. ?I?. j hr. President, in accordance with tho roqitst of lir.
Hardy, I have determined when tho witness Grandjoan testified h^rc*

Ho was her_ na a witnoss on 6 January 191*7, hia testimony ia on page
1099 of tho E n g l is h record, pngo 111*5 of the Goman.

Tho testimony of tho witness Hell ia also of interest in thia
connection, lie was horo on 3 January 191*7, hia testimony is on pego
1058 of tho English record, pr.ge 1098 of thj Gomin.

/d'i DR. TIP?:

Q Witness, wo stopped at tho typhus epidemic in Netzwoilcr.

I put to you tho tostirony of Nurse Grandjoen, who snid thsro was u
total mr.'xjr of l,2CO caaos of typhus and I bcliovq I understood you
correctly that you conceded thia number might bo right. If ono took
all caaoa togothorj ia that true?

 Including tho outaido oraapo, that night bo right.

Q Grandjoan wna including tho outaido onnpe, yea. TVitnass, I
should liko to go on to another aubjoct you discussod, thu poison gas
experiments, which !<r. Hoagen cllcgodly carriod out. us far as I can
recall, you said Ha-.gon case back about the end of April or beginning
of Eay ir. 19lij ia that right?

A Yoc.

q ffoll, then will you ploaSc toll ua from your own Icnowlodgo
what you know about thoao gas exporinonts?

A Profosscr Haa.gcn ca» back about this tin, ho had jxoplo
pickod out again fron among the cypaioa i:ho woro in tho camp, who woro
in a certain block and ho put then in tho sane tiro rocos.

q Hay I interrupt you a nooent; how do you know who selected
the oxperinenta.l subjects?

A They wero selected by tho camp doctor and told to coce to
tho prisoner's hospital, they ca» oarly in the morning or at noon, I
don't rojorbor exactly and Haogcn and the camp doctor pickod then out.

Q now roahy people woro taken out of these blocks as possible

KX65


30 Jun—*.-13-20-2-:i-chan (Int. von Schon)
Court Ho# I#


axperinoatcl subjects; was it a largo nubbcr or a few?
A I bo 11cvo eight, there wore four groups*


10!*66


30 June A7-A-o — 21-1-Uurtha^Von Scton)
Court No. 1


r, 0 o i understand you corroctly? Did you say eight?

«» Parhaps eight, about eight*

» The experimmts were carried out on eight persons?

A* Yss*

I believe you said this morning that the so cxporimTntal
subjects included soon gypsies who had already been in the typhus
experiments, is that true ?

a. Yes.

C. How, do you know whether Ur. Haagen ordered the people to come
to the hospital and from what group of persons these people were taken
or whether it was a camp doctor who did this? Do you know anything
about this?

A . Ko, I only know that perhaps en orders from above — I don't
know ~ the camp doctor ordered them to cose to the f>ospital and
Faagen and the S*> camp doctor selectod them; but primarily Haagen.

. ’itnoss, do you know Professor Haagen woll?

«. I saw a great deal of him.

0. ell, the Court has seen ^r. Haagen too. ^an you ploase describe
to us what Ur. Haagen looks lihe?

A. Viell, he is about one meter sixty-eight tall. Ho Had gray
hair. He wore n Luftwaffe uniform, blue-gray. He had a white epaulet,
a golden staff of Aesculapius. He was not fat, but rather stout.

. You knew Ur. Haagen from the typhus experiment?

A. Yes.

r . Now, did he carry out th 'se typhus experiments alone?

A. Yes.

’as no one over there ?

A. Ho'- there won* visitors sometimes.

C. How, I sust put some other testimony before you, witness:
witness. Hire, whom wn h --ard her said that Ur. Haagen cane with


another otabsarzt of the Ioftwaffe.

A. Vo, sometimes people came alone and sometimes not, but

10*67


30 June 47-A-S^21-2-!&irthafV on Schon)

Court Mo. 1 Case 1

I

occasionally he brought see*-body along,

b. °ut when the Injoctiona were cede nobody was there.

A. ‘* 0 , only the assiatahtsl
4. It was a focale assistant?

A. I-s.

There was no other officer there?

A. No.

4. h ow, what happened in this gassing experiment, ’fitness? Just
briefly.

A. I have already said that Profoasor Haagon divided thoso people
into four groups. I an aa^uaing this nuobcr, eight. It night havo
been ten. And then ho wont down with one group each tirao and ho took
a drinking cup «nd an anpul« , a whito aapulo, that ho brought with
hin in a big box. It was put in soot or sooething like that. It was
v.ry well packed. Ho took that out wd ho took tho people down or
rise ho soot for thre; ho had gonr- ahead, and thon they cano back and
w«tVi put to bod.

c -f Ju8t * ainuto, ‘‘itn-ss. >hat actually happonod to thoso
people when thoy wor- away free tho hospital until they caon back. You
don't know that?

A. No.

Q. And you don't know whether Hr. Kaagon porfora-'d experiments on
those pooplo in th. n-antinu or wh thor son-body olso did it and maybo
Haagon was only tho assistant. You can't say that?

i.. No.

C.. Now, what did tho poople look Ilk'; whon thoy caoo back?

A. A hr first wore not seriously affected. iY:ey were usod again
later, 'uid bocccc worse and worso. .’hen tho worst can® hho people wore
trying hard to breathe. They couldn't g»t air| thoy had foan at their
south. Tvrriblo, tr-rriblo to look at. I can't Judge, of course. I only
know that th- diagnosis when they died was lung, oodena. That was deter-
nined by Professor Haagnn and sere of the prisoner-doctors, including


10468


30 June 47-A-S*f-21-3-4£urtha (Von Schon)

Court No. 1 Case 1


this Dr. Kredit, the Dutch doctorl

r. You said, fitness, I belieVe, three people died of these
expericents, la that right ?

a. Five, and see* died in Dachau too;

C. How do you know that.

A. I went with an « vacuation froo Natzweilor to Dachau with the
sick transport. There was a train with t! irt*«n hundred patients
and these people were aeons thee. I know that on the way soee of them
died. lt> had one car for this ward and another car for that ward, and
so wo tod the ceses sorted. And Dr. Kredit reported that those peoplo
had died,but I don't roaeefcor tho oases.

r i, Mow, how any of those people died while thny wore still
in Nat wailor and how any died in Dachau?

*. I can only say that I s-w scon of thus in Dachau. Ono was in
tho hospital with no for southing — had something tho natti.r with
his lungs.

'• how any dead people fron thesa experiments did you your¬
self soo in Natzweiler?

0

A. Fivo.

Q. Those are tho fivo in tho book hero?

A. Yos.

'. Mow, can you, opening tho book, "linoas, toll fron tho book
whon ttose people died? C*n you s ->„ that free tho entry?

A . The nonth, yns.

% How, "itnoss, how docs it happen that only tho nonth is
•‘nt^rod and not tho day*’

A. The dates wore not always given, the dates. Saaetines the
report cane up. It was always reported to the SS and the a ate wasn't
important, only the nonth.

C». Rut if I understood your correctly before, you said that the
death record from which you copied this list was kept in the hospital.

A. Yes.


10469


30 June 4?--®-21-4-Murtha ( V on Sdbon)

Court .Vo* 1 Cise 1

And was kfcpt by prisoners?

A. Yes.

C. Ho*, Witness, it seems rather remarkable that priscners
would not have enough interest in their dead comrades to record
the date of the leath, especially since you say that there was the
Intention of notifying the relatives later.

a. If you will look at the book you will see that in the cases
of the Dutchmen — and I was a Dutchaan — I wrote down the exact
dates or had then written ctotci, because I was especially interested.

The other prisoners , too; tut I was interested in my Dutch comrades,
and if ;cu look at the Book you will see that in the cases of the
Dutchmen the exact date is given.

• "•11, "fitness, are these exact dates given in your copy too?

A. Of the Dutchmen ? Yes they are.

Q. Now, Witness, to go back to Mr. Haagen: Can you say definitely
that Hr. Ha.-gen carried out these experiments or is there a possibility
that you are confusing Haagen with some other Luflwaafe doctor who
was also a Stabsarrt ~ captain — and who to your knowledge actually
did carry out such experiments in Natzwoiler?

A. >hat experimen ts are you talking about, the typhus experi¬
ments?

C. No, I mean the gas experiments.

a. I know only that Haagen only - was the only one who came

to the camp *nd was the only cne who had the interest of having the
case history recorded.

r. You think you can occlude any mistake then?

A. Yes, it is quite impossible.

r . But * ether Haagen actually carried out the experiments, you
don't know?

* — • • _

A. No.

C. Now, “itness, a final cuestion on the witness. Dr. Kredit. Kredit


10470


30 June i_7-s-S^-21-5-4fiirtha ( v cn Sfehoo)

Court Ho. 1 Case 1

was a Dutchman, I believe.

*. Tea.

. G a n you tell us whether Dr. Kredit died?

In February, 19&5, in Dachau.

D2. Tin 5 : Then I have no furtherrueations, Mr. President.

THE P P.LSIP g y r; «ny further cross-examination by a*iy of the D 0 f, :nae
Counsol?

(Ther* was none.)

Haa Counsel for the Prosecution any redirect examination?

UR. H*BDT: The Proarcuticn has no further questions, your Honor.
IMS PRESIDENT: lh* witnras is excused frcci the starid.

(The witness, !Jal#-s, left the witness-stand.)

I understand that Counsel for the Defendant Bocknr-Prcyoeng
has soma documents to offr.

’CH. HARDY: May I incuire at this time whether othtr Dofonse
Counsel will bo prepared to put on their documentary evidence? It
seecs to me that soon of these translations should bo through by now.

TfE Fl^IDBr: x s there any oth-r Defense Counsel prepared with
any of the documents which r- to bo offorod in evidenco?

JR. HARDY: I think Dr. "ill has ono document.

DR. '1LLE: I hove c single document to offer.

THE PRESIDE?^: Till Dr. -^illo have anyfbrtnor documents?

DP. ~ILLE: ffo, only ono.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. "ille ray offer that document at this time.

DP.. 'TILLS: Ur. President, this is Xeltz 25. I have —

THE PRESIDE.'7: Is that document available to the Tribunal?

DR. *'IL1S: Yes.

THE p-'JvSIXNT: "ill you hand than to the tribunal?

DR. 'ILLE: I offer this docuaent as oltz exhibit 2k.

The event described in this document is a visit of professor
Aloxand r to Hirschau wh- ro th* aviation medicine institute of


10L71


30 June 47-A—i —21-6-3!urtha(Vcn Schon)

Court Hot 1 Cas- 1

Professor *lt2e was at that time. I do not believe it will bn necessary
to read the document, although it is quite short. I shall nerely
refer to the fontents and ask thatit be accepted in evidence.

THE PRESIDENT: '~hat exhibit number do you assign to this document?

DR. "ILIZs ‘wenty-four.

THE PRESICEfT: The document will be received in evidence.

DR. '"ILLE: Hr. President, cay I coce back to ay presentation
of documents of Saturday ? I have investigated. The President said
that the so-called document bock was not supplied with numbers and
there was no index. I have inquired in the meantime. Thore was a
misunderstanding in the translation division which has been cleared
up in the meantime. I had only one docu=*».t, which is very extensive.

I had given it to the translation section and it was mistakenly
treated as a document book. That ia why there were no numbers and
not an index.

HR. H/HDY: I may inquire ihether Dr. ^awllk has any further
supplemental evidence inasmuch as I have not any othor document books
for the Defondant Hovon, prrhaps he has already completed his docu¬
mentary ovidonce.

THE PRESIDENT: Has Counsel for the "efondant Hoven any further
documents to offer?

DR. GAfLIX: At the recent I cannot say, Hr. President. I an still
busy preparing my final rebuttal notorial.

)£R. HARDY: That should have b*cn all prepared by now. Your
Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: If thore are any further documents to be offered
and if they are not in the hands of the translation department, it is
very doubtful that they will bo prepared in tine to be offered.

DR. G. UK: The material was offered last week; I really oust
have a little tico to refute it. I an not in the fortunate position
of the Prosecution, to bo able to get in a car and drive to distant
areas and get witnesses.


10.72


30 June 47-A-S^21-7-Murtha (Von Sc ton)
Court Vo. 1 Ca39 1


VR. HARDY: I don't understand what the Defendant's Counsel mans
by evidence offered last week." This is rebuttal evidence. Tour Honor.
If this continues we. will be here until next Dececfcer, letting them
answer our rebuttal evidence.

TOE PRESICE.VT: I don't know — the rebuttal evidence admitted was—
DR. GTXIK: I am speaking of refute,g the material offered by the
Prosecution in regard to the Defendant Hoven, on ednesday of last week,
during cross examination. It is not possible for me within three or
Tour days to obtain the evidence. I an endeavoring to rebut these
documents which have been offered. But if the Prosecution offers this
material so late it is an affidavit of Ack-raunn of the 21st of March
which tho Prosecution was only offering -ow, I believe that I am
justified in asking for a few days i*t least.

HR. HARDY: I as sorry, I can't see tho justification, your Honor;
but I would like to know from other Defense Counsel how aa*.y of them
have their to cum tots ready and can they present r list to the Tribunal
of when they will approx^nately be ready to present these documents
so that we will be able to ascertain whether we should sit nights.

‘o might run out of evidence and hrve to adjourn. The Prosecution is
nearly finishod . c may have twr or three little jobs to cloan up
our case, but other than that we have these docunrnts narked for
identification which I am «,dcavorlng to grt together, and I have
perhaps another day that I an entitled to in the case of the rebuttal.
7h».y have two more Jays left — that is Tuesday and Wednesday. And
if they don't have any material ready, then ve won't finish this week.

THE PffinDSWT: I understood rtien I asked Counsel for the Defense
MKstious the other day that theywould be r«ady by "edn 1 sday end I
also understood all the documents they wanted wore in the hams of the
translation department and that the delay was occasioned in the tr?ns-
lation depertmert in furnishing the documents, !fo on< suggested then,
as I reawnber, that there were further documents to be offered to the

10473


TO June 47-A-SV-2I-8- !&irtha (’on Srfton)

Court No. 1 Case 1

translators.

DR. G/.'LIK: Hr. President, it ia only cat aria 1 to refute the
rebuttal naterial. ~-e have to have that opportunity. If the Prosecution
raits until the laat aimrte and then offers evidence, tf-Tri we have to -
have a certain aaount of tire to be able to refute it.

THE FRSSIDSJrr: Just >Aat evidence are you ref-rring to as rebuttal
evidence, Doctor? You referred a noawit ago to the cross—ocanin&tion
of the Defendant Hoven. That ian't rebuttal evidence.


101,74


30 Jine U7-A-1.TIi-22—1—Prir»au (Int. von Schon)
Court No. 1


DR, G/d*LIX: I boc your pardon. I aean the material which was shown
to the defendant fever, last 'odnesday in cross examination. I an trying
to rofuto that. It has not boon possiblo to find the witnesses fron
whoa I want affidavits, to get than here by now, I assuao that they
•.dll bo here tomorrow or tho next day txit I can't do it any quicker;
bocauso tho prosecution doosn't off or tho evidonce sooner, it is not
^y fault. Hr. President.

MR. HARDYi Your fervor, it is ry understanding — naybo I an
subject to correction — it has boon understanding- that thoso
docunents that the prosocution used durii*- tho course of cross exard-
notion wire rofcuttal dccunonta in tho truo sonso of tho word and bocauso
of that understanding tho Tribunal rulod that our docunonts would be
offorod foroally (taring tho course of our rebuttal and that thoy would

bo narked for identification ctirin;. tho cross examination .period.

' * I

ferr, it is ay position that thoso docunonts mrkod for idontifl¬
ea tion aro rolxittal docunonts and ho tad anplo tino. Ho got thon taro,
throo or four ninths ahead of tho actual robuttal. Tho cross oxanination
of Kovor., truo, was last wook but thare was nothin.- now to spook of
brought out in tho cross gemination of fevon.

THE PRESIDENT t Tho locunonts offorod by tho prosocution and
narked ao identification during tho oxanination of tho dofondants
woro furnishod to tho dofondants long a go. Copies woro offorod to

a

nost of the dofondants. Of courso, thoso dofondants whoso caoos oano

last did not recoive thsa quite so soon but those docunontc aro proper

rolxittal ovidonco, as stated by corneal for tho prosocution; at least,

I assume that thoro is no ovidonco in than that is not propor robuttaL

testimony. I knewr that nost of than was propor rebuttal ovidonco. If

there was evidonce in those docunont that in no way concerns tho

defendants* defense, it night bo said to bo original ovidonco but I

. •

do not think thoro wa3 zaach of that.

How, thoso docunents narked in dofendant Haven's caso wore
hoard during the dose of the caso but counsel tas had those documents


104*75


t


\ *

30 Jtao U7W.-.VH>-22-2-?ria:au (Int. von 3 chon)

Court Ho. 1

fcr scno tiro. If too witnessos or© not available, that iri."ht be true
of accie witnesses nho would not £ot h«ro until next Poll and we cannot
wait indefinitely on the prccurinc of witnesses. It is unfortunato
that witnesses aro not readily available but it is a srla faot and
this ovidonee must bo closed j and I will hoar fro- counsel at any
tine — tOBorrcw or ‘ echos day —- if ho can procure any documents but
documents which will not bo prepared until after that and then will
not roforred to the translation cSopartoent I see very little cbanco
of those documents boirv; rocoirod in ovi done o.

Counsel nay prosont ary particular situations to tho Tribunal. I
will always liston to hin but, os statod soao days sinco this ovi done o
has roachod tho point whoro it rxir.t roach a final determination.

If counsel has a witnoss tomorrow and can procuro an affidavit,

I will endeavor to oxpodlto Ms translation. I have already tclkod to
tho translation doportnont in an ondoavor to oxpodito thoso oattors,

I will spook ayxin, but tho natorial rust bo hero for tho translators
to rork upon.

DR. O/.i'lIKi lir. Prosidont, nay I say somethin*-? I an trying to
obtain it as quickly as posslblo? It is not nntorlal wMch coos bock
for nonths. It is a question of rofutinc the affidavit of .‘.ckornann
dated 21 !!arch which was offored last /odnosdoy. I had no knonlodfco of
tMa boforehand and thoroforo could not rofuto it. If tho prosecution
assorts that it is imatorial, it would bo difforont — it was a
completely new affidavit of which I have had no previous kncrrlodca.

UR. K'.RDTs And it was in tho nature of rebuttal ovi ’.onco, Your
Honor, and tho prosecution feels it waspropor ovidonco to bo off-rod
on cross examination* •

TFE PRESIDENT: In every oaso there always cotes a point whoro
thora is an examination cf the dofondant and then a cross examination
and in that case ovi donee is properly identified to bo offorod as
rebuttal evidence.


10.76


30 Joio U7-^-i.TI>-223-?rir«au (Int vcr. Sohon)
Court No. 1


If counsol can suggest ai rw ay by which he can 7 recuro further
affidavits within the ties specified the ottor day by the Tribunal I
111 bo glad to do anything within ay power to assist in tho presen¬
tation of that evidence. If oounsol will see what ho can do and the
Tribunal will endeavor to procure ovidenoo insofar as possible, but
it nuat cone to an end sons tine.

D?* QtfLIKi Vary well, Jtr. President,

!E. KT.RDT: Tiill a ccenittao of lefonso oounsol, naybo two of
than, cake a achodulo out today or this evening to show tho Tribunal
tow tho rost of this ovidenco will bo presented? Prosocution is or>-
doavoring to pick up shreds of ovidonco ami jait it in to take up tho
tiao and, of eourso, wo have our jroblcns, too, an I wo aro only tvro
or three non as opposod to twenty-threo of defenso counsol. I would
liko to got a sc.ho.dulo to show how thoy aro going to put in thoir
docunant books and who has to conploto then, Thero nay bo sono
dofondants who havo nono.

THE PNESHE.YT 1 Thon wo «m Judgo tho tine. If tho counsol for
tho dofondanto will got togotoar and furnish such a statement to tho
Tribunal and to tho coureol for prosooution, it 'dll bo ap/prociatod
and, if thoy will, do that this ore ring and furnish such a statonont
tos»rrow aorrdxy, as to what documents thoy will hivo to prosont and
wton thoy oxpoot to prosont it.

Counsol for Bockor-Froyson; - .ay procood with tho introduction of
his documents and Dr. Nolto has seno.

DR. NELTE (Counsol for defendant Harr’loser) i In an agreement with
colleague. Dr. Tipp, I havo only two brief questions on which I
should liko to havo o decision of tho Tribunal.

On 18 .fane 19U7 I off ..rod an application to tho Tribunal. It doalt
with a quosUomairo to Dr. Dalactawrsky. On tho 8 th of January, on thoo
day when the prosocution submitted tho .affidavit of Dr.'Balcctowsky
tore, I, according to the instructions of too Tribunal, subnittod a
quostiomairo, as proscribod, to tho General Secretary and asked that


10477


30 Jaao L7-^.-i.77)22-li—?rir*au (ln% vcn «chon)
Court 'So* 1


this quas tionnaira "bo e*von to r. Balachoaiky so tlfct I could use it
as evidence* This application toe .ado on tbs 8th of January 19U?
but I rocaivo no answer*

Every nonth I have asked the Secretary General's offico about
it and every nonth I was told that offorts w^ro bain jade but that
no answer had boon obtained yet. I an not in a position to obtain
this affidavit free Dr. Balachon3ky — or, rather, the answer to the
quoations* I believe that this is an approvod cross axanlnation. If
tho witness *es not appear, then what is sai in his affidavit
against Professor Kandlosor cannot bo used as evidence* Theroforo, on
tho 18th of Juno I aubnittoc! an application to the Tribunal that tho
affidavit of Dr* Balachowaky insofar as it contains statements corv-
corninf-; tho dofon'ant Handlosor should not bo adnittod in ovidonoo
and I ask for a decision on this a. plication boforo I loso all
opportunity of sutodttin further ovi’cmco.

TIE PRESIDE!/* r For a rulirv on such a question tho Tribunal would
liko to knew what has boccoo of tho application which was filod in
January. Of courso, I don*t ronenbor it oaong tho oanjr do tons of
applications which havo ccno to ny desk* I would su • cst that counsol
GO to tho offico of tho Socrotary-Gonoral an! ask that tha ori.rinal
application bo tracod ark! find out when it was filod and if it is
thcro — If not, if they havo any idea what has bocono of it. It has
always boon ry ondonvor to havo tho Tribuml rulo on tho applications
vary promptly. It is ixxisibla one my hava boon lost or nislaid. I
don't know. I havo no recollection of that particular application,

Dl. JELTEx On tho 8th or January I i' not mko an application
to tills Tribunal, I subalttod a questionnaire* to the Tribunal asking
that it bo sont on to Dr. Bala oho .sky*

THE PRESIDE!/!: That is not an a, alication? That is what I rofor

to. It is an application for intorro ation on questions. 1 hethor it is

is an affidavit for a witness or intorre ation, I rofor to then all as

applications; but ay su .estion is that ccunsol i.-raediatoly ^o to tho

10Z.73


30 Jane k7^.-..TD^2-5-?rineau (Intf von Schorl)

Court Ho. 1

of flea of the. Secratcuy-Ccnoral add find out what record they have of
that application, if any. If they have any way of ascertai n ing where
it is or what has beooao of it.

DR. fCLTZ* Then ttero is a second natter, !!r. Prosidont. The
prosecution has sutoittod a now docunont book XVIII. In this docunont
book there is a sworn stctcoent of Professor Reiter of 29 Ilafcch 19U7
corearrd.ru- a typhus conference 29 Docenbor 19U1. This is docunont
JD2506. The prosecution has offerod this as a rebuttal to tho affidavit
aide for Professor HandLosor, ftocuuont »s25. Exhibit 10. It is tho
only docunont in this docunont book XVIII which affects tho defendant
liandlosor. I offor a docunont in cvidonco in that connoctiom Profossor
Roitor hinsolf, according to tho inforaation of the Socurity office is
in tho Hospital and sinco ho has alroacV aftdo two affidavits I do not
intend to ask hio for a thir l; but I havo in ;^y possession a statement'
which Profossor Roitor £avo to no whon I nskod hin about an affidavit
and wantocl to dotomino whether ho had already aftdo any statonont on
tho typhus conforonco 29 Doocabor 19U1. hen I said to hin that in
naklno an affidavit as I wanted it ho should, take into consideration
what ho had already stated, ho said that on 22 Novorfcor 19U6 ho had
boon interrogated by tho pro3oc»tion.


10479


30 un-A-. 3-23-1-Hinabuck (Int. vor. Schon)

Court Mo. I, Caso So* 1.

TK3 PR E S IDE NT: Counsel, let ai ask you, I understand that

/

;*ou have an unsworn statement fror. Dr. Roitorj is that correct?

D?., KELTS: 1 do not hsvo another affidavit, but a statement
by Frcfessor rtoitcr.

TIE rRSilDSJfr: I said an unsworn statement, not an affidavit,
but a statement by him without an oath, without a jurat; is that cor¬
rect?

DR. NEUE: Yes, Xri President, but it was not given to no
but to the Frosecution.

TIE FRESIDEJtf: Wo 11, do you wish to introduce it in evidence

V

or what is your desire?

DR. HE1T3: Yos, I want to submit it in evidence bocauso it
contradicts tl» statement which Ffrofossor Reiter made for tho iVosocu-
tion as an affidavit.

T’E PRESIDENTt Well, you submit tho statoaont to tho Prosecu¬
tion and possibly ho will agree and maybe admit it, I don't know.

UR. HARDY: I absolutely will not agroo to the admission of
it, your Honor. I do not know vhothor I over :md it or not. If tho
prosecution had it Dr. hoito certainly would not hav w it in his hand,
but bo that no it may, ho sutmittod an affidavit fron Professor Reiter.
The prosocution thon submitted a cross affidavit fron ft-ofessor Roiter
portalning to the facts in tho direct affidavit by defense counsol.

Tho proposition is as simple as that. I don't sco any nood
for further evidence from Reiter.

TIE PRESIDENT: Well, counsel has no affidavit from Dr. Rcitor,
and an unsworn statoaont would not be arb.lsglblo over tto objection of
the prosecution.

DR. NEUE: I believe, <4*. President, this is a misunderstand¬
ing- I offorod an affidavit, and tto Tribunal accepted it as Handlosor
Exhibit 10. The prosecution docun.nt KO-2506, ras n second affidavit
free Professor Roitery dealing Kite tho sano subject, as Socuaont HA-25.
- n this affidavit Professor Reiter maizes different statements than ho


1QA&0


30 dua-A-iE-23-2-Bi nabucic (Iht, von Schon)
Court No. I, Case Ko. 1.


&^de on the 22d .of Novenber 191*6 to th: yosocuticr. in -writing, and
for the evaluation of the probative value of the affidavit of Prof¬
essor Heitor, I want to offer this statement wtocb was cede on tho


22 d of HovonJxr to the prosocutior..


JH. HARDY: You act, your Honor, if this was nado to tho pros¬
ecution I aa sure it would be in cy files. If Professor Reiter sat in
hie cell and wroto co a letter and novor dolivorod it, that isn't
southing that I have recoivod* This is not under oath. Ho oxocutod
an affidavit under oath for the defense counsel. Thun wo called him,
presented that affidavit to hia and asked hie for ottor statoiasnts.

Ho gava us statooonts-and swero to those. What this pioco of papor is
is beyond no. Ifc my woll havo written that in November.

Tff. HlESUJENTi fuss tho paper to tho Tribunal.

>S. HARDY: Thoro is no rocoipt stanp that it has boon re¬
ceived by ny affico.


DR. ’iSITE: Hr. President, this dosavat is tte copy signed by
Professor Reiter of a docuacnt which ho alleges ho give to tho prosocu-
tion. If the prosecution says that they did not r.coivo a docuiront,

then I offer it horo for identification. Then tho natter is sottlod

then I won't offer it in ovidonc-, if lr, Hardy cays that he rover got
this lottor fron Professor Roitor — ttan tho anttcr is sottlod.

U*. HARDY: I can stato positively’ that Hr. H-rdy novor got
it, your Honor.


THE FRESIDoJfr: Well, that only answers tho quostion in port.
If counsel for tho prosecution would asc^rt-in whottor that lottor is
in tho file of tho prosecution - so;»jono else nay have rocoived it. I
don't know who prepared tho affidavit.

HARDY: Your Honor, suppose- it is in the file of tho
Prosecution? What is tho point? I don't uncfcrstnnd his trying to
offer tho docurxmt. It is not unc_r oat!:. It's not a docun-nt; it's
just a letter.

THE PRB82DQfT: I understand, but if a paper writing shows


10481


30 Jun-A-HR-23-O-MInaback (Int. von Schon)
Court So# I, Cose 2io. 1.


contradictions between statements aide by a ;ritrv_ss and it is contond-
od that the affidavit prepared by ono party does not conforn with tho
statendate node by the affiant, it night have relevancy, but Dr. Nolto
has statod that if tte prosecution will state it never received this
decunant ho will not offer it. It should bo a conparativuly sirplo
oat ter to ask tho office of the prosecution if rnyono there over re¬
ceived this docuncnt.

i*R« HARDY : It would, and if wo rccoivcd it wo would have it,

your Honor, and defonso counsel has it, so I ca in a position now to
say wo never received it.

THE PRESIDENT: That doesn't altogether answer, because Dr.
Reiter night have undo two copios of tho docixacnt.

12t. HARDY: hell, £ will ohock with ;iy filoc, your Honor, but
I rxi sure that is tho situation as 1 havo outlined it to tho Tribunal.

THE PRESIDENT: Vory well, that rill dispose of thj nattor if
it is corroct. If not, the ‘ribunal will consider it tomorrow.

MR. HARDY: Since this copy is addressed to th- prosecution
nay I keep this, your Honor, to chock with thj oth-r ono?

DR. NE1XE: Yes, there is a photostat too.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for Beckor-Froyseng.

DR. TIPP: Mr. President, first of all, from docinont book 1,
Becker-Prey song, I should like to offer a foir documents which deal
primarily with experiments on hir.an beings. Froo docuncnt book I I
h-.Vo already offered and assigned exhibit numbers to documents 1 to 7.
Documents 0 and 9 I do not intend to offer#

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I didn't hoar you. Would you pic as o
repeat that?

DR. TIPP: Free docixxnt book 1 I intend to offer a few papors
on human oxpcric^ntation. First of all, I should liko to say docunonts
1 to 7 hav_ already been sufccittod. Docuncnts 8 and 9 I do not intend
to sufcnit. The next docuntnt which I should liko to off_r is 3ock«.r-
Preysang Irusbar 1C which is on page 27 of the docuncnt book, and if it


10 t 82


Tor. Schon)


is admitted I shall assign it the exhibit naabor 52 i The docuDont is
the paper by Gill and Forbes.

THE HIES HOT: Has comse-1 for the prosecution this docuncnt

book?

HR. HARD!: Yos.

THE PRESIDENT: Is thero any objection to the admission of
this,docunant?

!H. HARDY: Your Honor, I night ask defense counsel hoir many
docuronts in doc icon t book nunbor 1 ho intends to sufcnit, and I can
look thee over now and giro hie a blanket clonranco or object to tho
onos I wish to objoct to*

DR. TIFP: In this book I intend to offer only Docuncnt 10 ns
Exhibit .52, Ikeumnt 16 as Exhibit 53, and Dociront 17 as Exhibit 5U.
JR. HARDY: I hnvo no ofcjoction to any of tho&. throe, your

Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho docuuonts will bo recoircd in ovidoncu.

Now, counsel gives to docunont 10 tho exhibit rar.hr 52?

•

DR. TIPP: Yos, 52. 16 will be 53 and 37 will bo 5lu Tho
othor docirwnts fron this book I nood not offer. Hew I go on to
docuaunt book 2. Proa this book I should liko to offer docunonts
18, 19 and 20. Tho rost of tho doevrents havo already boon offorod.
Docuinnt 18 is on extract free a scientific pnpor by Karl Kisknlt,

• ■

Theory and Practice of Ifadical Roc-arch. It deals with tho historical
development of oxporirontaiion on huian brings in gcnoral. I will as¬
sign exhibit mnber 55 to this docicunt.

THE PRESIDENT: Will you repeat, counsel?

DR. TIPP* I offer Bockcr-Prcysong docirv:nt 18, Theory and
Prnctico of Ifcdical Research by Karl Kiskalt as exhibit number 55.

UR. HARDY: Your Honor, I have no objection to theso throo
documents, 18, 19 and 20, and I night inquire of counsel if ho intends
to introduce docuaont nuEber 32 in this docuncnt book. It has not
been introduced to date.


10A83


30 Jnn-k-i '3-23—5-Win&buck (Int. von Schoa)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for the- prosecution is correct that
dccuLSRt 32 has not been introduced in evidence.

»• HARDYt If ho intends to introduce that, I have no ob¬
jection either, your ffonor*

DR. TIP?: This docuaont, an affidavit of Professor Zugsehaort,
has already boon offered as a Schroedor document and I cncloso it in
=y deeicont book ooroly for the soke of simplicity. I don't boliovo
that a now exhib it rnebor is recossary, and I don't boliovo I nood
to road froa this docicont oithor. I go on to docur^nt book 3.

Froa this document book I have only tho last docucont, 59-A, an art¬
icle froc niao", "Conscientious Objectors as Guinea Pigs". This
will bo Exhibit 57.

!!R. HARDY: I nust object to that being naaittod into ovid-
onco, your Honor.

THE FRESHEN?: Objection to admission of this docurent is
sustainod.

DR. TIP?: Thun in doemont boo'.: h, free this book I intond
to offer only docuuonts 60 end 60-A. Professor Luxonburgor of Munich
was approvod as an oxpert witness for tho dofonao. Ho was to testify
about oxporiajntation on hixaan beings. Since so such testimony has
already boon given on this probloa, wo have dispansod with this ox-
P-rt. Rj and his as® elate, .Dr. Halbnch, have recorded tteir at- *
titudo on this problon in an affidavit. I boliovo that this fom
will help tho Tribunal noro than testimony fron tho witness stand.

Tho exhibit nunber would bo 58 and 53-A.

THE rRESIDEIfr: What nuab^rs wore thos>., ccinsul? What nun¬
ber? What docisaont?

DR. TIP?: 60 and 60-A in doc leant book U. Doc leant 62, which
is tho only ono which has not yet bo«_n -ffered, I do not intend to
offer.

TliE PRESIDENT: You nust again give ao tno exhibit racbors
for 60 and 60-A. Has counsel for the prosecution any objection?


10424


yc un-A-!3-23-<>^in2buck (int. von ocbon)
Court Ho. I, Case So. 1.


!?-. HARDY: I have no objection, your Honor, but I have no re¬
cord-that tho other four documents ware offered in evidoncc, any one
of the other four. That's 61, 62, 63 and 6U. They nay have boon
whiio I *os out of court. If they have been offered I would just
liko to get tho nunbors for ny records bore.


10Ui5


30 Jur.e-*-3£-2U_L-p e rrin (tnt.'Con Screen)

Court So. 1

»X2 F32SITZ57: Docuaent 63 w*s received in evidence re Exhibit
1 * 3 , Becktr-Treyseng*

HR. HaSBTi mA 64.

THE P7ZSI3TT: I have no record of 64 beln,: offered.

HR. EaHDT: H^ber 64 la Exhibit 7.

D3. nrr(Coonael for the defendant 3eckeiw?feyseng)l Exhibit 7,

Mr. President. 6 l la Exhibit 20.

HH. EAEDT: * nd 62 you do not intend to offer.

na. tippj vo.

THE PRESIDJTT: X na eorry, couneel, but due to the conversation on
the part of the prosecution, X still felled to get the exhibit nunbor
of 60 end oL-A.

DS. TIP?; 5« «nd 51 -A.

THE PRESIDES?: X call it 58 end 50 .

Da. TIFF: Very wall.

THE PRESIDES?: Tou are nob offering 6 l, 62, or 6 U, la thnt correct?

D3. 7XPP: Vo. Kr. President, X ic not offorln* 62 . 63 IB Exhibit

aunber U 3 . Docucent 64 is Exhibit nuaber 7.

THE PKESIIXVTi Veil, counsel, I hnve no record thrt 64 has boon
offered In evidence. Tou sny it's been received as Exhibit nunbor 7.

I hrve no record of thnt, thnt sny be true, but I hnve no record of
that.

HH. HAHDTi Tour Honor, at this tine, in thie Document 3ook Index,
Docuaent Book Vuaber 4, Docucent Vuaber 60 is Exhibit Huaber 58 ;
Docuaent Vuaber 60 -A la Exhibit 59; Docuaent Vucber 6l Is Exhibit
Vuaber 20 ; Doojpent Vuaber 62 is being withdrawn; Docuaent 63
is Exhibit 43; nnd Docuaent 64 is Exhibit 7.

TEE PHZSIDEU7: Thnt agrees with the records for the counsel for
tfce prosecution, the adaisslon of Exhibits 20 rad 71

KH. EAHDT: Maybe I was out of court that dry. X have no objection to
the offering.of those affidavits with those Exhibit nuabers.

IB. TIPF: Hr. President, perhaps I can explain that. Docucent 6 l

10U86


3C Junt-A-3X-2 2 -Pe rr in (Int. Ton Sehoen)

Court So. 1

I offered In the exnr-lr.Ptlon of 3ecker-?reyeeng to support the /

testimony of the witness; nod in the ice way, I offered Docuaent
5U during the dlrect'.wweination of 3ecke^-7r«yseng p» Exhibit 7.

Sow, I cone to Docuaent 5 la the new Supplcnent Docunent 3ook.

Docuaent Book 5 has already been offered.

X3. EAFJYl Whpt Docuaent Book Susher 5? There are threo docuaente,
72, 73 and 7 U that have not been offered.

DS. TIFPx That la true. 72 , 73. ud 7 1 * h«e not been offered.

THE PBISITHTTi I have 72 narked Exhibit $ 0 .

Da. TIPP* Tea, the other two. 73 «nd 7 1 *. I will withdraw.

TEE PRESIDES?: Docuaent 67 la not narked aa having been received.
KH. EA2DTJ Docunent 67 . he intended to introduce that later. That
la on —

Da. TIPP: Hr. Prealdent. 67 is an affidavit of Profeaaor Hr.tthea.

That wp.a originally to be offered boca.uae Profeaaor Katthea aent
ua coplea of tw> reaenrch nasi^yxeents of the cedical lnapectorato.

He gave the affidavit that the contente were correct. The Tribunal
told ne that I wra to obtain tho originals of theao reeoarch
psslgnnenta, ainco n copy certified by tho witcoaa wpa not eufficiont.
In the acantino, the witnoaa had told ne unfortunntoly he hr.e only
cooiea which aro not certified. I ac very aorry that I have to
diapenae with thia evidence, t/eder the ciroxastancea, I can not offor
It, *d I will withdraw it.

THE PRESIDES!: Just explain that altuat'.on again, counsel.

D3. TIPP* ?Tbo ».tthca docunent which Xr. Hardy ncntloned,

Docunent 67 le a etatenent of Profeaaor Dr. Xatthcs in Erlangen
about the way reaecrch aaaignnenta were iaaued, their contente, and
ao forth; I have already offered a nunber of affidavits on this
point. To thia affidavit were attached copied of one reaenrch aaalgi-
aent froa the Xedical Inspectorate to the witness Katthee, nnd ono
to o Leipzig institute at which the witness waa working. The witneaa
had said in hia affidavit that the attneknests, that ia the research

10437


30 Juno-A-BZ-S^J-Perrin (Int. Ton Schoen)

Court So. 1

« •

essiipmento, vere in order. Vhes this document was offered, and the
prosecution objected, the Tribunal decided that the original had to be
offered, that a copy certified ty the witness vne not enough. I got in
touch with the witness and Professor Katthes told nc that he could give
rs affidavit to the effect that the copy agreed with the original, tut
he did not have the original; and therefore, I no withdrawing the
exhibit because I can not conforts with the directions of the Tribunal.

w

TKZ PEZSIDZFT* Veil, the situation now is exactly the sane ns it
wea when the docunent was offered.

MS. HA2DT: That's right.

TKZ P2ZSIDEFT: And tho question turns upon the authority of the
witness Dr. Katthes to certify to certain docuaents to be true copies.

MR. HAteT* That's right.

TKZ FKZ3IDZFT: In the absence of soae extraordinary drcunstrncee,
tho affiant, or the witness who snkee an affidavit could not have
the authority to certify that cert*An prpers are true coplos of other
docuaents. The docunent in its present fora was ar.d is objectionable.
The objection is sustained.

DS. TIP?» Then, I go on to Docwccnt Book Tive, part 2, Beckox^-
7royssng. Docunent 3ook, 75, the affidavit of Professor Enogon which
I showed to Profossor Haagen in the exaoinatlon rad it was offered no
Zxhiblt 51. The next Docunent is Docunent 76 , rn affidavit by Mrs.
7iverowsky. It is on page 385 .

THE P2ESID2FT: 385 of whrtl'I have tho docuaents Becfcen-Preyseng 1
adaitted as Exhibit Jl; an affidavit of Zugcr. EengenT

D3. TIPP: 51.

XS. EASDT: Tour Honor, this docunent book that I have doesn* t hnfo
tho Eacgeo docunent in it, and in the index it is crossed out as if
it warn't to be introduced.


1.0LB3


30 Jurv-A-JS-Su-la-Pcrrin (Int. vcn Sc non)

Court Ho. I.

I suppose because wo had Haegen bore and beard hin in direction
testimony.

THE PRESIDE-VT: Well, I have before so a copy in English and
a copy in Goman of an affidavit by Bugan Haagon. I have it narked
Seeker-?royseng Exhibit 51, 17 of Juno. It was not included in the
docirant book. It is an unattached affidavit.

DR. 7IPP: iir. Prosidont, this affidavit Which you just non-
tionod by Frofossor Haagon which I offered as Exhibit 51 was put in
tho indox of this documnt book ty nistalco. It is not a socond affid¬
avit by Professor Haagon, it is tho sano one, but since tho docunont
itself has already been offered, wo can strike it out hero in tho
indox.

THE PRESIDENT* New, counsel, again what document book are you
referring to. I have ho re before ao a docunont book 5 for Bockor-Froy-
song, but I havo no part 2. I have it horo. Very wo 11, no*/ if you
will start over again with that.

DR. TIP?: I offer Bockor-Frcyscng Doexmont Mo. 76 ns Exhibit
60. This is an affidavit of Mrs. Vivurowoky. It is on pogo 365. I
do not intend to road from this affidavit, Hr. Prosidont. I shall
but point out that llr». Vivorowsky workod for Professor Haagon for
years. Sho workod prisurily in tho field of hepatitis opidonica, and
she confims as Frofossor Haagon hiroelf said that no hirvm oxporijiontc
wore carried out in this fiold. And I should also liko to point out
that on pege 3, in the third paragraph, Mrs. Vivorowsky says: "Ho..."
aeaning Profossor Haagon "...used his now dry typhus vnccino at first
on himself and Miss Crcdol." Tho next sontonccs only refer to tho wit¬
ness hersolf. Tho next paragraph begins: "In 19lih, I hoard that a
typhus epidemic had broken out in one of tho camps. It had boon
brought by prisoners recently transferred free tho East. Prefossor
Haagon had a disinfecting station installed at the entrance to tho camp.
I do not knew what was subsequently undertaken tharo. Fr.auloin 3 rig it to
Crodul had to deal with the Yeil-Folix reactions during this opidonic."


104B9


30 Jun-A-13-2U-2a-Iferrin (Int. vcn Schan)
Court No. I.


I shall ztrely refer to the rest of the contents of this docu-
n?nt. The next docuaant which I offer is Beckor-Froyscng No* 77, Ex¬
hibit nuabor 61. It is an affidavit by Dr. Fritz Witt of Nuernberg.

I should like to point out that Dr. Witt was a witness here on the
28th of February. I an offering this affidavit. Nr. President, to
clear up the quostion of the filo note referat nunb^rs, and the organ¬
ization of the nodical inspectorate once jorc. 1 should like to oall
the attention of the Tribunal primarily to the drawing which is at¬
tached to this affidavit which shews tho organization of tho cffico
of tho cliicf of tho Medical Sorvico of the Luftwaffe as it actually
was. I do not intend to quote fren this docxzaont. Tho next docunont
is Bockur-Froyseng nunbor 78 which I effor as Exhibit 62 . It is an
affidavit by Professor Dr. Knot ho. It is on pego 396 of tho docunont
book. Prof033 or Knot ho says that Bocker-Fraysong suggested to liin to
sot up a training conpr.ny in tho oxporiaent station in tho construc¬
tion ccnpany ot Juotorbog, and Professor Knotho also says that this
auggosti-.n of Bcckor-Froysong was refusod by his superior. I believu
I nust offer that affidavit in ordor to shew that Bcckur-Froycong
had no right to give erdors as tho prosecution oliogod.


1CV.90


30 J.-j-'?-'.- .-25-l-Iesscr (Int., vo:: c.oon)

'*urt i

-ho n?::t document is Uodtor-rrayson 7? , =3 Exhibit 53. ft is an
cfClf-it by Professor !5\ <holl3, iw conlonts ajcin a description of a
research ce3ijznent, how it care about. T.ic witness sa;-s t':at i: x*e was
no choc!:, -o control snorted, and there - s no authority to issue or ora
on th art of the office which issujd tho assiTnont. I do not intend
to '■•.oto .‘ra: tlxis docuxjnt.

frosidnnt, I should li»:o to offer one ore docunent in tho follcr.r-
Lon. The Coe I Lll ronsbrr that m ths so aerator cass, in
the case of Tocu ont IK*-l35, thsro -rsva cousidorable difficulties in
translation, it is a Isttsr fror Ichroo Car tc "L. lor, draft ad by Ur.
schcr-'ro. ser.'. Tho Court will n:«£jor fft tho defenso ob5octet! to tho
original translation of *.t by tho frosocutlon, Tho intorprotsrs *oro ashed
to co , - , ont on this c'ocu:rmt .nd they said th-t tho Goman t:::t was not
.- 'bl'uovs. I was t* mittsd to brirc oa.mtsr-ovid.onco. I havo obtained
on opinion only nc nr. Yant ludolf ntfchsn, ths bred of tin In Ush Topart-
ant of tin Interpretation Injtitu.o of the bidolbor . dnivorsity hco trans-
latsd Jt. Tn liah copiss are boro and I should li!:o tho Socrstary f-or.our.l
to head tho Injlish coiis to tho Tribunal.

I!:. I request that this r.ttor bo tr.’-on up outside tho Court

ith the frosocuticn and -ith the intsr .-rotation dopartnort. o have put
in an rlt-mctivo translation, cortifiod by then in order to avoid coll¬
usion and ar'u ont; not bavin- tho frets frrllinr at y fin:, si-tlps no;;,

I rislx that tl’.is could ho trier. up /ith tho ?ro3sctulor. ovtsido ;ho Tribunal
rr.d talon up before tho Yibunal perhaps ..bclnoaday or Thursday.

ZZ . I-I CUT: Counsol -ill discuss this rxetter with tho lYosocution
sv.teido of Court this e/oning or sc.o of r tino and 3eo if any adjust ant
of tho .-tt:r can bo sedo, and ‘lion roport to tho Tribunr.l; or, if an
a-.rocrent cannot bo ivdc, tlxo ratter sh vld -c brought boforo tho Tribunal
and so.Clod b 7 oirlor.

Jr. Tipp: Yory well.

?.. h *: I lie vo 2 docunent boolrs, fupploncnt Ho. 2 end I'o. 3
Yen Iciplloack. I wonder if ~t. Steinbacar has any ot r sv *-lo: r.tal


104.91


30 Juno-Ii7-A-2~D-2?-2-Ix!33or (Inti, von Oehoon)
Court !’o. I


boobs or arc thes the only t:-o that ho intends to net in' Perhaps ‘ic cor.
put into evidence no". I *.;on't objoci to oithrr one of thon I d~ht add.

01. 37"*I!m'.lE2 (Counsel for tlus defendant Teislbocci): .'to-, the list

•

.■hlch the Prosecution of‘ rod today, about coevrants for identification,

I -to soon :>oro ero 2 '.’orlicck affidavits. Tho defense has no objection
to thoao 2 decuaents bocauso they arc properly corti-ficd. Then I ha’ tho
assijn.ont fxorz tho Court re-'erdin- Inhibit 5, at tener.t cf tho witness
at tho University Clinic, Professor loin: oyer, tht this oeirant should
*o cortifiod. I nroto to Prof:nor lo'mayor and non I fcavo tho cortifiod
cory, so that this document is in order non.

1?.. V 7: ‘'as this one off;rad before as a .Pei^lboec!: o.uhibit?

. •

D?.. IKSirf.uat! :ro, I ;;r.vo it tho old number - Huhibit Ho. 5.

!?.. "IX: Tho .rolocution has no objection nenr that it is in order,
your Honor, ‘.pparently tho Tribunal .-.chitted that provisionally.

rr: : r.;i I ?• I cssuio t;: t it -as adt:;d provisionalllefer-
onco -.rill •« .-ado to this natter in tho record, ' hat is tl:. t doer. :ont
nuribor - Doiplboocb 5?

It is Ceicl’ooock 3ocurx>nt 2li, uhieh is addbit .o. 5.

TIT. I'.VII " 7: lay -ho record show that Doislboeck ’Jocuront 21., Doi"-
Iboocl: bt’dbit 5, was fomally -.‘nitted in cvidonco, boin;; correct in forn,

DPI. 'Til: - '/ And then tho Tribunal nsk;d no about a doer, ent */aich
T. offered in Hn-lish - an ^ncernt fro*: a book hr Critchlor to -jet * roan
translations lor tho Tribunal end tho Prosecution. I hero lied it translated
and I ivo you copios non.

'. . -Pi- The docuront .ihich you arc .ottinj a Cernan copy of, your
lonor, \ik eh is Soi-lboccI: Ixhi'oit 37 , rrthrr bocur-ont Ho. 37, '.fas Cei-1-
bosel: idd.it Ho. 30, I believe.

DP.. 3 .'.H~p.tr ;• ’fai, it rx Inhibit 30. It t. 3 just a Psmen trans¬
ition tli t UU3 .dsain;,. Then, as 'rfdbit 36 , I she Id like to offer
.-Udavit of Pr. .alter Pexlc, fror. :-* "ocurent Pool: 2. The m; bar is

3?. It ms in the 3upplo:;nt on > .0 UjG to 15U. I do not intend to read

• •

it, in order toxvc tiro. It is properly certified.


10.92


*o. T


r.. VT: Deos thj Tribunal hr.ro copies o' the -^nplish of Docurnnt
boo!: 2, tkrt is docucnnt 39, -*ich just .ras offered as inhibit 36 'oi-lbocc'.:?

T.ZZ .'TIXOT: Arc those Defendant fci^lboeck docuaont boolrs? Do,

:."o hav6n*t those hare.

' T.. r_'-TUr- Bora is one copy, r°'— Honor, and the others can bo pickod


X.. 373UT.U?.: I hero than boro.

:nil- I loro ere a sufficient nuiicr of copies.

X. SCTF.JCSt And hire is tho Canaan, And then tho last document
uhich I intern', to subnit today will bo L-fiibit . 37, th- list of nnnos of
tho --naios.

Z.Z V. 31 XT.- Just o r».ont, octor, *..a haven't rccoivod these c’.ccu-
nonta yet. 1'cr.r lAst'doomsnt era you offering, Doctor?

in’.“ l' : A nair document. I have already -ivon tho original
to t!io locrotary Conoral. It is p-rt of .:: ibit i'o. 3l», a black cover *..lth
tho nr as of tlio sypoioo. linco tho erso is conplctod new I should liko
to offer this list officially. I h va ashed tho Gan.r-l 3ocujtrry 1 s
offico to prepare photostatic copies for tho Tribunal and tho Drosacution
already has copi-s.

71. : Tour Honor, I don't f _nk Vo introduction of tho list aa

contained ir. tho black cover is r.c.soary .3 a aoparr.ta nuh.r. I bo-
•

li.vo frt the ch.-rts and tho 2 boohs traro introducod as Daiylboack Hflbit
?3l» and the 2 books that -ro includod in thiiibit ~}h -va ona 'hie'.'. !ian

t

t’;o black cover th-r«on, where those lists of nvo: ar. found. I thin!:
it .a id save trouble and would not craato too =uch difficulty if ^:o con¬
tinued to !ajcp t.on under ona nuQber, 3b, rat:*, r Van subnit tho list on
tho cover of tho black boo!: as an additional nusfcor.

T.Z rvsrarr- I understood Baislboac!: Docuaont 39 ha* just boon
offered aa fbdxibit 31:; an I Jrong 7

:r.. :vaw Ho. 36 .

X. ITX: 3T.t Tes, the last nunbor was 36 , docunent 39, Hliibit

• *

36, affidavit of Dr. ed. .'alter fohda. 'aid now I wanted to 3 IV 0 an e::-
'..ibit nunber to tho list of nr :s but I aurea wit tho *r os ecu.tor that it


10.93


l


30 *Jur.c-h7-A-lSD-2$-ii-b_33er (Ir.t. von Schoer.)

Court li> I

is not necessary to pivo it - 3c>srata wris r. All I m inter-3ted in i3
tv. -t the list of nnacs bo redo cornlete. On the photostat copy of the
black cover there tc 29 nn.-ss. Cr. the list, th. fever charts, there arc
11 otlcr tvziza; tit t rJ:.3 Itf) altogether. Der;lboec!: rererbers definitely
th t tho lest oerporinontal mebar was a person nazel ho'f end ,"'i3 was some¬
body n-Tvjd ’heifer. The witness, Leafinger, said that Kicfor was in tho

c:rxjrl ent. Tho only ones that .to raissins, then cro ;crhans 20 and !j2.

•

Cr. tho occasion of tho eross-aaxminati'R of tho witness, hettback, by
Vr. ilartiy, ho mention .*d a neno diich is sup osed to bo ho. 20. Unco I
do not havo a list of -y cun I cannot choc!: it, but that nay bori'jht.

Then, of tho TTholo mBb.r of nancs, only cno is missing - th t would bo
l!o. U 2 . I haven't found ! in on any list and it is nfossiblo for no to
toll the Tribunal what this last name is, that oth.r.lso wo have all tho
1:3 nr. ms.

TIC TSrSZOZTti -That was tho o:5iibit nurib-r of that bool: itself?
h”. ”• 'Ji- The j Mbit msib.r of th.- charts and th 2 boota that
Vont over in tho cross-eranlnation of tho dofondant Tciylboccb, is
3ei-lbocc:: 2=Mbit fo. 3!i.

m PTSinr.fr: .ire there any copies of those lists for tho Tribunal"
ff. TTTIIT.." fa Ios, I can ,ic ;-ou copi-s, but I asked tho
"acratary Con ra.l's o"ico to :.v.!:o ;xiotootctic copies and this "ontlorwn
I: era v.s kind en-u^h to or* he •'ould tako care of it and pa.vo no a co.rr
■n! the prosecutor a cop.* and I would liko to a3k hin to ivc tho Court
lj copies.

nn . SI T T: Then copi s -rill bo furnished to tho Tribunal?

-TXT: Tour Honor, tho V-otostatic copies of tho p-yo is not
actually necessary. Tr. 3 te inbayor .as rsado a certified copy of tho narco
as , ritton or. th.- photostatic :opy -i:c*. 1 think wld bo suf ficient, ratlwr
’fran h-vin~ tho book rc-pioiostat.d. \3 a atter of fact....

Tl! r.V'Cl T: :y reference *~s -croljr to t!»o photostatic co;y
of • _-t pa. c of the rcsua.

1'.. : HUT: That is vat I *ean. I n.-a.r. it has been photostated


1049A


30 J-T.o-w 7 “A-- 3 D- 25 - 5 -I»~ 3 scr (Int., Yon Schoen)

Court iJo. I

*

or.co end I have a copy end the Tribunal nay havo copy if they -fi3h end
I -.-ill take one of these in lieu of it. I think thi3 is sufficient.

TIC .V.T»IlZr:- Probably that typo..ritton list of neros '-.111 anir..:r
the *orpo3c of tlic Tribunal,

DP. STSUn'JCT.: Thin I havo.

TC Pr , .TiIP~17: Ju3t one no.sont, Vo.: this list of nan:3 is 3unplo-
nontcry to uhnt Bci^ltocck erd libit?

IT.. Tl'PDT: This list of nanea is the sene list of nan .a no con¬
tained in tho bleak cover of tho boo I: that is in Inhibit 31*.

Til: :■ '.SSCUT: Thon this photostat and this list is a sv.pnlo-
nont to Dci.lboock "htftfbit 3U?
dp, iTsna-.aii: ics.

lEODTt Tos, you can call it that, sir.

-nr: IT. SITITT: Procood, doctor.


10^95


30 June 4*-kJ‘jC_2s_i_Ur=£y (Von Schon)
Court X


IE. oUEBlUB: I a«k the Tribunal to approvo an export Dr.
Glatzl froa Tlensburg. X havo a atatcscr.t frca hia In ay D-cu-
aent Book Bo. 2, but It la Inadequate ainco I could not give hia
any data on wtlght. X vrote to hia and aakod to dona ho re or oleo
to give ac a written opinion. He proalaed to do ao, but ao far I
have not received the opinion. Therefore, I aaked tho Tribunal to
bo able to offer thla opinion If It arrlvaa In a few dry«. Tione-
burg hae very bad poatal connoctlona; It la In the Brltlah xone,
and it waen't poaelble to do thla Curlier. I bcllovo tho prooocutor
will have no objection to thla delay.

The. PttSXBCTt The tribunal will hoar fros Counael when tho
affidavit or atatocent or opinion or whatovor ho calla It la rc-
coivod. If It la received before *cdncaday evening, It will cortalnly
bo adslttod.

LB. STMHBAUKBt And today I aakod K r . Hardy whothor I can
cosplote ^ eloalng brief and go away, loavc Burnborg, whothor tho
water e*ac la finlehod. Ho eald, "Toe". I waa vory happy to hoar
thla, bit after tho rcccaa he told oc that tho proaocutlon lntor.dcd
t« call the witnoaa *arl Hoollonralnor again. Therefore, I otould
like to aak the prooocutor whether ho gavo no thla Information
officially or whothcr that waa not official?

KB. HAfiDY: Tour Honor, tho prcoccutlon la entertaining tho
thought of perhaps recalling Hocllcnrhincr to got hia toatinony.
Howovor, aa I oay, wo woro sorely entertaining the thought and Hr.
•'oHanoy and I woro going to have a conference on It Into thla aftor-
noon and I seroly atatod that to defenao counael so that I could
alert his In cnao he decided t- lcavo for Vienna before tho ond of
tho wock and if we did agree in a conference the Tribunal would re¬
call tho witncaa Hoollenrainer. That la puroly tentative.

CEh PELSIIRTl Tou will notify the Tribunal at the opening f
tosorrev's serning acaalon whether you expect to call the witnoee
Hollenraincr?


10.96


30 June 47 -A-J jC_26—2_UrEcy (Ton Schon)

Court I

KE. a-aDT: Tea air.

IS. oTLXSBaUIB: Than I hare nothin* noro to any at thie tlao.
TO. FELSimrrt Tha Tribunal will bo in rocoaa until nlno¬
th irty o' clock tcanrrow eernin*.

TEI Hi a S E ILt Tho Tribunal will be in rccoas until nlno-thirty
o'clock tosorrow aornin*.

(Tko Tribunal adjourned until 1 July 1947, at 0930 houra.)


10497


Ml

1 i’jlj^^-FL-l-l-Galla^ser (Int. van Schor.)
C-urt So, I, Case I


Official transcript of the African
Military Tribunal in the oat tor of
the United States of Africa against
I'arl Brandt, et al, defendants, sit¬
ting at Numbers, Go many, on.l July
1947, a930-1700. Justice Boala, pre¬
siding.


THE MARSHAL: Persons in the c our trace will please find thoir seats.
The Hon :r able, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tri-
biuil I is as in sossian. Cod save tto United States of Anoricn and
this honorable Tribunal. There will be ard^r in the court.


THE PI


Will


EKT: Mr.


Marshal, will you ascorteln if the defendants


are all procont in court?


THE MAHSKAL: Kay it ploosv your Honor, all the defendants arc pro¬


sit in the court with the exception of tho defendant Oborhausor, who
Is absent duo to illnoes.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Clerk will note for tho roca-d tho prosonco of
ell the dofondanto in court with tho oxcoption of dofondont Oborhausor,
uho Is hospitalized or. ccount of illnoss puraiont to tho orders of
the prison physicirn.

Ur. KjiEDT: In coeplioreo with tho roquost of tro Tribunal that tho
Przsocution stato the position in regard to tho calling of tho witnoss
tori Hoollcnroinor. Tho Prosecution at this tiao requeots that tho wit¬
ness Karl Hoollenricnor bo racellod to tho witnoss stand. It nay bo con-

. , *

veniont to roccll hin at 12:30 this aftorncon rather than this corning,


sad then tho dolonso can c >ntinuo with thoir docuauntation in as nuch
the witnoss Hoollerreir.vr h~r not boon alerted. It should bo 1:30, Your
H-jnor, I ca sarry.


Dr. STfDEAUEP.: Mr. Pnir-idont, it would be be a good sign that

*

think it can dispense with this witnoss, but

objoct to a renewed oxanination of this

called by tho Prosecution as a robuttal wit-


told or forced tho Prosecution to say.


10493


1 c' l::-rL-i-2-Gcllafihor (ir.t. von Schon)
C urt Ko. I, Case I


"I boro no further questions." By caking this statement he indicated that
the uxcainction of the witness was completed, thereupon, I also said
that I ted no questiens of the witness. If this witr^ss is to bo called

to the stand cgoin> after there has bocn an opportunity to interrogate

• * “*• * * I - J 1 +

and to tell him what Laubingur testified to just bo fore hin, then

I b. lievo that the value of this witness is alight, and it would bo pre¬
judicial to ell the dofensu counsol, because then, of courso, wo would

Mko application to ro-exaoine our witnossos on inak points after having
t;W then of faulty material of the trial. For those legal reasons I ask
this application be rejected, but if counter to ny expectations tho Tri-
twnal will grent this request, thon I oato ny application on tha basis of
tho cental condition A tte witness Karl Hoollonrcinor. When a rogrottablo

incident occurred, and recess was called, a woman whoa I ted not "known

•

befono caao to no and said that she was Ho Ion Hoollenroinor, tho wifo.

There wore very few defense counsel presont —

Kr. HARD!: This is all hoar say basod on dofonse counsol's ovidonco
ttet ho is building up. I can not see what that has to do with tho ad¬
missibility of the witness.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel may procood.

ER. SEIKBAUERi She nskod ao to help'tor husband, saying that thoro
' s mo thing wrong with his hud. He had been in four experiments, and
* M sufforing groatly. But nit this circumstances alone, but a much raoro
irp rtant orvo has occasions no to cake this application, I tevo ted groat
difficulty in trying to find experimental subjects ttat woro scattorod
throughout Germany so far as this type is concerned, and I cooo across
t'rl Hoellonroinor.. I went to sou hie, and I triod to find him at his
x t wn. Then I sont a doctor to talk to him. He told this doctor ho
r, ~ in four oxperiaonts, and that he was very such excited and dis¬

turbed. This doctor ease to ou and said wo can not use this ran aw a witness


10199


1 * - -7- '-FL-l-3-GaUagher (Int. van Schon)

Cxirt No. I, Case I


•° - 8 0 pathological liar* One aist grant even a young doctor tho abi¬
lity to Judge that thia person ia not quite nornai. Therefore), I aak
that before hia examination th.it Karl Hoelluiroincr bo exasinod by a
doctor appointed by the Tribunal, and that the Prosecution bo given an
on rtunity to participate alao in tho examination by tho doctor.

T«E PRZSIDZNT: Any other defense counsel have anything to any on
this subject?

DR. STEINBAUER: May I continue, Ur. President, I aa almost finiahod.

THE PRESEZliTs Tea, I thought counsel hod concluded.


10500


1 Jnly-k-FL-2-i-te-oss (Ir.t. von Schon)

Court Ho. I, Com I

DH. ST3L'34tEB: In case Houllonrcincr ia called to tho witness
stand I further ankc application lroodiatoly to send q asssongcr to
tho liurnborg-Furth District Court in Brlongon and got a complete record
jf the filo of 19 March of Karl Hoollonroiner who was born on 14 March
1914 in Furth. This -could bo done within two hours. Tho reason is that
J-rl Hoollenroinor ia not unknown to ay colleagues. They told ac that
to their kncwledgo Karl Hoollonrcinor must havu bcon convicted ct loast
L2 tinea. He lied to you. Ho was asked whether ho had boon convicted
and hs said, "No," I don't havo tho German record boro but 1 rcracebor
that. My colleagues hove told no that Hoollenroinor has boon convictod

0 • •

for theft, fraud, aaanult, etc. Thoroforo, I wont to tho ponnl rogistry
end the officials said that aa a privnto person ho could not give no
rny information. I oust, therefore, cak tho Court to help no. I wont to
tho Secretary Gornrnl *a Office yostorday and ho also Cold no thet wit-
mt an order from tho Court tho Secretary's General's offico could do
n thing. It ia without doubt necessary in Judging this witness to do¬
te mine whothor ho told tho truth on this point or not and whothor wo
are dealing hero with a decent person or with a porson who has boon re¬
peated ly convictod.

Mr. H..RDY: Your Honor, Prosocution wishes to point out that I be¬
lieve ny words at the tiao of tho interrogation hero in tho Tribunal
in connection with tho witness Hcellonroinor wore duo to tho confusion
and duo to tho conduct of tho witnoss. I had no further quostions at
that tine - that is in arxw^r to tho defense. Secondly, dofonso counsel
have called witnosoos back to the stand, and third, tho testimony of
Karl Hoolonrainor is doerxd to be essential and necessary in this caw.
He whatever ftis-record nay bo that the prosecution has no knowledge of,
he vcs experimented on in tho sea water experiments and has knowledge
of them and, in addition to that, he underwent at least one of than.

IKS PRESIDENT: Counsel for the Prosecution having requested tho
right to call ?Car 1 Hoollonroiner again to the stand, tho Court, having


10501


1 !ely-lt-FL-2-2-GrDes (Int. von Schon)
Court No. I, Case I


i.xjd cainscl for Prosecution and counsel for the defendant Beigl-
b*cfc In resistance of Prosocution's application, it is tho order of tho
Tribunal that tho witness HocUcnrciner say bo recalled to tho stand.

C.ur.se 1 for the defendant Bciglboeck any hnve an order of tho Court
_tch will assist him in procuring any record of tho witness Hocllroincr
t Zrlangor. If a request will be presented it will bo imaodiatoly si-

and acc aaplistod so that counsel will be aided in every way by the
Tribunal in gaining the information ho desires. And, of courso, counsol
f jt dofoneo nay rebut th«. testimony of this witness. Undor all circums¬
tances tho Weight to bo given to this witness called boforo tho Tribu¬
nal is for tho Tribunal to determine. Counsol will have tho privilego
of cross examining the witness. Tho witness my bo rocallod to tho stand
b.ing undor custody under ordor of the Tribunal, ho will bo undor guard
at 1:30 o'clock this oftornoon.

Dr. GAMJK: (for tho dofendant Hoven) Mr. Prosidont, in tho list

>f exhibits which ore to bo admitted whioh was givon to you yesterday

thoru is document oxhibit 523, NO-2313. I intend to have a handwriting

•

expert text tho correctness of this docuaont and offor an opinion, An
export is here in the building and I ask tho decision of tho Tribunal
that tho herdwriting export bo nllowod to oxamino tho docunont in tho
General Secretary's office.

TIE PRESIDENT: What io the nuabor of that oxhibit, counsol?

Dr. GAtfJK: 523, Ur. Prosidont.

I!r. HARDY: Tour Hon r, I haven't hoard tho remarks of counsol. I
ted the switch on tho wr.ng nuabor and didn't got tho translation. Ro-
pjat it ploaso.

Dr. GAi.XIE: Exhibit 523, NO-2313 has a pencil notation on it which
nos discussed horc in court. I want to have a handwriting expert oxamino

r*

THE PRESIDE?.": Counsel is cornet. A hartfwriting expert produced
by counsel for tix defendant Hoven may oxamino tho document in tho of-


10502


1 Juir-M-FL-2-3-Gro88 (Int. von Schon)

Court !.'o. I, Caao I

:ic<- :f tho Secretary General under supervision by an official of that
agency. The clerk of this court will advise the Secretary General that
the Tribunal has cade this order for that examination.

Ur. HARDY: What reference is that - to tho notation of tto date
which is on the document?

THE PRESIDENT: Yes.

.

Dr. G/JfLIX: And then on tho list, ttr. Prcsidont, thoro pro docu¬
ments, Exhibit 526 and 527, NO-2366 and NO-23SO, which arc non to bo
finally admitted. Document 527, NO-2380 is a legal opinion by tho SS
Judge, Dr. Uorgnn. I bolieve it is not permissible fa- logoi pinions .
to bo handed in as oxhibits.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel any prosent tho objection whon tho oxhibits
aro offored. • •

Dr. GAWLIK: Thon I should like to call tho attention of tho Tribu¬
nal to tho feet that the final decision about tho admission of tho af¬
fidavit of tho dofondent Hovcn, NO-429, Exhibit 281, has not boon reach¬
ed yet. The Tribunal postpenod this docision until after tho dofondrnt
HJTon was ox na i n od. I should bo grateful if I could havo this docision
so that I cen considor it in writing ray closing briof.

THE PRESIDED: Is that exhibit contained in tho list which is bo-
f;ro tho Tribunal?

Ur. HARDY: Subject to tho prcsidont it was admitted in ovidonco -
duo to tho fact it was not strickon by the Tribunal I assuraod it was
admitted.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho exhibit will bo admitted in ovidonco.

Ur. HARDY: I boliovo, your Honor, defense counsol was to proparo
a list as .to how cany reaaindor of supplemental documents would be pro-
aented and that list was to bo ready hero this coming at 9:30. I won-

-*-r if thoy have- it ruedy?

THE PRESIDENT: Has defense counsel prepared tho list suggested by
the Tribunal yesterday afternoon as to the exhibits thoy propose to of¬
fer?

10503


1 July-'-FL-2-A-Gross (Int. von Schoo)

Court No. I, Caso I

• Any dcfer.ao counsel c.jm prepared <o offer any further docuaunts?

-fr- HAHDY: Yxir Honor, I oa not in a position to put my more pro-
;-cuti a\ evidence in at this tino in as much as this document mar ted
for identification, the index, nhich I chocked yestefday afternoon
there is a couple of errors in it - inaaauch they skipped somo of the
: ounents in cutting the stencils. I am having it rccut and the books
put together in a prepwr fora. I didn't check it before they cut it
but I »x\‘t have it ready until aft-moor. but 1 assure you I can tako up
tho rest of tho aftomoon with the witness Hoollreinor and I think I
will nave ay identification documents ready.

Dr. FI£L£IHG: Ur. President, tho list of when it might bo oxpoctod
that defence counsel could oftar further an to rial has n>t boon com¬
pleted because wo have not been able to gut in touch with saio of tho
defense counsel. /eotonlay I talked with tto Secretary Conoral about
the subject of translations and he told bo wo had to expect tho trans-
inti jn brcnch to trke about 2 weeks from tho time documonts cro turned
ver to then before cdepleted, N«, in tho last discussion which tho
C .urt had with defense counsel the Tribunal said that all supplonontal
d-.cunonts would be accepted which woro handed in to tho translation by
tho 3rd of July. 1 believe there will be c-naidorablo difficult if tho
Translation actually takes two wuuks for coaptation.

THE PRESIDENT: If counsel understood tho Tribunal to answer that
all d cuacnta handed in for translation by tho 3 July would bo accepted
it is in orror. I aa ir.f row' by tho Translation bureau that counsel
Fleming for tto defendant A-ug wsky xi last Friday, June 27 hondott in
I think 153 pages of a do c um en t to bo translated. That was entirely too
Into to tend,documents in for Translation. That means a task of 153 nan
•’ ors to translate. I can't uolcrstar.d why counsel was so si» in hand¬
ing those to the tranalati xi department. To hand them in on Junc^ 27 is

«

too late to bo presented for a'-bisaion — was entirely too late and
b-ymd any huacn possibility of having thtc ready.


10504.


1 j l;--"-FIy-2-5-Gr=3= (in*, van Schon)

Court Ha, I, Ceao I

Dr. PLEUDC: l£r. President part of tho docmxnts camo into ay
hands only very late but I would like to point out something further.

The closing briofs of tho dofonse counsol - I don't have all tho figuros
together, tut as far as I can soo now will be 1800 to 2CD0 pages. Tho
Tribunal said that closing briofs had to be ready by 7 July. If tho
translation takes 2 weeks we will not bo obis to got the cluing briefs
in tine are! Ur. Vnrtona told oa yestorday that would take up this matter
with the Tribunal xace again.

Ur. HARITf: As I uixloratood it, your Honor, tha Tribunal mo anxious
to have tbo colsing briefs into the translation department boforo 7 July
and then tho translati:n would havo tho closing briofs of defonso coun¬
sel Prosecution could road in German using soo» of our Gorann speaking
ottomios. And, if wo had any answers to onto wo could do so but to
filo tho briofs in the original language by 7 July and thon it could bo

send to translation Ottl by the tioo the caso is completed tho Tribunal

•

would havo the briofs in vory good foro.

THE FRESIEENTs Uy rocollcctixi is that counsol for prosecution is
c rroct. That tho briefs woro to bo made by 7 July in tho Goman lan¬
guage and copies of th. briofs in Gorman furnished to the Proeocution.
Tho mattor of briofs is an entirely difforont pr .position from the mat¬
ter of tho docuoonts which aro ovldonco because as tho Tribunal stated
tho Tribunal has insisted thvt tho ovldonco be all boforo tho Tribunal
very prxiptly. I don't kn w - tho Translation department has boon work¬
ing very hird and I understood they would havo some of tho dofonso do¬
cuments available lr;a day to day, today, y^jterdry and tomorrow. Can
any Gorman defense counsol give the Tribunal any information as to h:*
:any documents, ore in tho hands of tho translation dopartoont besides
the 153 pages on cohalf of tho deforciant Urugewsky? Has any dofenso
counsel present boforo the Tribunal this morning any untranslated do¬
cuments in tho hards of tho translation department.?

10505


1 ' - - -3-!-L;S5cr (Int., vor. Zc'.iosr.)

Ccvrt . 0, J

• •

If yaur Honor plaaa o . If your Honor con coo fit to
roco a for IS rdnutcs, the Prosecution ■.'ill endeavor to *,ot our docinonts
xrixd for identification end bring thai ’-ore end present thon et this tiro.
In tlB amti.no, ’cfonso counsol con hero e conf:ronce end nko cut a list
jvat -.irt docuieents they hove at tho trensletors end uh.nt documents thoy
.--.and to produce.

.I.’’, e’.r.msirr: Tho Tribunal -*ould surest, or nde:.d insist, that

lofonso counsol furnish saw date, of th t naturo to tho Tribunal. Could

•

r.ot tho Prosecution call tho ^fitness ollonroin .r this nornin-.

-■ Jo can call ths -.ltr.oss HoUonrcinsr ny tino your "onor

pleases.

P'ff'I CiT* I surest that you cell the *..ltnoss "ollonroinor nov;.

T:. " • It 'rill tako so vor el rdnutcs for iiin to '» broujit up fron

tho vdl, ;-our Honor.

TIT. P.: ZTCMi Unturciay.

f'.. .7 : HO: !r. rtosidont, this noon, eftwr tho recess, I 3 ’iall
• -l in a list c doetnonto sh ero not jut translated.

1. HVOT- It should also bo called to tho attontion of tho dofonso
< ■'ol that attomo7 >tciribnuor should bo called to tho Covrtroon for
t! '.s err. dnation of Hollorroiner.

~r .r,l The Tribunal will bo in rccoss; tho uitn.ss Hollcnroinor

-*■ 0 called end t ‘.to Tribunal advisod as soon as ho is ready. Counsel in
'•Q txmfciuo will undo-vor to proc-ro t-'ds list of hi3 docxuvmts.

' :Ki Ttiank jx, your Honor.

TIC ?. TilfCT- • Or. :io.-ninG?

' IT' : a. ?r.3idont, I Irvo 3ust heard th:t Dr. Itoinbauor
-robabli* gone to furth in connection with thas Ifcllcnreinor natter so
- — *ill Tot bo present. I shall find out irr mediately .

1C “.rUDCiT: I don't understand Ivr.r Dr. Itoinbar r could have done
t :: t*» Tribunal !ias signed no order that *..111 enablo hie to .iro-

‘:o information -thf. eh he desires. Ho lias arobably jone to his offico


10506


I July- 1 33-3-2-1^'sor (ir.t., vodchoon)
Scurt ISo. I


to -ircpc.ro tba or'or. If you ccn sdvi30 '.sic th t tho v'itn.ss •.'ill jo
e-lice’ this nornins; but ho c-’umot xvo loft, bocruso if he is \ 0 in 3
ithout th t ord-iT it '.'odd ho useless.

The 7ri : r nr! -rill ncr bo ir. recoss until tho Tribunal is o<M.sod
thrt counsel is ready -.. 1 th tho t/itnoss lollonroinor.

(A recess ra trfren.)


10507


1 dul^P- 7-- (Xnt. von 5 choon)

?ourt : O. i


.T~. Tho Tribunal is a-ain in session.

.. . -V- The prosecution -i3ha3 to recall tho witness Karl : Too 11-

onrainor to tho : witness itand, lour Honor a.

7": TTTi -J.T: Tho lirslnl will sc a o n the witness oollcnrainor.

'". J, : XZ L i r:Z'M:: 2, a witness, took tho stand end testified.

-i follows:

J'*jn iT"i:T>: You will raise your ri^it hand and be sworn. I
r ;.-r by od, tho .Urdhty and Crr&sciont th-at I .111 speck the uro truth
*nd *.rtll withhold and add no tiling.

C ’itnoii reported tio oat!:.)

CITlTr Counsel my procood.

Dir.xr n-dr.’iTicn

;; :vzr:t

r ltness, your na;» a-ain ia l-arl -ioallonrcdn-r?

• • •

< •• — 3 *

itr. ®s, at tho closo of ;-our testimony tho oth_r day, you wero
proceeding to toll t:io Tri’vnal about your activities .-rt.r your arrival
‘t t"to 'l-.cliau corjpantrr.tim car.?*’

'■ •• »• • •

*! a; j '--m did 70 U amvo Tor tho Tint tiro at t!:o 3aohnu concen¬
tration carp?

*. Th t was about tho * lddlo of July.

. - 1 then you stayed at tho cany hospital .“or a period of ono or

todays?

A In •uaclrjit*?

"o, in D ach a u , after your arrival?

A I'as, Tea, ir. Dachau. •

n "-nd then ycu wore a: mined physically and “Iso rayed?


‘.hon ft r yna ha:- beon physically .raninod and : .-rayed, vhttt

r-d to you?

■Tian, a aero into a 3o-call_d surgical dopartnent cf tho hospital.


10503


1 jn>'-fa7-i^:ED-6-?-Pcrrin (In*-., vor. Icbocn
"mart ito. I


*orc lip of us on. Then a dee ter c.-zb to U 3 , - nan ftron tho TAiftr.raffo,

-nd Iio acrrln.d us. 2 had to tf:o our cloth.3 off -nd line up. '.nd Jiq

• ^

a-id, *Jter, you trill be -iven jood food, as -ood as you have novor had it,

-nd f or. rmi irill bo hungry. You .ren't jot anything to oct, end you irtll

' -ns to '.rink son rrator . 1 One of too prisoners nhcso.narB ires kudi Tr.ubuann

• • •

*

/v. nod up end refused. !!_* tics in an orporinent, a cold -..utj o:-pori*ent,

nd lie didn't rrent to 'jo in ray -:or- otrperlionts. The doctor f ron the
• •

:t\TJ*;e said, 'If you ere net qui;t, end -..-rat to rebel I trill shoot
you on the spot. The doctor frc= the r.uTturffo all rays J&d - pistol, end
f ion 1:0 ’-ro ell quiet. Tor ab*ut ono -.rook ;ro jotcookies, r.roibech,
end brotm su;,'r. Ik~re -rare ab ut 21 little cookies, and thrao or four
Uttlo pieces of dextreso. Cthr.-.ieo, ::o jet notiing. Tlie oi-ht cl'. 73 ...
n . Juet n iKi'ent. bid yeu at any ti*a volunt.or Tor these oxporinonts?
A Ho.

0 'ore you ask~d *.&oth:r or net you -.risked to volunt-or .“or t)io
^'oriairts?

A No.

r : * ro any cf the if 1 r invites na!»d if f loy pvld liko to volunteer’

A fto

1 han't the 701313 ‘ ettbcch a volunt-or, tho younsoat Tottbach?

-• I cnly ono "^hst "attbaeh frc.- urth, but I don't !moi 7
' .bother ho volunteered.

>.s irnst '.ottbzoh in tho ixperironts throughout fiat i 3 , did
ho c~. ploto tho oxp.riuonts?

• * •> < •

ho vaa c "7 fur. a short tiro cr throo days naybo,

• •

"icn, tho doctor free toft raff ; vt llzi out, and vkoro ho -.-ant I don't Imou.

“ ''v,.*, did f.j ftref jssor ask anyone for fieir approval before the;’

*--•0 3 ub'. acted to tho soa -rater orn^rtionts?

a no.

' id the r f. jscr vr any of ttio otiur Uiftncffo physicians talk
thc ina-tos and advise Cue as tc the kasards -f tho oxporir.ont prior


10509


1 ■ ly- 7-t'-:"D-6-3-S^prin (Int., too 3 cbocn)
; -at :h. I


: ahc co -TMnco aoat cf the actual orperinents?
ifo.

::v.r t •.•111 yu, in detail, tell the Tribunal juet *.:hat load the

xrp»i.xr. i subject 1 : received Tier to the orporin.r.ts, during tho courso

' tho asrori:»nts, it r tho Kparinents; cad in doing 3-, *.ltnc3s,

IT talk very slaOy and distinctly ac that t!ic interpreters -.dll bo

rule to translate you ..re offidontly.

- 3. ’.t first rj ,.ut potatoes, . i?:, and then no got tl-.ooo coolies

rnd d Metresc and s-./oibeefc. Th\t abort ne TOak. Thon to got nothing,

•

Own tie doctor fren tlw Jttftwaffo said,* "Ikr.r, you have to drink sad vator,

and yu .-11 be hungry." That tj about one ar two woofcs. This Jh'.di Taub-

• - •- - arid, got excited end Udr.'t ,-et v participate, and

tla doctor fr-n t'. o lAiTtraTfo eric*, "If you . ; t xxitod '-id utiny, I will

al;:ot you," raid ttoaro -a. all quiet. Thon-.o bogan tc drink soc irator.

I brail: tho verst 'ind, that was ycUcr.riah. .‘c drank it fr.:o cr tliroo
• * •

*• :3 " “-nd then in the vening, -/q had no liter of tho yolloir
iter. '."noro was tliroo kinds :f vatcr, .'.Tito vntor, and yo? lav water;
end I drank tho yellow line!. :.nd tlion after a nr days, tho pob;&o -roro
cursing, thoy lad fear, t their ncuth. 7.:a doctor frew tho buftiraffo
r-.o It- ft cynical laugh and. said, j "t;t : .t la ttoo to rako liver punctures."


n . Talc .ore slowly, witness. Thank you.

• • •

- 3 . The fir3t re-. cn tie \oft .f on y u caao in, t!io second bod,
t m3 tla firit cno. 11 nlced li’:o - dag. Ho -.rent crasy. Ilo had
fear: at bis truth. • 7.io dcct. fro:: ttvo IcCt-rffo tcck hin drn cn a
stretcher i.ith c hi to sheot or r hi;, ant- tier, he stuck a noodle about
thia long (indicating) into his riJit side, and there *:as a hypodorr.de

o- Io cn it, and it bled, and it was very painful. Tfo wero all quiot-and

•

a-ited. r.tm uhon that ws ever, tla ether prisoners had their tum.

people iroro crazy inn thirst and laager, but tho doctor hac! no pity

U3. Ho -.-3 cold like ice. Ib didn't tako any Interest in us. Thor.,

•

•* ZT^KT — I don't knew his ncro airy.xi-o — lie oat a littlo 'it of bread


10510


1 ' i-6-c- Perrin (Ir.t., vrn ”chocn)

Court ::c. I

•

ncc, r ! --nh 3 ;-xj crater, I don't rcsrixjr .iu 3 t ufcat he r’id, the doctor
:r -4 tho iuffcraffo set vary .-a—y rad nod. Ho too!: the synoy and tiod
bin to tho hod po3t rad scnl.d ia r.uth.

r . it;ioan, dc y-.u rora that ho nit edhesivo tano - v.r t'.ds gy^ay's

A -03.

n . Oc ahead, c.ntinuo.

hon a ho v-a on tho riyht, r ' iy atr-ny, husly folic;,

!io rafussd tc *.-ink tho ’xtor. He r.ahed t!_o u '.or fr c tho TuTt-.-affo to
• .

lot ••in jc. Ho -rid ho couldn't stand tho -t_r. tr.i :ic!: vith it.

d-ctor Or u t!jo luftvmffo ba no -it;*, and !m a aid, '''Ho, you have
to ’ rln!: it. T.:j d.ct.r free: tho T* iftr-fiffo told no or hi3 anaistrata
to " and 'jit a sound. Naturally, 4*3 didn't ' n r!tr.t a sound trio.

"an •’ hia r.iaisttnti c. o '.l tit r red tubo ab ut that lone (indicr.tins)
»* - ~''t this tubo in tho ~'Vjy'3 rruth fir*t rad than into his otonach.

v t - senent. That tv'-.o nas hew Ions' Iras '•.e«ld th*t bo,
r. '•-"If a actor Ions?

'hrv.t thi3 I ns (Indieatins.)
r : Th-t m bo about a half r. :;jt:r?

1 3, r.b ut halC a no ter. :.r.A thin tho doctor fr~:.i tho Luftraffo,
:-o tech this red tttbo rad Tt ! t in the a rr.d into Ms atonach.

. ! fon ho :*ured tho ~t:r d *.n -ha tubo. Tho 3-?sy !cnool->d in front
a* hi- rad Vasaodttd Id::, ‘cut th-t cctor hrd r.o ity.


1 July ^ 7—!5-u TIV- 7-l-?rincau (Int. von Schon)
'curt :fc. 1


Q Witness, ia-lrr; the oxperirents wore your tesporaturo taken?

A Yes.

Q Tfho took ycur tenporatures?

A Thoro woro t»<o "rcnchrxn, one tall thin an ! one short blow!
ono; and they took th: tenporcturos and tho doctor fron tho Luftwaffo
took tho tonporaturos, too.

3 '"hon you a ay "the doctor fron tho Luftwaffe" you nean nan

you refer to as tho profossor. Tho professor and tho doctor fron

tho Luftwaffo arc tho sano or aro they tiro different pooplo?

%

a yos„

Q I soo. Thpnk you. Now, who porfornod tho livor punctures?

A Tho doctor fron tho Luftwaffo carriod out tho livor punoturos
h l n aol f . Sono pooplo wore Ivon Uvor punoturos and at tho sano tino
a lunbar juncture. Tho doctor free tho Luftwaffo did that hinsolf.

It was vor/ painful. Sorothln. ran out — water or sor»thinr — I
.’.on»t know what it was.

0 ^ ell, Id you rocaivo a livor puncturo?

A Yos.

Q Did tho profossor toll you what roason he rovo you that
livor puncturo — fcr what roason ho vavo you that livor puncturo?

A Tho dootor free tho Luftwaffo caao to no and said, "Now,

Hollo nr ai nor, it*s your turn." I was lyin: on tho boi. I v/as very
woak fron this water and fron not havin', anythin- to oat. Ho said,
dlcv, lio on your left silo and tako your clothes off your riy,ht side,"
I hold on to tho bodstor.I on top of no and tho doctor fron tho
Luftwaffo 3at down noxt to no an' pushed a Ion;- noolo into no. It
•ras very ,-oinful. I said, "Doctor, what aro you doinr?" Tho doctor
said, "I havo to nake a livor puncturo so that the salt ccoes out
of ycur livor."

3 Jfow, witness, can you toll us whothor or not tho subjects
usod in tho cxpariavmts woro -ypsies of purely Goman nationality or

10512


1 July U?-?W.TD-7~2—Princau (Int. yon Schon)
Court !fc. 1


-oro thero sono Polish ^ypsios, sa> Russian ypsics, Czechoslovakian
ypaios., end so forth?

- th ero woro about seven or ol£ht Gomans and the rest of

thou -oro all Polos end Czochs, Czoch gypsies an ’ Polish sypsios.

0 ''oro any 0 f tho oxpericontal subjoots evor taken out of the
station rooo to tho yard outside tho oxperirontal barracks?

A Yos, at tho ond when tho oxpurinonts were all finishodj and
throe pooplo woro carried out with i/hi to 3 :iaot 3 over than on a
strotchor. They woro covered with shoots but 1 '.on't know rrhothor thoy
1 /c.ro doadj but wo, yy colleagues and I, talkoi about it. Y/o novor saw
than a^ain neither at work nor anywhoro in tho canp. .to bfton talked
about it and wondorod whorv they woro. 'Jo xvovor sew than a pain. I
assuao that tho pooplo diod.

Q Do you know micro thoy joro taken to?

Ko, I don't know.

1 oil, during tho courso of tho oxporinonts woro you weighed
every *ny?

A Yos, wo woro woighod, too*

1 as that ovary day or ovory other day?

A I don't roaxibor exactly.

q Y«ell, now, after tho ccnplotion of tho oxperinonts in oarly
Soptaabor what happonod to you?

A "hon wo hai finished the axporinanta?

q Yos.

A I told you that alroa:V. TTo waro sont to tho hospital and
tho octor froa tho Luftwaffe caua an ’ said wo were to taka our
clothes off an’, wo linod up and wore 'Avidod into throe . roups. Tho
octor fren tho Luftnaffo said, •'Jfow 70 U will bo given good food. You
-.re novor had such coed fco:V' e woro A von potatoes, dxortroso,
ccokioa, rdlk —

q Just a ranute, idtncss. I an referring to tho end of tho

10513


1 July ii7-:'W.TD-7-3-Prlrciu (Inti von Schon)
Court !fo* 1


Q Just a ninuto, witness. I an referring to tho end of tho
exporinonts, aftor tte experiments wero all conpletod. Could you
toll ua what into that was that your experiments were ccerplctod and
you wero transferred from tho expcrirental station?

A The axporlnor.t lasted, naybo, four or flvo weeks altogothor#

I don't know tho date*

Q Tfoll, then, they wore ccuplotod in early September* Is that
correct? You arrivod —

A Yos. .

Q Ifew, after the experiments wi.ro cccplotod did you thon rotum
to tho canp propor or to tho coap Jiospitol?

So, into tho con? —- about twonty-two — wo couldn't walk. Vo
had to help each other in walking o woro uxhaustod and I forgot to
toll you on© thing* Boforo wo began tho oxporinents and wo had this
QOd food for about ono wook tho doctor took us out into tho courtyard
r-?ar tho hospital* Tho doctor free tho Luftwaffo 6ano* Ho lad a littlo
bottlo and ho pit a number on our cheat* I had nunbor It burned
and thon wo want back into tho block. On ovory boi thoro was a nunbor,
tho sano nunbor that wo hoc! on our chawt and ono nan — but I don't
rersonbor who it was — ono of tho prisorwr3, 3aidt "Tint is what thoy
call tho death nunbor*" Thon I was scared and tho prioonor said, "Yos,
that is tho loath rairfcar so that tho doctor of thu Luftwaffo will know
rl'ht away who is dood*"

Wo didn't want to go on with tho uxporlmonts but what choico did
wo have? Wo wero just poor prisonjrs. o had to lot thca to with us
what they wanto!* *o couldn't resist. I haven't 'ot tbo power to rolato
everythin^ as it......

Q All right. Just a aonont. '*aa your bod nunter "23"?

A Yes.

Q Then you ware considered to bo oxporinantal subject No, 23?


A Yos


10514


i July l7-?*-..TD-7-k-?rir»au (Int. von Schon)
Co'-xt Ho* 1


>

Q ' are you sick Airing tho course of the experlnonts, witnoss?

A Yoa.

Q !fcw, witnoss, after tho coopletion of the exporlnonts in
early Soptcobor wore you then c a l l ed in and weighed to doternino your
red gilt about two woeks lator?

A No, not aftor two weeks*

Q Vloro you called in and voighod ono wook aftor you had coi>-
plotod the exporlnonts? Do you rcaanber? ,

A I don't renenbor. But wo woro woighod.

Q You woro wii -hod overy cby Airing tho uxperinents?

A Yas.

Q lut I want to know is, woro you weighod after tho cajplotion
of tho axporinonts? For instanco, you woro woichod every day during
tho oxporiaontsj thon tho cjporinenta woro ccnplotoi; thon you woro
not woic'ho! again for a poriod of one or Un wcoks. Did you got weighed
ono or two wooka aftor tho corplotion of tho experiments?

A ’.fhon tho o^orlncnt was all firdshod? No.

q oil, rww after you loft tho axporiaontal block and wont to

tho oanp how Ion; boforo you woro ablo to rosuno work?

%

A A few days. Thon wo woro givon a do tail at a fern in
Fel baachiitgon. 'o had to work hard and tho food was bottor than in
tho oaap but, you know, if you aro a prisoner; what did tho farmers
ivo you? A little broad, souu soup — but, in any caso, it was
' ottor tfrn in tho caap; and thon ovary avonlng wo carw back to our
blod: and thon wo got tho ro;;ular canp foot!. '

q ?fow, witnoss, woro you over subjoctod to ary other nodical
experiments during tho tino that you wore incarcoratod in tho concen¬
tration ca^ps?

A No.

q Did you over suffer fren any othor «soasos whilo you woro in
the concentration canps? _

10515


1 July li7-!!-ATD-7-5-?rincau (Int. von Schon)
Court So, 1


A Yea. hen tho experiments wore finished I rot phlcpaonal.

I worked for the farcer for about a weak and than I cane back to tho
can? in Dachau and had phl 0333 r.nl. That was a few months I was in tho
hospital. It was tho sane block — not tho sano block whoro wo had
tho axporlront. It was a different bull In-. Th:n I had phlo3a>nal.

I vas thora about a fcwaonl^s. Than I care out there. !!y I 03 was stiff
because I havo a lri .3 wound there.

Q All richt, witness.

A And then tho doctors didn’t help no in the hospital and I had
to lonvo tho hospital a rain with ry bont log and I was exaninod by
tho SS doctors but they didn’t oaro about py 103 whether it vras
straight or bont. They woron’t interested in ae at all. They said I
had to ;;o to „u, sburr and work for "losserschnidt.

Q All richt, witnoss. Did you over havo ralaria whilo you ucro
in tho coqpontmtion camp?

L * No.

!C.. HAIITf: At this time, your Nonor, tho . rosocution has no
further quostiona to ;«t to this witnoss. I .d;ht call attontion of
tho Tribunal that this witnoss is Caso No. 23, tho w»n — wo oxanlnod
his charts an<'. graphs, and tho ones whoro tho stenographic notos
ppaar on tho back thoroof have boon nbdttodly offered by tho kifonJ-
ond Boi-iboock.


10516


1 Jul-lMS-8-l-Hinabuck (Int. von Sc bon)

Court Ho. I, Case No, 1.

_ COSS SYAMTHATIOS

BY DR. STEDEAIES (Counsel for defendant Eciglboock):

Q Witrwss, what was your father's nan??

A Ky father, Rudolf Hoollenroiner.

Q What was your nother's aaiden none?

A Johanna Yiagner.

Q Shat wire your gr ndpcrcnts 1 nanes?

A My father's parents I knew only ny grandoothor's nano,
Johanna Hoollonroinor, On ny mother's side. Analia Kagnor.

Q Whon you wore oxzninod the first tine you said that you
had nover boon conviotod of any crlna. Do you maintain this assortion?
A Ho, I have boon convictod.

Q Whon why did you lio?

A I did not lio. 1 noant fron tho oxporinonts.

Q Tho quostion was »hot!>cr before you enmo to tho Gostapo

you had ovor boon convictod and punishod by tho police. Nothing had

boon said about oxporinonts at that tino. That's an excuse. Do you
• •

adnit that you liod? It's such better for you.

A No, I did not lio.

Q Moll, you have boon convictod?

A Yob.

* For thaft?

A Yos.

9 For fraud?

A los.

Q For assault?

A lop.

Q For blacknail?

A What do you noan by that?

Q Well, coercion.

A No.

Q For using a false nine?


10517


i Jui-M-}53-8-2-4.inabuck (lot. von Schon)
Court No. I, Cam No. 1.


A No, I never used a false nano.

Q You have to speak core slowly. \io will ccce back to that.
Then you were prosecuted for desertion?

A Yos.

Q You rofusod to oboy your draft or<k>r?

A Yos.

Q Isn't that why you wero sent to tho concentration crop?

A No, just because I an a gypey. Uy brothers wero in tho war
ind fctoy cano back free Russia and cano to Sachscnhauscn and woro nur-
dored thoro, bccauso thore woron't supposed to bo any noro gypsies in
tho Qeman aray.

Q What kind of a triangle did you woar in tbscanp?

A A black ono.

 Your wife said that you wsro in aaL>ri«, phLe^pone^iii^phoiii
and soa-rator oxpcrimnts?

* Ho, only this ono oxporiaont, no solaria.

c

Q Do you adcit that you liod to tho young doctor who talked

to you?

A No, I didn't lie to tho doctor. I Just told him tho truth.
Uy wife and I woron't allowod to narry. 1 {y wife had a child end it
w's bumod in Blgcoaau. My sis tor was burned and both hor children.

Q Don't got excited. I askod you whether you told tho young
doctor that you wire in four different dxporinonts. .'ill you havo to
say is yos or no.

A I told tho doctor I drank salt water.

Q Listor, Hr. Mottbach, don't evade ny question after th.e~;
fashion of cypsics.- Give do a clear answer as a witness under oath.
Did you toll tho doctor that you were in othor experiments, yos or no?
A No. I just drank salt water.

Jfl. HARDY: Your Honor, tho tost irony of this doctor is not
in ovidcnco before this Tribunal. I don't understand what Dr. 5U.in-
bauer is referring to.

10518


1 Jul-ii-iB-d--3-Kinabuck (Int. von ^chon)
Court Uo» I, Case Ho. 1.


DR. oZSZHBUBS: In cross oxraination the prosecutor repoatod-
ly read free testiaony without offering it in evidence. I hevo tho
right to ask his —

TKS IHESJDENTc Counsel is correct. Ho nay proceed, but it
would bo bettor if counsel would ask tho witness when and whore ho
spoke to this doctor and the nsao of tho doctor if ho knows it.

Q (By Dr. Steinbauer) In Erlangen did you talk to a doctor
froc tho hospital nanod Dr. Klogcr?

^ No. '

TilE FRESIDENT: Give tho witness tha da to, Counsel. Toll hiu
when that conversation took placo or is supposed to havo taken placo.

Q (3y Dr. Stcinbauor) A few wooks ago.

A I was under nodical troataont in Erlangen, but I don't
know any Dr. Klogor.

Q Didn't a doctor cocao to your house? Didn't ho cone to soo

you?

A Yds, I don't know whjthor it was a doctor.

Q Boll, but you talked to a young gentleman?

A *03.

Q Hu said Ikj was a doctor?

. A (fo, he didn't say / tfo was a«doctor. ••• r*.

Q Didn't you toll this young uan that you had been in four
cxporlronts?

“ Ho, I Just told hin I drank salt water, and I had a liver
puncture and I had phlognono. And this malaria and typhoid happened
in those caape.

Q Jtow, I an asking you for th, last tico, witness. I don't
want to waste tho Court's tine. Did you toll this young / nan. Dr.
Huger, that you wore in four oxporiamts?

A No.

Q Then how can you explain tho fact that your wife told no


that?


10519


1 3-UHinabuck (Int. von Schon)

Court No. I, Case No. 1.

A I don't know. Wo went through a great deal in tta canps.
The Jews and the gypsies wire all exterminated. Wo had no value in
tto canp.

Q Didn't this young nan leave a note with his address?

A Yes.

Q Well tten, you knew his rv~m?

A How should I know if the nan coixs and writes this note
ind says his naan is Klogor, but I don't know that ho is a doctor.

Q Now you know because you have that note.

A Tos, and he told no to ccoo see hiru

Q Didn't you tell this doctor that you wanted to go soo Coiz-
nissionor Auerbach in Munich because of your nany sufferings?

A Tos, because wo won oppressed here in the concentration
canp offices. Tho Nazis took everything away. Wo wore sent to thj
c-ap and tho Nazis took all our property.

Q Noll thon, it's tvuo that you want to ask for a largo sun
of nonoy?

A No, I haven't taken a penny.

Q But you want 20,000 narks?

A No.

Q How auch do you really want?

A I haven't got anything yot. A nan na-xd Issnor, frotn whoa
we. nde purchases boforo tho war, his brother was exterminated in
Auschwitz, and I haven't got a penny free, tho concentration ennp of¬
fice.

q Witnoss, you don't understand no. I didn't ask you liow
nuch you got. I believe you arc telling the truth that you havon't
got anything. I Just asked you how nuch you want to ask for?

A I haven't asked for anything yot.

q How ouch do you intend to ask for? Didn't you say that you
Wert going to ask for 20,000 narks?


A No


10520


1 July-IW5-8-5-Niivibuck (Lit. von Schon)
Court No* I, Case No. 1.


Q Aren't you Uncle Karl?

A }$r mao is Karl Hocllcnraincr.

Q Didn't your relatives nt B_rabruck cell you Uncle Karl?
* Ho.

Q 3hnt ia your religion?

A I nn Catholic.

Q Arc you uarried.

A To a.

Q When end where were you narried.

0

A I carried in Erinneon.

Q When?

A In 19U6.

Q What lionth?

A I don't rereabor what do nth.

Q Holl, wr.a it in the a\n.-or or winter?

A It woo in tho aumor.

Q You ar.id you wore in Auschwits?

A YwB.

Q Wore you in tho Birkcm.u oxtorniir.tion canp?

A Yea.

Q V/eren't the gypeioa in o bi« emp there?

A Yoa.

Q tore there wenon and children there?

A Yoa.

Q Did you have a wife thiro?

A Yea, ny fiancoc, Ida Schciidt. She wn3 gassed. Show os
burned. I never sow hor again.

Q Didn't you boat this wooan till sho bled?

A No.

Q Did you over boat her?

A Ho.

Q In what block wore you there?

10521


1 Jui—iWS-6—S—Ciinr.tuck (Int. von Schon)
Court No* I, Case- So. 1.


A Block 18.

Q Casn*t it block 20?

A Oh, 20, yos, 20.

Q You were in block Z3 • Do you re:*jabcr who was the senior
innate there?

A There was a big Hungarian. Ho distributed tho food.

Q Wasn't there a fellow nauod Laubingcr?

A Yos, but ho only distributed tho food.

Q Yos, yes, I understand, and who was his deputy?

A In the block you aeon?

4 Yds, Lnubingor's doputy.

A A litlo nan, an East frussira.

Q Ko 11, you are not so littlo, witnoss.

A lfc, yos.

Q Yos, I sa talking about laubinger's doputy in this roou.

A I don't know.

Q Was it you?

A Mo, no.

Q Witnoss, thoso aro very unimportant things, of littlol
consequence, but ii is better-to tell tho truth.  •

A Yos.

Q How, just think. Woron't you Laubingcr's deputy?

A Ho.

Q Didn't you holp hie carry tho food?

A Ho.

Q Wore you in any oxperiaants th.ro?

A.Ko.

Q How, lot's go to tho xxjxt caap, Buchcnwald.

A Yos.

Q Woro you in block 1*6 or 20 or whoro were you?

A We woru in a tent canp.

Q Very good, in a big tent cr^p.


10522


i July— —‘ 3-8-7-Ninabuck (Int. vcn Schon)

Court Ko. I, Casa No. 1.

•

A Yos, there were several tents.

Q Hero there a hundred gyreies or two hundred, how nany?

A Oh, for God's sake, how shall I ronenber an exact nunber?
There were a groat uany fron Auschwitz. Scoc wore put on a Uehruacht
transport.. Uy brother was ttorc. Ho was sect to Ravensbruck.

• A little slower, witnoss. Then I an right if I sy there
were seno thousands of gypsies?

A Yes.

Q Mow, there was a roll call otx> dry and volunteers wero
asked for for r. work dotnil.

A No. .

Q Do you xonxr.bur that?

A No.

Q You yourself said that there was a roll call and pwoplo
wore wanted for Dachau?

A Ho, I don't know anything about it.

DR. STEDiBAUER j Tho Goman record on Laubii^or and Hoollon-
rainor is not yot available unfortunntoly.

:*«. HARDY: Your Honor, for tto bonofit of dofonsc counsol,
this witness did not say that. Tho witnoss Laubir^or did. I didn't
ask this witness how they selected then at Buchonwnld.

D.i. STEIMIA'JER: Hr. fa\.sidont, I m sorry I only have tho

English.

Q (By Dr. Stcinbauer) Here whan you vero a witness you toati-
fiod, "I was in a tont canp in Buchonwald."

A Yes.

Q "And suddenly our mribors Kv.ro celled."

A Yes.

Q "Forty uon were celled up includir^ ne."

A Yes — no, we iwsre Just forty.

Q It says "including ae." I didn't write the record. "Tfe
'•ere told that we had to leave for Dachau; we had to work there."


10523


1 Juiy-4WJ3—o-G-flinabuck (Ir.t. vcn Schcn)

Court !.*o. 1, Case Nc. 1

A ho wore in Buchcnwcld in the tent crap end an SS nrn crac ; ne¬
edled our numbers. He celled up my number too, end then no lined up
in o group or cur own. One gyp ay who had already boon in Dachau said
it will bo bettor in Dreheu; wo rrc going there to v*rk, but wo never
volunteered for any experiments.

Q I didn't ask you ebeut that, witness. I rsked you whether
it is true whrt I heve Just read to you; th-t you wore celled up
against your will?

« he weren't rsked at all. Forty of us v.cre called together end
were sent to Dachr.u.

Q :icw, I havo to tull ycu t at ycur countryman — he is from

V

Furth toe — IXcttb-ch, srii tfv't ho talked to ycu; that he wanted to
come bec-uso Dachau >as nearer Furth thrn Buchenwald; is that true?

A That ml ht be. I didn't mind going to Drehau because ay
broth .rs live in llavich.


1152 U


1 July A 7-4L-F jCw9—L-C*al laghe r (Von 5 chon)

Court X

%

<» the- you did go VoititttArily?

A So, X did not.

^ Hov does It happen that Lnublnger said something else. Leu-
blngor said you were deceived, that la why you volunteered?

A So, I never voluntcorcd. I certainly wouldn't nek for ny
own death and volunteer for....

<i *011, you vent to Dachau?

A Too.

Vi Do you know the old Hcrtbcrg?

A So.

H You don't rcaeubir the gypsy froa Pressbourg?

A So.

H *ho was tho oldest gypsy?

A X don't reacaber.

k You wero with your coarndcs for weeks, end don't know their
nascs?

A So.

k It is possible that Hettbach did not knew nil the names thon,
isn't It?

A How should I know? I did not havo tine to nsk everybody
vhnt his ra-.e is.

H Did tho professor, when the experiments wero to begin oxplnln
tho purposo th-t It was for rescuing people froa shijwrocks, and it •
was a sen-vnter experiment?

A Yea, of courso.

Di<j he explain that you would bo very thirsty?

A Yes, he did first.

And that thirst was very unpleasant?

A Yes.

H Bo you rcaoabor a B u di Taubttrnn?

A Yeo.

vi You said today that you thought he wao a revolutionary?


10525


1 July 4?-X-JjC_9-2_G a ii a€ h cr (v on Sshon)
Court I


A So, I did not spy that.

Ct And that ho resisted, and the professor hed to hold hin
bnde with a pistol?

A So, no Hudi Taubnann »»* In the ecld water experiments al—
rerdy, end the doctor froa the Luftwaffe said, "You will hicro to
drink sen-water, and you will he hungry, end you won't get anything
to eat," Thon Sudl T a uhnanr cioe up and told the doctor froa tho
Luftwaffe he would not do It, The doctor froa the Luftwaffe said,

"If you refuse, if you sutiny, I will shoot you."

*i Witness, I nust put to you the tostlaony of Laubingor. You
consider L^in^er R decent, trustworthy person?

A Tes.

* Laubingor said on page 10230-of tho English record whon ho
was asked whether Taubnann and a certain Baabcrgor in Xfciohau — do
you know then?

A Tes, X know Baahcrgcr.

 Whether thoy wero volunteers, and he said, yos, thoy volunteered?

A So, I never to lun cored. —

So, no, no, Laubingor and Baabcrgor X ocan Taubnann and
Baabcrgcr?

A I don't knew.

*4 You said nobody volunteered?

A So.

Q But now I a- telling you that Leublngcr said. He said that
Taubaann and Banberger, who vr> In IVchav before veluntcorod?

A So.

^ Then Laubingor wn» lying?

A X don't know.

You know that he erid exactly the opposite to what you said?

A On that day if Taubaann had volunteered, ho would not got so
oxcitod.

Then Laubir^cr was lying?


10526


1 July 47_M_IJC_g_3_C>1 lagfcor fron Schoa)

Court I

A I don't know.

H Hltncss, I hare read to you what the witness Laufcingor testi¬
fied to on this Important point. Mow I will ask you, Is that true
or not?

A I don't know wha* it la about.

KB. HASTY: Ikfonsc eounsol, nay we read the iaubingor tcstl-
nony. I apparently nlosed It.

m. STLlt a jJa a t Car. you be kind e\oigh to read it In nfllh.
Hr. Hardy. Tou do* better then X.

HR. RARITY: (Roade transcript silently^

BY ‘IE. 3TLIS3AUBR:

Hell, then. Hr Lnublrger —

A Ky njtttt Is not Laublnger.

«i Oh, Hr. Hoellor.rclnor. Hns Laublnger lplng on. you?

A Laublngor a aid tho sane thing I did. Hy has to, too. Ho
has to tell the truth about what tho doctor did. *

H Te«, you both hawc to toll the truth, but n«w you nr© saying
exactly tho opposlto, One of you aust be lying.

A I don't tell lion. I tell tho truth what thv doctor said.

Hew then Laublnger was lying?

* I don't know.

•i, That Is enough. You said that the young Hottbach fron
Xurth, thrt ho was tolling the truth?

A Yes. I know hi a.

ii But you norcr say hln again, you said, la that right?

A Yes, when he left the cxporlsents wo did not see hln any

noro.

<* That Is enough. How this Hcttbneh said that until tho ond
of the cxpcrlncnts he was always In tho Hater Station i/l'clurinc t.;C
daytlso, and only went to the Ikpartacrt II during the night?

A I don't know.

You ^ust said you never b»w hln again?


10527


1 July A7-J*OJG-9-^.-Galla?hcr (Vca Schcn)
Court I


A Tea.

q How bid i*;.s the room where you were?

•• 'Pnerc these were carried out, where the experiments were

*

cerriod cut?

0 Hew big that re cm? as tie as this rocc?

A Net quite as big,

Q Then could you sco the people?

A No, I did net sco him any more.

Q i/itness, wasn't thorc another Ucttbnch?

A I don't knew.

Q About this Mcttbach, didn't you seo him in the room?

• A Nc.

Q Then Hottbcch is lying?

A ‘.’o woro sc exhausted that wo cculd not run around any more.
Q Then you wore blind?
fk No, I wes net blind.

Q Then you became nearsighted?

A Nc. lio wore lying on bods. *.to lid not h-.vo any strength
to run around.

Q ’witness, thirst dries out the ncuth? ^

A Yes.

Q How can you explain thet theso pooplo hrd froth?

A Tftoy had attacks and fits, and fermod nt the ncuth, thoy ^ot
raving sadness fits.

Q I Just asking you hew it can be that when the mouth is
completely dry thcro can bo froth?

A I don't knew.

Q Then seme bccace mad?

A Tea.

4 f ^

• • >


10520


1 July 47-X-TjC_9-5-C*allagher (Von Schon)
Court I


<i Yen Gypsies 'atick together, too, don't you?
a Y«g, of course.

Vi Then 70O era tell sc who bccase aad?

A I don't resesber.

*4 Yon =ust know, if-, a fried of nine — I was a soldier twice,
and if a friend of *lno fend gene =ad then I would have known It,’

A It was a tell nan who had flret rolled on the floor. Ho was
tho flret ono and he ahd flte, and when he was thore ho was thrashing
around with hie hands and feet,- He was a tall silo gypsy,
vi You said that you were wolghed?

1 Y...

k Isn't It possible that aftor you got out of the cxporlmont,
■nd got good food again and plenty of water, • you worn wolghod
again?

A lo.

h But then thoy had a chart showing whero you woro wolghod
every day?

a I don't know.

H Were you weighed standlr^ up or lying down?

A Standing up.

Vi *oro soac of tho people wolghod lylr^ down?
a I don't reneabtr.

<< ^as this scale such that people could bo wolghed lying down?
A I don't knew.

Vi ^hero — what did this scale look like?

A W©n, It was a scale, a big scale. You had to stand on It.
There was ar Indicator that shewed the weight.

<4 The nan who had his south fastened shut, did he have a tube
for Ms stoRach, too?

k I don't resaiber.

You had a liver puncture?

A Ye*.


10529


1 July 47—H_JjC_9-6-Gallfy hsr (Ton Sahon)

Court I

As you hare a scar?

A -I don't know.

H Don't you oror look at yourself?

A Tee. Tou want to see it?

H >o. I an just asking you If you hare a little circle, n
little round scar there?

A I did not look at It as carofully no that.

 ''ell, don't you think you hare It? Tou do or you do not?

A I don't know. I was not Interested In these caap mnttoro
any noro. I would go erasy. I did not want to hear anything noro
about the casp. He suffered long enough.

«i Witness, do you think you arc crazy or Dentally dcfoctlvo?
A lo.

 Do you think thore is something wrong with you oontnlly?

A Ho.

Tou s«-y you are going crazy?

A *ell, If I keep thinking of that caap.

!©. HA2DT: I object to this line of questioning, your Honor.
3T 18. ST1IHBAUQ:

 11, you had a llwcr puncture?

A To..

<* Do you know whether you hare a scar, yes or no?

A I don't know.

•

 “hat was tho nationality of the pcoplo in tho camp who wore
orpericental subjects?

a Poles and Ctocha.

k How ?any C-wrnans were thorn)?

, *

A Ton or eight, that spoke C-crr.an.

Here thero tone Hungarians *nd Burgcnlaender?

A Ho, I don't know.

Vi Hasn't there a follow there eellod Papal?

‘A I don't know.


10530


1 Juiy-M-a;G-9-7-Gcllegher (Vcn Schcn)

Ccurt I Caae 1

• -

Q Were the Frcnchsen there nice, cr were they typical SS nen?
1 No, they were geed to ua,

Q War* thoy inoatca?

A Yea,

Q They were nuraea. Kero these Frenchaen good people?

A Yea,

Q '.here did they aleep?

A I don't know.

Q Liaton, witneaa, they alept next to you. You nuat know

thet?

A Ho. Iho doctor froa tho Luftweffo wra with the guarda, and
they guarded ua with c piatcl.


10531


1 -Zuly jC-10-1—Z-esser (Ton Schon)

Court I

«

H Veil, 3 people wore carried out, you said.

A Tee.

^ L o you know their naees?

1 Mo.

fit Bid ary body die durlr^ the experitaent, ae far ae you know?
Could you say Meier died, for exnnple?

A Mo.

Then, after the experiaent wee over, you worked on a fern?
A Tee.

 That wae In September - harvest?
a Tee.

k Mae that olean work or wae that dirty work?

* That wae dirty work.

*t One got dirty oaeily?

A Tee.

*t And vhero did you got after you left that faro? Tou had a
phlcgxono after thle dirty work...

A Tee.

Q And then whore did you go?

A Then I went to Augsburg.

<i To the Meaecrachaldt M 0 r1rs.

A Tee.

»i Mhat wero you thcro in the Mresorschaidt Morke?

A I wae a laborer.

*t So, you wore aoro. Juet think.

A Mo, Z wae nothing. I wae a conoon laborer. I wae just a
prisoner whon I workod for M et *orechoidt. My leg was still crookod
when they Sent =e away froa Xfeehau.

k Meren't you the forecan there?

A Mo.

«i Mhat are y&u living on now?

A 1 an a dealer in textiles and sueicel inetxencntB.


10532


1 July 47_itJrjC_10-2_Ie»«er (Ton Schor.)

Coart I

k Can yon rend and write?

A T*..

k Do you like to reed the newspaper?

A lo.

H Do yon hare a radio?

A Tee.

k At the beginning of this trial why didn't you a>no horo and
voluntcor ne a witness?

A X didn't hear about it.
k But yon hare a radio!

A Toe.

k Aren't you In the Caro Station?

A Tee?

k Didn't they talk about the experiments in D*chmi?

A Mo. If I had known about it X would havo cobu hore lnmodiatoly;
k Didn't yon erer beat anybody in Auecb-itx?

A Mo. X can swear to that.

k Mow another question — the witness, Haseion....
a I don't know him.

k He was a soldlor. a young fellow fron tho Rhineland.

A In euechwite?

k Ho, no. Mo aso talking about Profossor Bolglboock'o station.

A Tes.

k He was a vitnoss: his name was Hasslon - a young Luftwaffe

soldier*

A Tcs.

k Do you remember hin?

A Bid ho wear glasses?
k Bo, a student from the Rhineland.

A I don't know. I only knew 2 — tho doctor fron tho Luftwaffe...
there was an older aan froa the Iaiftwaffo and a younger nan, with
giaecoe. Thor® was sosething wrong with hi* eyes.


10533


1 July 47_K_JjC_lO-3_Lesier (Ton Sehon)

Court X

Witness, a fellow na.ned Pillwoln, frits. Do you rcnoabor
hlaT H© waa a nurse; he gare aid and food and weighed the pooplo.

A *ee.

«4 He was froa Vienna?

A ea, he was froa 7 loan.

H ^aa he a nice fellow?

A Tea, he waa a very good aan.

Do you conaidor hia trustworthy?

A

W ?hen thore waa a Dr. Lease there; he cado tho blood toots, otc.

A Tea.

7 aa he a nice fellow?

A Troa tho Luftwaffe?

Tea, he waa froa the Luftwaffe.

A A Mg tall fellow?

Q Was he a nice follow?

A 7 ell, what do you seen — nice?

I aa Just asking you, do you eonsldor hla trustworthy?

A Ho.

H How about Worlicek?

A I don't know Mb.

v< He waa froa 7 lonna too; he helped Pillwoin.

A I don't rcaoabcr that.

H Did thla Pillwein treat you well?

A Tea.

*i Mow I hare to tell you that these witneaaca, oo there io
no aiatake — the wltneae Worlicek oald that tho people were trontod
woll outsido of the experiaont and then I should llko the Proaocutor
to read what the wltnoaa LeuMngor said ... Well, that ia not
important...they all said that the Professor treated tho exportnontal
oubjocte well.

A Sol

10534


1 July 47-K_7jC_lC-4-Le3ser (Von Scbon)

Court I

Q *sll, arc all those people lying then?

A Ho* could the doetor fron the luftvaff© treat us veil?
k This doctor...

A ht doctor?
k Dr. Bleglboeek.

A lo, he did not treat us veil,

k AH right. L«t us go cn. Do you sooke a great deal?

A Toe, I ueed to ssoke.

S Did you saokt in the ceap?

A To«.

H *ns it easy to get cigarettes there?

A Mo.

k In 1944 vas It easy to get cigarottos aayvhoro In Oornany
outside of tho caap?

* *o.

k Then cigarottos vero very valuable?

A Tos.

k *Hd you ofton soil or tra.do your food for cigarottos?

A Mo.

k Did tho profossor give cigarettes to tho patients?

A Too.

k Hov aany?

A Tvo or threo.

k And the people who did tho cxperlaont voll, got noro?

A I don't kr.ov.

*» Veil, think If Lrubingcr know about It you Bust knov about

It,

A Mo I don't knov.

Veil, then you vor. In the experiment?

A los.

k Tour nusbesas 23?

A Tes.


10535


• 4’_^-JjC_iC-5-Lc..er (7«. Sehon)

Court I

^ Can it bo that fron the 32nd to tho 30th of August 1944
7<-n were In the experioent? That Is 9 day — days — is that
right, when yon veto directly in the oxperiaer.t?

A The water ox-erincst! and tho ll^er puncture e.ul so on
l'wted a week or two.

<4 Asn't evade =e — when yon yonrsolf woro drinking the water
nndcr supervision.

4 I don't reaenber.

v* But think! It is irqjortant.

A X don't resoaber.

4 Vhy don't yon rcr.eakcr? Do yon want to aakc it aoro days
or don't yen want to thll tho truth?

A H 0 . I aa tolling the truth.

4 Hell, I will show yon a chart which shows that yon woro in
tho orpcrlacnt 9 days at the asst.

A So, it was longer.

4 Do you know what your wolght was at tho beginning:

A Ho.

4 At tho end?

A Ho.

4 Horo you ovor photographed?

A Tos.

*h«n you woro in bed?

A On n stretcher In the courtyard we wore photographod.

4 Ha« that at the beginning, tho end, the aiddlc, or whon?

A At the end of tho oxjorlnont.

4*a= afraid I don't have the photographs with ae but
vo don't need thco. at the end of the experlnont you vero photo-
grr*phod?

A I don't rone-;tor exactly.

4 Bow I asked yon whether 70U were photographed end you aeid
it was at tho end.

10536


1 July 47-JUjC_l^_6-Leo«or (Von Schon)

Court I


A T m .

<i All right. Sow I would like to toll ao whether you ere tho
one with the So. 23 here.

A Tee.

k Tirat lock at the picture.

A Hore I as. (indicating on photograph)
k That la right? That la you?

A Eeae, In thcao two plcturca.

-vi FHXSIEra?: The witness nay ho coated. Sit down, wltnoaa.
3T IB. S*1 I S3AUI3:

k "ltncea, thoao plcturca waro takon Just before the ond of
tho experiment?

* Toe.

A n <* how did the orperisent end In your caeo - do you ronoa-

bor?

A I don't reac-bor whet day It wee.

I raked you how, end were you giver, wator to'drink, or nllk?

A So.

Q Sell, whet hepponed?

A V # had to drink aelt water.
k Yoa, but whon that stopped?

A Soli, whon tho experiment we a flnlahod, thon wo got wntor.

Soil, did the profeo^r give you an Injection?

A At the end he gave ae a long bottle; It was water; he tlod
It up at tho top and let It go Into =7 aru.

^ ht la wh«t I wantod to know. Thon after that did you fool
better?

A So.

k And It la not true if the professor aaya that It wan nlnoat
a atra.clo how you revived and were able to walk around again?

A So. I did cot Ju=p nor did I run around when tho cxpcrlnont
vre finished. Frlgoncra had to help each other to walk.


10537


1 July <7->_FjC_lo_7_Lcc=or (Ton 3chon)
Court I


Vitneaa, weren't you photographed after you got this
injection?

A I don't rcsor.bcr,

S Veil, think. Ain't Just Bay yon don't know, but think it
orcr. If yon need tine Jn»t think it ower.

A In. I don't renoaber.

H Sow when thoie experlsenta were going on did yon evindlc?

A Ho, no, never.

Q T«m newer drank any water?

A Ho.

‘i V 0 had a fonoua profeaaor fron locrica horo and he found
out exactly who drank water, and when.

A I newer drank any water. Vo were ao oxhauated we could
not owon get up and wc were under guard.

* Yru ay yen newer drank water.

A Ho.

Then it la not poaalblc that on 3 daya — on tho 24th,
tho 26th and tho 29th you certainly drank wator and nn tho 20th
probably?

a I did not drink any wator during this exporlnont.

k Didn't yon throw away your urine?

A So, tho doctor froa the Luftwaffe feaoined the urine and
ho aald, *Hollcnrainor,.

HP. H A R M; Tour Honor, the tranalation hae not been oocing
throv^hg

*4 Vitnoca, did yon throw away your urine?

A Ho.

<4 How inch of thla water did yon drink — this yollow wator?

A That was about the ai*e of sng.

*4 Could it hawe been half a litter?

A Tea.

‘i Aad it had to be ellnatcd, too. If it is taken into tho


10533


1 J^ljr 47_K_PjC_lO-&-lca®cr (Int., Von Schon)
Court I


body it has to be eliminated.

A Te«.

4 v «ll» hfw doe It happen that on 2 days yon had loss urine
than yon drank, when* otherwise y~u had exactly the sane valuo? It
1« a Tory teiaportant thing — It vonld be nuch nicer...ssake a
such better lnprcstion, If y^u toll the truth. The other Qrpsieu
adaitted that they swindled. That yon should be the only one...

A I didn't do arything; I didn't drink any water; I didn't
oat anything.

H And yon did not threw m/ay any urine?

A Mo.

<i Moll, when you were oo vc*k *ftcr tho oipcrioont mnd cone
bnck to your barrack*, which barrack did you eoac to?

A Block 22.

• )

* 22. Weren't there ether gypsies there- too? Boon 4, I think?

a I don't reBerber. And It la not Important.

*4 D ld you neet Laublngcr there?

A Tea.

*» Mottbach?

A Mo. Mo Mottbach.

Vi Witness, I win hare you ornfrented with Mottbach “ho will
nay that ho wan with you.

A When the oxporlnent wat finished ho wa« vitji no but ho wont
away to Mauthausen.

k Witness, I aa asking y>u whether Mottbach was In tho ro'-m
In Black 22 with y«u?

A I don't reaoober.

Tcu don't reaoabor — that Is eoocthlng different. Do you
consider it posslblo that ho was there?

a I don't know.

^ “ore there people who repeated the experiment?

A I don't know that either.


10539


1 July 47-H_yjC_10-9-Le««er (Ton Sehon)

Court I

If « gyp#y we# lying on the ground, wouldn't you have
helped hln, o r wouldn't the Trencfcaen have holpod bin?

A The doctor fron the left*affc took the patient# down on
a stretcher and Bade the liver puncture; boss 'f then In their
bed#, too.


10540


Court So. 1

1 Jul 4?-*-ll-l-ia(-Kalcy (Von Schon)


I as asking you If * per ton becane aad or was writhing on tho
— aind wouldn't any of hi* ccsrades have helped hill
A. So.

Q. Vhy not!

A. Because they couldn't walk.

Because you were weak?

A. Te* f ve were weak.

Q, But tho Jrenchnen weren't eo weak?

A. I don't know.

^ They wore next door?

A. Tho Trenchcon were there. They were in the other root*.

Q. Kow far away we* the other rooc?

A. In f*c aaeo block on the right.

(<• There was Just a door between then?

A. Toe.

<v Kero all tho gypslos In tho oroorlnont at tho sano tlae or
vorc thoro soae that voron't in tho orserlaont?

A. Thoy woro all In the osporlnont except Srnst iiottbach.

Q. You didn't understand no. I an sorry, witness. I as asking
you v-hethor all 44 of then drank sea voter at tho sano tlno, or vhother
one group was thirsting and tho other* wore going for a walk?

A. No, there were throe kinds of water, white water and yellow
water, and three grouoe, ebout 13 non In oach group and 14 In ono.

-V That is what I wonted to know. The group not in the oxoerinont
did they oat in tho rocs or out of the rocs?

A. I don't know.

Q. Soil, witness, you were thdro?

A. How should I know. whan I mao drinking seawater no A'lp'.t got
southing to oat.

Q. Vhat about the others?

A. "o woro all In the block. Ve couldn't walk,
v Did scec ncoolc have to repeat the exoerineat?


10541


’curt So. 1

1 Jul 47--ll-2-LS-iialoy (Von Schon)


A. Tea, the peoole who drank the water or ate scec bread. Then
the doctor free tho Luftwaffe would get scec eea water.

Io » < already heard that. Do you know that eoao peotlc

had vhat they called an "escape ooint"?

A. I don't know.

"ere you there when the station v*s dissolved, and the acoaratuo
v«s peeked upT Did you help?

A. So.

q. Do you know whether the erofossor tried to help the prisoners
get sane privilogo, or to have poocle released froa tho ''chmacht? Did
you hear anything about that?

A. So.

%. Didn't he oroaiee that?

A. I don't know.

Q, You don't know anything — do you suffer froa a weak 000017*?

TKI rrLSIDEKT: Councol. will you ploaso propound your nuostlono
acre elowly. Tho oueetion and answer arc too fast for tho lntcrprotoro.

Yitnsss, will you speak aoro slowly and before answorlng counsol's
cucstione wait a aocont to let the interpreters translate counsol'0
Questions. •'

THI VirSLSS: Yes.

Q. Yltncss. you have already told us about tho cigarcttos. Do
73u know whether the orofessor did anything else for the orocritontul
lubjccts, for e marie, that aeabers of the Vchmacht were to bo released?

A. I don* t know. s

V Do you rooccbor sore crialnols, that is, criaical oolico, that
case pad inouirod?

A. So, I know nothing about that.

0- Kolther do I. Do you know that Loubingcr case to tho Quarter¬
ns tor'a office?

A. So. I didn't.

S> Ho was in the saae roc-c with you, 22?

10542


:j art Vo. 1

l Jul 47-K-li-3-i3i-*alCT (Von Scbon)

0

A. Tos, when the eroerlnents were finished. I was on the fare for
float a veck end then had a phlegnone and ee then taken to the hdepit&l.

IHa PhiSIDIST: Counsel, I east insist that you !•. until the wit¬
ness has finished his answer and thon propo u nd your-*oxt ouestion, so
that it can bo translated, lad witness, you east delay your answer until
tie ouestion propounded by counsel has been translated.

Q* Vitnoss, do you know Wiether in the winter of 1944 or In the
taring of 1945 thero v/ «e a big faalr.e in the care!

A. I don't know anything about that.

Q. Did you cror hear anything about itT
A. BO.

And that nany gyreies died then, you didn't hoar that?

1. In Dachau?

Q. Yob. Dachau.

A. Ho.

Q. Did ywi neot any of these 44 pooolol

A. Ho, there were not aany. Vhcn the oxoorlnents wore finishod,
saay gypolfi* vore sent to other concentration canoe. I in the hoeni-

tsl thon,

Q. And you voron't in ary nalarla experiment?

A. Ho.

CJ, Or typhoid experiment? .

A. Ho, tyrhold and aalaria was in Auschvltw. A lot of gypsies had

that in Auschwitr. Dead people were stacked like flour sacks and thon

tahen avay by trucks to the crcsatoriua. Gypsies and Jove veron't

*

anything in the caap.

3R. STIIHBADtet In the neantiao, hr. President, I have obtained
the creerpt free the crinlnal record, which is only in Gercan. I shall
iavo it translated and offer It to the Tribunal.

Tri PSLblDiST: Iroe that record you night ask the witness concern¬
ing the statesents on the record which you have.

EABDY: liay I see the record to check its authenticity? "ill

10543


Court So* 1 ;

1 1 47--ll-4-iS;-kaloy (7on Schon)


»>g Goman interpreters kindly look at this for bo to check its authen¬
ticity?

Q. VltMH, I don't want to hothor you with the oueation, hut do
ysu think it oossible you had cine conrictlons?

A. I don't reneabcr. I was a deserter and thoy betrayed no vhon
I cane to Auschwitz.

TH. S7SIH3AULB: I hare no further oueetlone, Your Honor.

CHI PRISISLST: Are there any other Questions to this witness hy
defer.#-! counsel?

DH. QA’.LDC: Gawllk for Horen.

CHS PBLSIIXHT: Coucicl, on vhat natter# do you desire to cxaninc
this witness?

HU GAVLUs About tho general treataont of Jews in tho concentra¬
tion cesp.

CHI PSSSIIfcHT: I don't seo the rolcvancy of that natter concerning
your client.


EH. GAVLH: In order to orove the attitude of Sr. Horon toward tho


Jove.


aH. HARDY: I think that is a natter of chronolo#^, tho attltudo
toward tho Jove in thie aattor, taki:* into consideration tho record of


tho Off.


CKa PR2SICIST: Arc you goin« to ask the witness whether or not ho
*r.ovs Horon?

EH. Ga' LIE: Ho.

CHS PHESttSXT: I see no nateriallty concerning the ceoe of Dr.
Sctoc la the esnninrtioc of this witness.


IS. GA* LIE: 7or ay case I consider it aaterial for ny closing
brief, but if the Tribunal does not think the cuoetions necessary then
I will dispense with then.

THE PBASIISKT: I see no pertinency of the Questions to your

dufenso.

IS. GAILS: I consider it oortinent to urorc tho gooi rocutation


105W.


“curt So. 1

i Jul 47--ll-5-SEK-aioy (Toe Schoa)


usd character of the defendant Dr. Eo»en and to prove that It ie unlikely
that ha eonaitted the offenses vlth vhich he 1 * charged. *

31. HSSI2&K: I suggest, counsel, if you contond that this witnese
ttev Dr. Eovon, then it would ho a different ouestion, hut you said you
ssio no such contention.

IB. QAVLXK: So.

IHi PHISIBiST: Then I soo nothing to which he can testify that
vould bo pertinont to Dr. Koran's defenso.

U-.. GAVLIK: Very veil.

IIS PT-iSIDaKT: Are there any other Questions by dofonse counool
representing clianto by whoa this witness say bo nroporly examined?

-J.. KAJtDY: I hare nothing further.

E* PEiSIDLiT: The witness Foellonroincr U oxcuscd fron the
v*tacos stand to be roconductod to his confinenent in tho prioon.

The Secretary of tho Tribunal - I see the Sccrotory is now absent.

HARDTJ Thu defenso counsel haro soao docunonts. I think they
5l«ht -ell introduce then nov. I this* I will bo in a position nt 1:3C
to start with docuaonts for identification.

3. SAUTXB: Kr. Prosidont, Dr. Soutcr for dofondants Slone and Huff.

I haro hoard that yesterday tho Tribunal askod for o list of docu-
nects vhich nro still to bo offorod by the dofonse. This norninr I
-, Wi qy colleagues hov nany docua.nts they still have to offor, and I
^ va iravn U P Q llBt vhich I nov hand to tho Tribunal so that the Tribunal
 11 info ra<«i. I shall hand you a list in a noaont. Cn tho right sldo
1 have always indicated whother theso docuaents arc in the hands of tho
Translation Branch, or whether thoy hare not yot been handed in. You will
V. eblo to got a picture fron this list. Unfortunately I have this list
:ch ' ic Arrian,-as there wp B no t enough tine to have it translated. I an
ttre, however, you win be able to understand tho list anyhow.

3Z fr_nSHS5T: I an surprised that defense counsel have docunonts
Ki± thoy haro not yet handed to translation. I understood all such
:cr.ts wv.ro in the hands of the translation department son* tine ago.


1055


i


1 July-tf-FL-12-l-lfcohnn (Int. von Schon)
C art So. I, Cose I


The Tribunal hes roceivud the list of th- documents refv-rro: 1 . to
by counsel.

DR. SA17ER: And then. Hr. President, may l make another renark?

I have aace a listing on a point, which the President brought up far
discussion about the approximate nuaber of pages of the closing briefs
and the final pleas, insofar as they have not yet been translated. I
have made this listing. Just a moment, perhaps 1 can give the court
sane copies of it.

IR. HARDY: Your Honor, from looking at this list concerning tho
supplement documents — wait a minute, I can see we only have to deal
with tho supplemental documents in the case of Schroeder, Hrugowaky,
Sievera ard Brack, cocabined with all the others are merely miscella-
neoua docu.aor.ts and it aeons to ate Bracks} Sc brooders', Sievera', Hru-
gcwskysi attorney should be able to prosent their documents today.

They certainly oust have had thoir documents in more than a wook ago,
particularly the defendants Greek, Siovors, and Urugowsky inasmuch as
their caoes wore completed weeks ago.

ER. SAUIER: Tho delay with many documents can bo explained by tho

fact that the Prosecution has offored now evidonce against various cb-

ferdants through tho cases has long boon completed. For example, against

the defendant Dr. Blome, whose case has boon finished fer months, ffldro

documents noro offerod last weok by the Frosocution. In this caso, I

have had no opportunity to call witnesses. I have made a state (rent on

this new ovidenco and on an important point 1 have taken ar. affidavit
%

of Dr. Bloao today. I want this affidavit, which was taken, to bo trans¬
lated. It was not possible to do that earlier and it is possibly the
same with other defense counsel. Those documents, »hich are still mis¬
sing, arc documents dealing with these recent charges raised by tho
Prosecution.

1R. HARDY: Your Honor, you see the great difficulty has boon hero,
-ha Prosecution, in an endeavor to bo cooperative with the Tribunal and


10546


I


i July-li*-FL-12-2-lfc eh an (Int. von Sc bon)
Court So. I, Case I


defense counEc 1, has introduced rebuttal evidence out of order. Mo have
done that to shorten the number of days and to expedite the closing of
the trial. In so doing, the defense coir.sel pickod up rebuttal ovidoi.cc
and tried to bavo no* affidavit cade.

I think a lanyer liko Dr. Sautor who went through tho whole I.U.T.
and is far aaro familiar with tho procedure of tho Tribunal is trying
to offer further evidence in rebuttal.to the Prosecution's rebuttal uvi-
d-Rce. Sc will never have the trial close if all of this evidence is
permitted today.

TC2 PRESIDENT: There is merit in what the Prosecution has add. Tho
Prosucution introduces evidence, the defense introduces ovidor.ee, tto

prosucution then introduces uvidonco in robuttal and then robuttal evi¬
dence is introduced by tho djfense. At tho conclusion of tto dofonoo's

robuttal, tho caso is onded.

%

The prosecution in order to oxpodito tho trial introducod saao
evidence out of order. Such evidence is not subject to dofcnchnt's ro¬
buttal, it ontitlos then to bring in further evidenoe, but the caso
clot*.a with tto orosentation of the defendant's rebuttal ovidonce. If
tr* evidence here had been introduced in an orderly ennnor, it would bo
undud. If, of course, the prosecution in rebuttal, after introducing now
evidenco that is not in rebuttal in what the dofenso's contention is,
the defense has an opportunity to lntroduco evidonco.

Ur. HARDY: Hay I correct you. Your Honor, you erroneously said de¬
fendant's robuttal when you juan proa, cut ion rebuttal.

T!ik PP.ESIDSNT: Yes, after receiving othor ovidcnco, which is not
n.hittal or in explanation of evidence introduced by tho dofensc that tho
r-" evidonco will lx. excluded then thoro is no necessity artf it might bo

a

-xcluded on objection. If there are no objections, it would go in. If it
».T3 aiaittod in evidence then tho defense might answer. If thi Prosecu¬
tion offers tho objection, it any open tho door fer the defendant to in¬
troduce othor evidence to deny it. That would be a mttur to be decided

102.7


1 July-'J-FI/-I2-3-Hcuhan (Int. von Schon)

Coo-t No. I, Case I

by the Tribunal and the Court trying tho ease as circus stances night

arisv.

Dr. SALTER: Hr. President, nay I saw something which is important
for nysolf and which also goes more or loss for all ny colleagues. Tho
Prosecution just said that Dr. Sautor had boon in tho I.U.T. and knew
tho Drocoduro very woll, New, I Bust say wo learned something new in
this fi^ld in nany respects. For example, that the Prosocution on tho

/

last day of tho ease can bring now witnesses that is soao thing now for
us. I, as defense counsel, if it is a fair trial, demand that if such
nvW evidence is brought in at the last moment, I am given an opportunity
to answer it.

I should like to show you by a practical cxnnplc' what I aca n. During
tta, whole trial, uhich has boor, going an for eight nonths, tho Prosocu¬
tion did r.ot say r. singlo word against tho dofvndnnt Dr. 31omu in con¬
nection with typhus. Then it would have been their right to charge tho
defendant Dr. Blxoo in this connection, but for eight nonths thoy did

not do so and new at tho last moment, I believe it was last Friday, a

•

document was submitted which suddenly charges the cfc ford ant Dr. 31 ace
with typhus oxTorioonts. In his whole 11 fo ho hoard nothing about ttora
and during tho nholo trial nothing was said about thon.

In tho Interests of a fair trial, tho Prosecution cannot say I aa
now in rebuttal and I think I have a right to dcoand that when such a
new charge is raised, I have a right to answer it and if this docucnt
is given to oa on Friday, I aa not a magician, I cannot offer the af¬
fidavit of the Da fondant Dr. Blceao months ago. That is apparently turo
of many other cases ol tho other dofonso counsel. Mr. President, I ask
the Tribunal to havo understanding fer this affidavit.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, nay I ask tho defence counsel onu question?

Is ths Defendant Blooe charged in the indictment with typhus? Ho, is tho
-.r.swer. No firthor questions.

DR. SA’JTHt: Then I would like to ask the Pro so cu tor why, I think it


10518


1 July-M-PL-im-i-Ubohan (Int. von Schon)

Court Ko. I, ^aao I

■as last Friday, ho subaittcd a docuaant which connects the defendant
BIoqo with typhus oxperinanta?

Ur. HARDY: The defendant Blome is not charged in the indictment
■ith typhus, tho ovidenco will show that the Prosecution definitely en¬
tertains no chargo against Defendant Blono with typhus. That is correct. .
It »ans to ao that defense counsel can reed tho record and soo r.hieh

evidence they can noil ignorj. I thirk in a question like this document,

% *

tUy would do woll to i^noro it. Tho affidavit shows the Tribunal tho

• .

entire proccoduro, they held conferences, how typhus oxporLaonts vtoro
started.

It 8*1 cas at this last date tho document at least did show Dr. Blomo
nr.a connected with typhus.

THS RIESTDEXT: You introduced no official evidence to shew that tho
defendant Blcoc was charged with typhus experiments?

Ur. HARDY: I did not introduce it. Your Honor, and this is tto first
tine tho Document was introduced.

* #

THE PRESIDENT: The natter of evidence is covered by Ordnance Ko. 7,
■hich allows tho Tribunal in its discretion to allow rebuttal on both
sides. Tho situation is not altogether fortunate, but I would like to
flay defondants in preparing those documents thoy woro informed they must
get in tlxdr documonts to tho Translation center. I don't know how many
documents ore ceding out. The translation authorities said the documents
would be turned out every chy beginning with yostoniay, today and to-
^rrtw. I don't know if tho (fefonse rocoivod any documents or not.

I notico defendant tfrugowsky has put in 19 documents,' put them in
on the 27th day of June — just a few days since. Have any dofonso coun¬
sel further documents to introduce? *««c have some here, I notico.

Dr. SAU7ER: Mr. President, may I add scoething? In rddition to tho
°n. list, which I gave you about the documents, which arc not ready yet,

I : -'.vo a second list which I also handod to you, showing approximately
thc • r - l «bcr of pages of tte closing briefs and final pleas, insofar as they

10549


1 July-H-FL-12-5 -Hgc hr. n (Int. von Sc ton)

Court No. I, Caso I

art not yot translated. On thu left side, I have the true of the <fa-
kzdmt. end defense counsel; in the adddlc, I have a colunn allowing
Hhuttor thoao closing briefs and pleas have boon handed in for trans¬
ition 7°t or not, or whether this translation is finished. On the ri^fit
side, I have the nuesbor of pages still to be translated. The ■r.Jority
of those closing briofs and picas are in tho tends of the translating
branch. I ra giving you this list so that tho President will have a pic¬
ture of tow ouch ante rial still has to be t ranslatod.

TOS PRESIDENT: I understand that tho nuabor of pages 3ixmn in tho

W“

right hand coluem siaply indicates the nuabur of pages not yet translated;
is ttet correct?

Dr. 3AUTER: Yes, tho nunber of pages not yet translated. On ttoso
thit are translated, I ateply aado s line and dash on tho right and that
is indicated in the contor coluon. lto figures on tte right oro only
th.osu which are otill to to translated, which have not yot co.au bee!: fran
th. Translation Branch. Thu President can soo how much work there has
to bo done by tho Translation Branch are! it will be oaolcr for tho Pre¬
sident to roach his dispositions.

THE PRESIDENT: Yds, I understand. Mo appreciate this list. Of courso,
tta tocuoonts which aunt bo introduced before the closo of tto evidence
ar> the natters of first importance. Tho briofs will bo dono as ooon as
thv documents which oro to bo roforrod in evidorKO aro roedy. I shall
tndcaver during tho noon rocoss to ascertain how the translation toonrt-
*“Rt is procooding.

Thu Secretary wiU file for t to record tto certificate concerning
<l-futoant Oborheuser who is i ll.

Tto Tribunal will bo in recess until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess was takon until 1330 hours.)


10550


- ; ' - 7- :~-i3-l-?~rrir. (Ir.t., roivCchon)

; art ‘.to. I


XBlCil


(Tho h Tin- reconvened zt 1330 hours, 1 July 19U7)

7!" ' i'iil: TSa TtUjddcI ia a~aLn in so salon.

- TDL (consol .‘or tie dcfandmta Ccbhnrdt end I'iachcr): 3r.

.-asidont, on lrot Irturdac’ ir. connection with Deexu -t Boob 18 , tho
•VcJ.-cutf.on offered on affidavit of the c'a:rT> corricndrnt "u rcn. This ia
~3oJ;8, * rhibit 350. I objected to t o ad lacier, of this document. T3v>
o-rt overruled ry obj.ctior. br.t arid tl.rt to reflate these str torents I eovlcl


v£ i 1 - os affidavit fror. tho ibfondant Earl Tobharit. I havo obtained
'da affidavit in tho Jntiao, and this nomine T sent Tour cooioa of
it to tho Translation Drench. I sh-uld li!:c to oTf-r this aa Ocbh&rdt
>: '.bit 55. It ia ^jcu- nt U7. .

7" : -I T.7- h't m—e.r did */ov. eriahto be raalynod to this
li, >umol?

•

Gobhrrdt *:5. I h-.ve no trsaflntd n of this docu eant ; at,
•. frcai.'ent, bat I r In : poaiti-r. to ;±vo tho Tribunal f-\>r copiaa
arm a: tlrt tho d' cc ant tnsber can *>c ar.t.rad.

7 "3 T " 7*. Z viael 7or the TVoaccution, are you zt -11 fauUlcr
ith tho rtf-ir ant?

' V :: w , I t net ‘rvdlitr Itli t!:a document, your "onor;
vor, it la s ' cuBuit ol tho Dofoac! -a • t. It is n • :*n to,

“ -a a tt-r of convenience -rjoditievsnosa, I ill net oajoct
t if n 'la^liah cj-; i3 filed *d h ua ir. Ora course.

7.:: r: I TUT: Iter I.r., ia tho -ifidarit, Ccvnaolt
7. <‘X7L' Vdsta y n, but*it ‘.a ritton uirlaly spaced.


. - 7- • C7 ccurSo, * ur onor, iris ia an anr-er to document idiich

• •


10551


i - 3 j-13-2-.''rrir. (jnt., vor. Schon)

"c. I


-.'xVrCt. Tbo -md-'.Tit cr Wixs 3uhrzn doesn't bring rxy nr.' evidence,

id.3 is -n ansv-r to tho rf ic-avit. In ry opinion in tho theory cf
:ho Irtr it is incorrect tc introduce it -rule bo .rrcno?'*sly

received, inasmuch as the affidavit cl Wits 3uhren is n thj nature :£
true routtal.

; r>r: arr- I think it -.rculd bo b=tt-r toseit until tho lr.it of
v_ docraonts aro effor-d 30 that ;.’o .Ight probably have the Tn-lish trans-
1 cn. 'To -/ill p“3s tho docuontn at tliia ti e and ccn3i‘.’.r it at sera
l*tor Cato.

I -ibuld it-to f :r tho benefit if cwai-1 fer both parti a t at thio
noon I 3p?!:o -.-ith tbo U>ad vf tho Translation Dopartoeftt. I trilled -./ith
Mr. 3r.turd-~ J .r. od;.oa, and bo told .\e that every dccuivent which bo led

f

1 :t atur.'ay, x; uld bo available or thda Tribunal toa-rrow ’wming,
odiMKlny ivraing. ”o inf~r=3 no today that ’zia prcriie -.rill bo carriod
i iy Creunont thtfc ho had at the tiro I s poteo t: liin last ,

-tur. ay -..•ill be ro&dy tern stow nerninj. "o also lnforned no that l»o
received joveral C-cu on'.a fer translation yostorCay, ni'-e an behalf
.* Vie TeCo:vlant Handles r, ir:va .n .o'.irlf of t'.vj Defendant r.cie, and ooro
l-cuonti frei: another defendant -hoio nano ho had forgotten. It aoona to

- chat aa Tar as Defendants I ru^o'.-a 1 .”* a. d andl-.sor ant’ ccnc-rn-d thoro
is Tittle ezcuio f-r the la to date th*.30 doeurzents are trrn.d intc tho
Translation, '.i tc tlu -th r defendants, I an not advised, bat jo rill
3c: ■'.•at :;o Ua.vo tci^rrcw * ming.

' :rv.noel for tho freiev.ti r. is raa<^- to 'ricood with hi 3 docunonto?
v. ' eWr : r.cr, I ihavld near liko to prcccod with tho docuncnts

•V.ich th.e W-aecuti-n have ir.tr dree * during the c urio of tho dofonao
* lich dccuronti have been narked for identi fi ca t ion nly. I '.111 c'ls-
ai'-uto a United mrzbor cf capios *f indcatis and deexr-ents -f th-io par-
r l-'curents • 'iich v:ro arbed far identification, in Tnglish and in
1 and •’>*rin; the nr.aontatlcn -f their decuronts for f-rnal adrittanco,

- Woooc’aticn a-euld r.anr-ciato artr tmj estiana fr a tho Tribunal in ccn-

- - n itli th.c ir.tr uuctirr. th_rccf. I :rv_ f ur copies f tr.o ccrrzlctc


10552


1 Jvlr- 7^'--:3”VI3-3-Pcrrin (Int„ vcn .chcn)
Ccart IT:. I


' nxxats vith index;i fer tho Tribunal. The tiro that I {risant.d to ’Jud"o

lahrias-anc*. Justico Boris yesterday vers a little ut cf ordir in ono cr

f_T> instances, but these, I a:: assured, :ro in bottar -rfiorj and I tliin!:

that if yen -.111 re ar t: thoso yu -.-ill hr.vo r. better index and - 1.1 the

bemonta o- -pieto. At the sans tins, I hr.vo cno cpy fer tho interpreters

•

in An^lish end ono fer tho c-urt reporters, 'e hr.vo f ur ronaininc copies

ir. OomrA fer tho defense counsel. Searin:; in slnd, :f c.ur;e, T.ur "oner,

•

th*t rll parties h:ro previously received c-pios of those docurwnts. Tho3o
.arc aor.ly fer convenience.

?HC IT. r-EECT: Tho 3ocrotary uiU Iirnd these docu ents tc tie Tri¬
bunal.

:n. :: ATf: If -four n-.rs plosso, fer ccnvcnionco, if you ill ta!co

•

the last deett ent, cn th betUa f all, that sh-uld bo tho first no ;ihieh
I :.iir i’.v.co •' ich is Inhibit U . UU 2 . 'feu aoo the -steris!: -n pa .30 1 -.rhich
refers tc tio last pc ,o. This is liiibit J*J|2, ’.illeh is D-current 1 !C—0S>2.

?;t that n tho t-p,‘ and then I tiiink e can e ntinua alone in srdor until

■c hit ‘n liur sr.-c. And as I 30 through tliose, V ur " n:r.

nr: TT.'Z I AT- Just a a nont, Counsel,

:: Tc: r.s, sir.

: "T.1 Its Tho last decunont....

• •

:r. •• rr Tho last dccurent as He. I?>C92.

TIT TT.I If IT: Th* t doesn't scon to bo hare, C:unsol.

Ill, . IT- Perhaps it's boon nit cn t:p.

Tin UI :;r* In, that i 3 n top. I th *.v:ht ycu ref-rred to tho
last dccurient in tlis beck, Tory -oil.

A. Il flTf- Tho first ± cv: ent is JV.cu er.t HC-092, fiich is VJiibit
I* . V 1 :?, 'ich I -Ter at tlii3 tine fer rlly It adrissi n into :vidonco .

7' TJDTT- can y u state, C-unsol, in crnnocti.n -nth each
' cv :r.t tho nano -f the defendant in comvecti r. -.. 1 th ah so evidence f:esc
' eve ants xr_ identified?

• •

AST: That uld bo alncst an lisp: ssibility.

3.0So3


7-‘ ~3-13CL-?crrin (int., v:r. Scl i on)

rrfe I'c. I


r.r* • ’I -T: V;ry I Jiwt as!:c<i Ter tl» inferseti'*.

T: n~7zr'r, thi3 i3 a cutliraar.^ic d'cun-r.t.


10554


1 Jul-A-l2-li*-l-Friaeau (Int. von Schon)

Court !io. I.

I think I cm do that. Your Honor. Miss Johnson has proporod
a list for no.

This document NO-392, which is offered cs Prosecution Exhibit
No. hh2, ms introduced during the course of tho cross oxanination of
K'.rl Brandt and is found on page 25UO of tho official transcript.

TIE {RESIDENT: What page. Counsel?

MS. HARDY: Tho pugo is contained in tho index. Your Honor.

The index has tho page of the official transcript.

THE {RESIDENT: That is in tho right-hand colunn?

MR. HARDY: That is right. Your Honor.

THE {RESIDENT: All right.

KR. HARDY: hill I assxno. Your Honor, that those docurcnts
aro accepted into ovidenco and continuo right along unless thoro aro
objections to tho contrary?

JUDGE S2BRINQ: Mr. Hardy.

!R. HARDY: Yos, Your Honor.

JUDGE SE3RING: I notice in soveral of thuso thoro is a re¬
ference; Troll, in 890, for oxenplo, "on tta* basis of a lottor directod
to iVofossor Dr. Brandt"; and, if you can, when you cooo to the docu-
-nts referring to Dr. Brandt, IT it is convonicnt for you to do so,
rill you indicate whether that is Karl Brandt or Rudolf Brandt?

IS. HARDY: Yos, Your Honor.

JUDGE S3)iU:Os And also it appears that sooe of those copies
do not h-vc signatures, and it nay bo that the originals do. If thoy
dc, will you ploase give us thj doeuxats — for oxonplo, tho last ex¬
hibit, Ul *2 — I don't knew whothcr that hod a signature or not.

MR. HARDY: Tho last exhibit does not have a signature. Your
Honor. It is a certified copy by tho — I think it is tho prosecutor
a the court officer in Frankfurt fror. when we rocoived the copy. It
is purported to be a copy of th. original.

JUDGE SEPRI'C: Tho lottor itself evidently has a signature, bo-

cousu the word "signature" is written thoro, but the naao is. nbt trans-

10555


i jal-4r-?B-lii-2-IViai2u (Int., von Schor.)

Court No. I.

cribud.

13. HARDY: That la right, *our Honor. The nauo wasn’t re-
pr educed.

Tt-Ei IRHSIDdHTJ These docuacnts, r.s they oro called to the

-.ttention of tho Tribunal end offered, will considered as received

in evidorco unless thoro is an objection, in which ovent, of course,

the objection will bo heard end decided.

iR. HARDY: There is ono other point I vant to clarify, Your
N

Hencra. When I r-fer to those dccviunts which are sufcnitted during
the cross-ex.-ninr.tion of a particular defendant I do not linit tho
docuncnt rnd tho contents thereof to that particular defendant's cr.so.

It try woll fit into othor defendants' ensos.

T l 3 ^RESIDENT: That will tx. undorstoed.

1R. HARDY: Tho socond is Ifcwuxint *10-890, which is offorod as
prcsecution Exhibit No. U*3. This was introduced during the cross-
exanination of tho Defendant Karl Brandt and is found on pa go 2500 of
tho transcript. Tho original letter*. Your Honors, contains a signature
which I m unable to decipher and is illegible, unloss it could bo de¬
ciphered by other Ooruan handwriting experts.

Tho next is Dvcuncnt NO-1758, which is offered as Prosecution
cothibit No. 1M. This is found on page 25U5 of tho official trans¬
cript. These are excorpts frrn Gorxral Haldor's diary. Tho dicry

was taken in shorthand. Thu original shorthand notes wore transcribed

& •

into Germn -nd duly certified. Your Honor.

Tile FRaS.’DE.’.Ti .that is the mxubor of that docunont, Counsol?

13. HARDY: That will be Exhibit UUj. Thj docunont nurfcor is

::o-1758.

Tho rext docujxnt is Docurunt NO-119, which is efforod as
ir.secution exhibit U*5, found -n page 2638 of tho transcript, and is
an rd_r of tha Fmhrcr regarding the rcleas- of doctors froa their
professional discretion. This is an original letter, Your Honor, which
is cn th_ official stationery, of th_ National sozialistischc Deutsche


10556


1 Jul-:.-:3-li.-3-Prir-32u (Int. von Schon)

U eurt No. I.

.j*Ixj lt^rpirtci and m a found by tlm ft-osocution in the document center
In Vienne, and ia duly certified. This ia also offered in connection
with the easo of Karl Brandt.

Tho rtxt docurmnt, four Honor, ia NO-15U, which ia offered as
rrrsocution Exhibit U*6, which ia found also on pngo 2638 of the of¬
ficial transcript, and this ia n report on sax oxporimonts with the
dccontoninetion of water. Tho original oxhibit is a photostatic copy \

hich ia allied. This was found by aysolf personally in tte filos of
the Reich Research Council in Frankfurt.

Tho notft document ia Decuaant 110-11*19, rfaich ia offered as
Prosecution Exhibit 117, which is found on page 26!*1 of tho official
transcript and ia a latter free Rudolf Brandt to Karl ITolff regarding
the food experiments in concentration campe. Pardon do, Your Honor —
correction — it is a lottor free Karl Brandt to Itolff, and it boaro
the original signaturo of tho defendant!Karl Brandt.

Tho next document is NO-1382, i.hich is offerod aa Proaocution
Exhibit 118 and is found on page 2611 of the official transcript, during
the courso of tho cross examination of tho defondant Karl Brandt, Those
aro two telegrams. Your Honor.

The next document is NO-1620, which ia offered as Prosecution
Exhibit Iiii9 and found during the cross examination of Karl 3randt, on
page 261*6 of the official transcript. This is a memorandum from
Grat.lt* to Hirrlor or. proposed medical experiments and then the reply
of Rudolf Brandt for Hiaxler. Tim original exhibits contain the
original signature of Reichsarzt SS Grawitz and also the initials of
the Defendart Rudolf 3randt.

The next ia 1190, NO-li90, i.-hich is offerod as Prosecution Ex¬
hibit 150, ahich is found on page 3021 of tho official transcript.

Thes-. are two letters regarding the Handloser appointment to the Reich
Hcsearch Council, which were introduced during the cross-examination
of the Defendant Handloser. These are in the original. Your Honor,

•■•ith an envelope attached thereto. One has the typewritten sigreturo


1055 ?


1 Ji -'-12—iii-U-Priaeau (Int. von Schon)

Court. Ko. I.

of Press, and the other has a signature which I aa unable to make out,
and you recall that thero was a note on the top regarding Prafossor
Rostock.

Tho next is a state cent by the Defendant Handloser, which is
SO-732, which ie offered as Prosecution Exhibit 1*51. It is found on
p ge 3C&0 cf tho official transcript. This was likewise offered dur-
irg tho course of the cross examination of the defendant Handloser.

The next is Document NO-1323, which is offered as Prcsocution
Exhibit No. 1*52, which is found on po^o 3002 of tho official trans¬
cript and bears tho original sipiaturo of tho Defondant Handloser. It
has an attactaont thereto and it concerns spottod fuver or typhus vac¬
cines.

Tho noxt —

I

JUDGE S2BHIN0* Wait Just a nlnuto, ploaso. No. 732 was 1x51?

IR. HARDY: Tos, Your Horwr,

JUDGE SSBRING: No. 1323 was 1*52?

HARDY: Yes, Your Honor.

JUDGE SECRI.C: And No. 1321 is 1*53?

1R. HARDY: That is what it will bo. Your Honor. I aa getting
to that now. Do Your Honors have copios of tho index boforo you?

JUDGE SZflRr.JG: Yes.

W. HARDY: Next is Docxaxnt 110-1321, which is offored as
Prosecution inhibit No. 153, vtiich is found on pago 3061 of tho of¬
ficial transcri;* bnd was introduced during tho cross examination of
tho Defendant Handlosor.

Tho noxt docicx-nt. Your Honors, is NO-1315, which is offorud
ns FTosocution Exhibit No. USh. It is found on pogo 3036 of tho of¬
ficial transcript and was offered during the cross examination of the
D.fondant Handlosor. It contains the original signature of one Dr.

Biebor.

The next is Docurcnt NO-1316, which is offered as Prosecution
exhibit No. U55. It is found on pago 3090 of tha official transcript


10558


1 Jul-AHS-lu-5-Friaoau (Int. von Schon)
Court ::c. i.


and was offered during the cross examination of tho Defandant Handloscr.
This contains an original signature which is reported to be illegible
in tho translation and I, unfortunately, ac unable to decipher it.

THE IRsSIDrUT: That, Counsel, is Document 1315?

IE. HARDY: 1318, Your Honor. It is offered as Exhibit 1*55, as
indicated on the index.

Tho next document, Your Honor, is Docuaont HO-1852, which is
offered as Prosecution Exhibit 156, which is found on page 3106 of tho
official transcript and was introduced during tho course of tho cross-
examination of tho Defendant Rostock. At that tino it was objectod to
by Dr. Sorvatius. The original copies of tho documonts woro sont horo
fron Notrwoilor and warn oxhibUed to Dofonso Counsol, and ho infonaod
ru orally that ho withdrew ot>Jootion after having tho opportunity to
peruso tho original documents.

Tto noxt docur^nt. Your Honor, is NO-692, which is offorod as
Prosocution Exhibit No* 1*57, found on pago 3U08 of tho official trans¬
cript and was introduced during tho cross examination of tho DofoOdaot
Rostock. This is a list of rosearch assignments from tho officu of tho
Chiof of Scionco and Research. Tho Defendant Brandt signed, tho orig¬
inal signaturo by tho Defohdant Rostock.

Tho roxt document, Your Honor, is Document MO-931*, which is
offered as Prosocution Exhibit No. 1*58,' and which is found on pago
3655 of tho official transcript and is a list of further assignnents
in resaarch in connection rith tho office of tho Roich Roscarch Council
and tho Chiof of tto Kcdicol Services. .That is the cffico of Dr. Brandt,
Karl Brandt.

Tho noxt document, Your Honor, is Docurxjnt NO-232, which is
offorod as Frosccution Exhibit No. 159 It is found on page 1*237 of
th.- official transcript and is a letter freo Gohhardt to Brandt regard¬
ing experiments at Dachau.

JUDGE S2BHIM3: Ifhich* Brandt ?

IP.. HARDY: This should tx: Rudolf Brandt, Oborsturrbannfuchrcr

10559


1 Jui-A-! 3-j^i-6-Pr La33u (Int» von Schon)
Court So. I.


Dr. Brandt. That is to be found during the cross oxacimtion of tin
defendant Gebhardt.

^ The next docurxnt. Your Honor, is MO-919 which is offered as
Prosecution Exldbit 160, found on pago 121L of the official transcript,
*as offered during the cross examination of tto Defendant Gebhardt.
Tr-is is a Hlnalur erder regarding experimentation on concentration
canp irnotoa.


10560


Court 1

July l-A-15-l-HD-Nlnabudc-Von5chon.


*

THE PRESIDENT: One moment, counsel. I don't seem to
have that In order.

MR. HARDY: That's 919, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: I have It.

HR. HARDY: Now, If you will turn to the second page
; the Index Your Honor, you will come to Document N0-190,
which la offered as Prosecution Exhibit No. 461, which la

0 K

found on page 4714 of the official transcript and was Intro¬
duced during the course of the examination of the Defendant
Blonc.

Tho noxt document. Your Honor-

THE PRESIDENT: Just a minute Counsol.

MR. HARDY: Yes, Your Honox*.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel on tho top of the aooond pago
of this lndox I find Doounant 1,185.

HR. HARDY: The second page?

THE PRESIDENT: No, Page 2 Is omitted from my lndox.
That 1 8 the top of Pago 3, but I have no Page 2.

MR. HARDY: I will send you up a Page 2 Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: I have one. I have another Pago 2

ho re.

MR. HARDY: On Page 2, Your Honor, tho top documont
Is NQ-190. It Is offered as Prosecution Exhibit 461 and
lc found In tho transcript on pages 4714 and was introduced
during tho examination of the Defendant Blomo. * re you in
order now, Your Honor?

THE PRESIDENT: Ju6t a moment — yes.

MR. HARDY: The next document Is No-1424, which Is
ffered os Prosecution Exhibit No. 462, found on pago 4773
of the official transcript and was offered during the
examination of the Defendant 31oae. The next document Is
NO-1057, which Is Prosecution Exhibit No. 463, found on


10561


Court 1

July l-A-15-2-HH-Nlaasucit-VonSchoen.


-a 4783 of the transcript, and was offered during the
examination of the Defendant Blone. This bears the original
initial of the Defendant Rudolf Brandt.

The next document, Your Honor, Is NO-1368, which la
Prosecution Exhibit *164, found on page-4807 of the official
transcript and was Introduced during the exanlnatlon of the
Defendant Bloco. It boars the original initials of tho
defendant Roudolf Brandt. The next document, Your Honor,

Is Docunont NO-435,'which Is offered as Prosecution Exhibit
465, It Is found on page 4983'of tho transcript and was-
;fforod during tho examination of tho Defendant Rudolf
Brandt. It has thereon various signatures, and letters from
Hlnolor oro attaohod thoreto, and we will find endoraomonts
vhioh contain tho original initials of the Defendant Rudolf
Brandt. Tho Tribunal will rocnll that he properly Identified
thorn durlDj tho course of his examination.

Tho next document, Your Honor, Is NO-1198, which Is
offorod as Prosecution Exhibit 466, found on page 5390 of
tho official transcript and Is a lottcr from Qrawltz to
Hrujuvsky which was Introduced during the exanlnatlon of
the Defendant Mrugoweky. It Is sl c ned In a typewritten
signature by Gravltz and then "by order of Grawltz," and
tho criminal signature of one, ■Nicolai" appears on the
orl-.inal document.

The next document. Your Honor, is N0-1303, which Is
Prosecution Exhibit 467, round on page 5400 of the official
transcript and Is a letter from Mrugpttsky to the Relchearzt
53, bearing tho Initials of the Defendant Hrugowsky.

The next document. Your Honor, Is NI—034, which is on
affidavit of a witness named Rudolf Hoess, and It Is
Prosecution Exhibit 468, found on page 5407 of the transcript

10562


&u*t 1

July l-*-15-5-H3-:Clna'cuck-VonScfaoen.

mi w r.a Introduced during the cross examination of the
Defendant Xrugovsky. This also bears a Jurat thereon to
the signature of Rudolf Hoess, of one Alfred H 3uch, who
is duly authorized by the chief of counsel to admlnlator
oaths. Your Honors will notice thnt in addition to this
affidavit, which X cay not hnve called to your attention
’• rin. tho course of the cross exnnlnatl n of the Defendant
Kru owsky, Is a rather elaborate chart of the concentration
oa-ps- In Germany. The Pr~.socutlon did not have this
reproduced for tho convenience of the Trituna. However,
tho Tribunal will note th«t Is Is attached to the original,
nnd if they doslre photostatic copies thereof, they nay well
have the Secretary General reproduce then for their use.

I Just noticed this myself when I looked at the original
exhibit.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will be glad to have thoso
ohotoetatlc copies.

HR. HARDY: It is nothin^ of evidential value, I think,
Your Honor, other than tho location of particular concentra¬
tion camps.

DR. FLEMMING: (For Mru a owsky) Mr. Proaldont, I objeot
to the auboiasion of this chart. It was not Included when
the doouaent was offered originally. I do not know this
chart and therefore I sust object, since I do not know what
IS chows.

HR. HARDY: I an not offerln^ It in evidence. Your Honor,
I was merely calling It to your attention. It la Immaterial
t- no whether It Is accepted Into evidence or not. I thought
- r the c.nvenlence of the Tribunal If they would like to
sco a letalled nap concerning the location of concentration
Camps, it is there for your perusal.

THE PRESIDENT: It is not received In evidence, not


10563


Court 1

July l-A-15-4-HD-Nlnatuck-Von3choen»


having been offered In evidence.

MR. HARDY: The next is Document N0-1305, Your Honor,
vftich la offered as Prosecution Exhibit 469, which Is found
on page 5426 of the official transcript and was offered
luring the course of the cross examination of the Defendant
.irugowsky. •

DR. GAWLICK: Mr. President, I should like to have the
Prosecution explain whether this ehxlblt Is to be used only
against the Defendant Mrugowsky or also against tho Defendant
Dr. Kovon, who Is mentioned In It.

MR. HARDY: I think I have amply explained that In our
briefs, Your Honor. I am not In a position today to elabor¬
ate on each document. I have here several documents that

§

number up into the fifties, and it would place a burden upon
ue, as one prosecutor, to onnblo each one of these defense
counsel — I an not In a position to write a brief for each
one of them at this time.

THE PRESIDENT: When defendants' oounsel recelvo tho
briefs of tho Prosecution, tho defendants' counsel will be
fully advised as to whloh doounonts are relied upon as
evldonoo against which particular defendant or defendants.

MR. HARDY: I might state that he may rest assured
that this document will be used against him If it has any
connection with the typhus experiments at Buchenwald, and
he may guide himself accordingly In his brief.

Tho next Document Is N0*1188, whloh Is offered as
Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 470, which is found on page 5437 of
the official transcript and was offered during the cross
examination of the Defendant Hrugowsky. This has the original
signature of Lolling, The next Is itooument NO-1109, which
is offered as Prosecution Exhibit 471 and is found in the

original transcript on page 5440 and was offered during the

* * ^

i

10564


10564


Court 1

July l-A-15-5-HD-Ninabuck-VonSchoen.

cross examination of the Defendant Mrugowsky, and you will
•ccnll ot that time that the document was objected to by
Defense Counsel and that the defendant himself Indicated
that he was fully aware of the contents of the document,
n.nd at that time the objection was withdrawn.

THE PRESIDENT: Just delay a moment, Courtepl, before
offerelng the next document.

MR. HARDY: Yes, Xbur Honor. I want to call to.the.. ..
tribunal*s attention that this lost document also bears
thereon the original signature of Dr. Ding. It's In the
left-hand corner, seoond page of the original document.

The next document, Ybur Honor, Is Document No-119?,

which Is Introduced as Prosecution Exhibit 472 and Is found

on page 5451 of the official transcript and boars the

Signature of the Dofendant Mrugowsky. If I recall correotly,

ho proporly ldontlflod that os his signature during cross

examination. The noxt Is Document NO-2734, which la offorod

as Prosecution Exhibit 473, which Is found on pago 5622 of

• •

the official transcript. It Is a letter from Orawltz to
Himmler regarding clinical surgical experimentation by
Oobhardt, with enclosures. The original has the signature
of Grawltr thereon; It also has the original slgnaturo'of
the Defendant Gebhardt and a note thereon, and In addition
to that, on the last oago of tho document, wo note tho
original signature of tho Defendant Poppendlck, whloh was
properly Identified by the Defendant In tho course of his
examination.- This was introduced during tho cross
examination of the Dofendant Poppendlck.

DR. SEIDL: (for Gebhardt) Hr. President, I object to
tho admission of this document at the present time. Document
liO-2734 was not shown to the Defendant Karl Gebhardt in orosa
examination tut to the Defendant Poppendlck. It was


10565


Court 1

jal;* l-A-15-8-ED-Hlnabuck—Vonschoen.


I? vae obviously shown to the Defendant Poppendlck only In
order to determine the correctness of his signature at the
and of the document. Only one photostatic copy was shown
to the Defendant Dr. gpppendlck on the vltneee stand by the
"rosecution. Defendant Gebherdt nor I myself had any
,wlodge of the contents of this document. Today I see
this document for the first time. Consequently I have had
;/. opportunity to present any evidence against the contents
of this document. In flew of the fact that the Prosecution
has not as yet given the Defense any copies of this Document,
I make application that this document be admitted only for
Identification but not as an exhibit.

HR. HARDY: May It please Your Honors, it amazed me no
ond that Dr. Soldi hasn't seen this before, because It was
a topic of conversation here for several weeks that wo had
a document, an original report of the experiments of Gobhnrdt
and It seems to mo that I roooll evon chatting with Defenec
Counsel about it, but I may be recalling lncorroctly.

Bo waver, this document is n robuttnl dooumont In the same
nannor as all tho rost. The Defendant Gobhnrdt took this


etand and sold that Mrugowsky had nothing to do with those
experiments, night in this document ho thanks or wlshos
to thank Krugowsky, Blusenreuther, and so forth for their
assistance. This doo-aont Is In the nature of a rebuttal
document. It Is a Gorman document, and It couldn't be any
more original than It la. It has been In the hands of
Defense Counfeel, to my knowledge. Defense Counsel for
Popvondlck had It for^several days and had the opportunity
o:serve It, and whether or not the Defendant Gobhnrdt
urd an opportunity to be heard on the dooament Is Immaterial.


It is a rebuttal document. It rebuts the testimony of the
Defendant Gobhnrdt directly. I wish to pass it up to
Itur Honors, for your perusal.


10566


i July li7^-A7D-l6^UOrcs3 (Int. von Schon)

Gcnrt «o. 1


HU H..3D?: (continued) Jbaza natter of fact. Your Ifcnor, it would
fcnva boon introduced iiriir- the cross grand nation of tho Do fondant
Ocbhardt hid wo raedvod it, o found it coincidontally on tho
aomine of tho cross oxarlnation of PoppendLek and it had his
si:naturo thoroon, That*s why I used it imodiatoly. At that tico
It lad not boon processes but sinco then it has boon processed, and
I -avo boon info mod teat copies have bo<*i dolivjrod to dofonso
ccunael imediatoly upon the completion of the processing, which was
‘•irinr, tho course of the caso of Popper. Hc!c, I aa not cortoin, but
as I rononbor this docurxmt was introduced on 9 ..pril, find this is
now 1 July,

TIE raZ3HE:rr: Tho fir.ll record on ;ajo 5622 as shown on
this indox noui: show what happened* Tho '.ocunont will bo rocoivod
in ovidonco.

Counsel for tho Dofondant Cobhnrdt, of courso, nay nako any
ar uwar.t in his brief against tho application of this rtocunont to
his diont that he. deans to bo well foundo:!,

IR- The next docurwnt. Your Honor, is 10-1639, which is

intre ’.uco l as Prosocution Schiblt It is found on pago 5622 of
tho roc or-!. It was intro \icod tirin'* tho cross oxnndnition of tho
tefandant PopporxAck, This documnt boars tho original si'pvaturo of
tho Itoichsarzt SS, Dr, Grawitz.

TfE i-SSITHlTt Coun3ol, bn*t That is ccrroct,

!!n. P-’.TDI t Tho naxt doettjent, Tcur Honor, is NO..

TIE mSIDEHT: Just a .v^nt, Counsel, I dor.»t observo that this
ocunont boars tho si -naturo of Grouitz,

r !H, K.'OT: Thi3 is a letter by Grawitz to tho Rcich3arzt-SS on
sterilization datod 7 September 19U2,

T'E rYESITENTi Tho pa-os were not clippod tcrethar. I assunod
that the exhibit constituted only the first para which is a conploto
-bcunont,

10567


1 July U7-^-t»TD-46~2-Gros3 (Ir*t. von Sc ton)
Court So. 1


JUDGE SEBRIlCi I notice ttot in your schedule you have 1639 and

1639-c.

Hi. HAHDY: That is correct. Tour Honor*

JUDGE SEB'JHj: And yot you have throe pc^os of one docununt
callod Ho* fC-1639.

3R. H'.PJDTt Just a nonont, I think at that tlno I ms introJuciHc
then with two different si'jnaturos, and it vms Your Honor's su';"ostion
that I break than up into !©«1639 an’ ?t>-l639-a« One is a lottor of
Grawitz and that*s perhaps why it indicates 1 of 3 pa^os, bocausa wo
broko then up for conmrdonco at that tlno, if ny n-nory seryos no
corrootly. 1639 is noruly tho correspondence to Himlor signed by
Grawitz.

JUDGE SEBPJHjX That will bo U7L and tho lotter by Poppondiok
"ill bo li75?

in. HUB? * That is correct, Ycur Honor.

Tho noxt document is JC-1639-a, which is offorod as prosocution
Exhibit U75 and is found on pa-o 5622 of tho rocord, which is a lottor
si'nod by tho Dofonlant Pop.xmdick, and his ori lnal signature appoara
ttoroon*

Do you havo that ntrni.htonod out now. Tour Honor?

TJE mssioarrt tot nunber ‘ocuacnt was that. Counsol?

•

!EU H'.RDYt That was 1639-c, which is Prosecution Exhibit ii75*

THE : TESICEHT: Tos, no havo that.

I®. HARDYt Ittcht, now tho noxt ono, Tho noxt one is W>0J.81i,

■hich is Prosocution Exhibit U76. This is found on paco 5639 and
•r?.s intro-bicod durirv; tto cross oxardnation of tho Defendant
Poppandick and boars tho criminal sl-naturo of tto Defondant
Poppondick.

0

JUDGE SEBRIMi: Incidentally, on tto loft-hand side appears a
v-n.i-writton 3 tatenant ‘Uin;; for ,rocassiry-"* In what hanirritinr is

that?


10568


I July L7-i>»TI>-l6-3*Oross (Int. von Schon)

Ccurt Xc. 1

!n. H..3I! Thntts Dr# Dinc*3 sir-nature in the left-hand corner,
Tour Honor# Tho otter writing scene to bo tho s r.no pennanship, but I
rocoTnizo that as Dr. Dine*3 si-mature.

The next document, Tour tenor, is !» 1182, which is efforod as
Prosecution Exhibit 177, which is cn pago 5611 of tte official •
transcript end was offered during cross oxanination of tho Defendant
poppondick and boars the ori Inal si-maturo of one Vonkonnol. This
is cn original Gorman dfcuaont on tte stationery of Vonkonnol.

DR* FLSriMj; !!r. prosidont, for ltrurowsky. In connection with
’ocuaint ID-1181*, Ju:!go Sobrirv said thero waa a simaturo at tho
loft. 3!r. Hardy said that waa tho signaturo of Ding. Thoro isn»t
my 3i nature on tho left tero. I should liko to soo tho original.
(Lcoka at ori ;inai)

That was not oopdwd.

MU H.nDT* Tho noxt doe unant, Tcur Honar, roforonco 'till bo
found on a-:o 3 of tho index. Tho first dacuricnt on .'ago 3 is N>1185,
•hich is offorod as Prosocution Exhibit 1*78, which is found on uago
561*8 of tho transcript and was intro 'uood tirin; tho cross oxanination
of tho Dofsrvlant Poppondick, and this boars tho original Initials
of Et. Ding.

Tte noxt docuasnt, Tcur Honor, is IFO-975. It was offorod as

Prosocution Exhibit 179, which is foun on page 5037 of tho official
transcript and was i itroducod :iirin; cross examination of tho
DafonJant Sievors. This is a file copy of a lottor to Professor Hirt.

Tte noxt iocuajnt. Tour Honor, is tt>970* It is offorod as
Prosocution Exhibit 180, foun' on 5813 of tho record and was
-fforod during tte cross oxanination of tte Dofondant Siovors. It is
a lottor fPen Siovors to Gluccks. Parcbn no. This is a plan of Military
:ciontdflc Rosoaroh to bo carried cut in tho concentration oanp
.latzwcilor. Tte ori-Inal exhibit is a copy and a notation that a copy


10569


1 July l7-u-j.TD-l6-i-<Jross (Int von Sohon)
Court Jfo. 1


ras-also sent to Professor 2irt. Ho signature appears on the carbon
oopy. fotrovor, tba rank of SS-ObcrsturcbarsniXiohrer appoars bolow
-/bore tho si {nature should appear. It is fron the Chiof of tho
.vhivsnarbo and is essuaod to bo the Dofondant Siovors* lottor.

Tho noxt is Document JO-935* vhich is efforod as Prosecution
Exhibit 181, found on pa 20 5815 of tho rocord, ns introduced durinc
tho cross oxnrdnation of tho Dofondant Siovors. The first lottor in
this dccuront boars tho initials of Siovors, an J in addition tho
second lottor has tho si^naturo of Siovors thoroon.

Tto noxt Jocuaent, Tour Jfonor, is !J0—977, which is Prosocution
Exhibit 182. It is found in tho transcript on pa-;o 5817. It was

\

introduced luring cross axarination of tho Dofondant Tlovora, and

you will find tho initials "i", tho initials of tho Dofondant

Siovors, appoarir*; on tho cri.lnal docurxmt,

* \

Tho noxt document, Tour Honor, is JC-221D, which is offorod as
Prosecution Exhibit 1*83, found on ,xiqo 5850 of tho official transoript
and rasintro'ucod durir. tho cross oxanlnation of tho Dofondant
niovors, and you will rvito that tho original ‘ocurcnt boars tho si ;na-
turo of tho Dofondant Siovors.


10570


i juv i947---a*-i7-:

Ciurt !fc. 1.


Clr.t. VCW Sch-n)


The n.-i -cucxnt, Y,ur H.nor, is MO-1657, ir.ich is Prosecution
Exhibit 464, f ua: in pace 5851 tf th, fTici-1 ivc rd -nd is
_-cuo_nt c ntr.inin- 4 lottcrs. The first ini berjs the si ;nr.turc
of Dr. nuehlcns; the second one baire the si 71 -turc -f SS 3ri ~.dc-
fuhrer Gluccks; the third letter bears the si;;r.turo f Sieves;
rxvd the f-urtfc Litter bears the si nr. our_ ,f Silvers.

T-*. next d cumnt, Y-ur H xi-r, ia '..'0-1331, >hich is Pr-sccuti?n
achibit A85, tx)aZ n 4 x 170 5859 :f the record an! was intrxiicod
tains the cr ss-vahednatien of tit Defea’.-rfc Sievj-s. It is noted
tfr.t tlic ri in* 1 initials t the w cfennt SL-vors ,.c.r jt\ the

d.cuticnt.

B» next d:cu.a.nt, Y ur Hon.r, is D-cuixnt NO-1756, ihich is
rrosecuti -n Exhibit 486, found ir. the tr~nscri;;t on.jr.:o 6411; it
ir.s introduced iiirin~ the cr ss-cxoiin*.tion of the Dofendant Rose;
letter t: Profess or Schilling. It is e file c j..y.

The next doouflenfc, Your Hen-r, i4 D-cu:cnt NO-1752, liiich ia
ff-n. '. *.o Pr.'soctttion Exhibit 4C7, f un'. -n ,r. 0 6415 of tho
record. It ir.s intr>'.ucc: '.urir. the cr- 33 *«-xrxdn'.ti n f the
[fcfcn’.'.nt i’.aoo and bears the rijinal si nature of Klr.ua Schilling,

0 lettor hddresse! to Prfesser Rose.

Tlx, r~xt d cuxrti, Y.ur H nor, is NO-1753, Pr- sc. cut in Sehibit
488, f >und n . v.e 6413 -f thi ffidhl tr-nscri;t an! .c.s intr '.ucod
■urin the cr , 33 -oe-xxin'ti-r. -f ti»- Defen n-t R so, be..rs the ari^inal
si ir.tuj-- .f SchlUin * an'. ia r.d reS3^d t. f r;fossor R se.

The next -cu-^-nt, I ur H r. r, 11 u cun.rfc NO-1755, ?r s^cuti.n
achibit 469, fmnd n 64l? -f tl-.c fficir.l tra:»scri.t, ir-s
intr. ‘.ucod dir in; the crjsa-cxauinnti :» ,f the Defendant H oc rnd
bo'-ra die letter initial "R- .f fch- deXen.T-nt R.ac, letter
iirectod t Dr. Klaus Schiliir. 7 .

r.:e* *vxL d curxnt, Y-ur H-ncr, is d cu.xnt ;«0-1059, ffered .as
Pr .accution Exhibit Ns. 490, found a .xa,c 6426 cf the -fficir.l


1 July 47-.-r^-17“2-I>-ascr (Int. Von Schen)

Court lb. 1


rccorx'., was intr-xiicoa Jwiiv; the cr'«s-cx~ainati _n f Vie Dofonlcnb
2«c oni is a file copy of a letter roUrosaod to tho Defendant Rose,
*ftich is a report ,n oxpcrittnts with ixhy^rato typhus vaccine.

JUDE SJ3RDG: Do y u hire any inf-ror.ti-n abotf, '-ii-a this
letter is frxj?

Ul. 1UUY: This is a letter that the Pr-secuti n, Y(Xir Honor,

I can jXvb y*i uoru Jircct inf:xtr.ti-n n.u that I have stulic;: it
.urc cl-sely. This is a letter which the P»*.cution f utC in the
files of ?rofosoor Haakon. It is a file copy -f a letter Rdlroaaod
t. Fr-fessor l:»c.

The next d cuont, Y or Hcn,r, la NO-1754, Stare.', as Prosecution
Exhibit 479, fourvl on ;*v. a 6460 of tho rfficifll transcript, irac
intr. ucc'. .urin. the orosa-ocrxdnation -f tho Defendant .1 oc r.nl
bears the ri M'-l si ;n-.tmv of the DcfcftJftit Uru^owsky.

TIC IR2SID31T: That is r.:t Exhibit 479, C unsul; it is 491,

is It not?

■JR. E.UUY: 491. Par- nno. Your 491. The noxt Oocuoent

•

Your H.n-r, is D-cuent 10*1186, which is prosecution Exhibit 492,
f.un! jo . 6463 -f the resort'., was intr-Uuoo^ .'.urin- the cr.ao

cocuiination f the Defendant .lose an*, beers the si mature -f tho
Do fen: ant r.-ao an: is a Urease : to the Dofcnlarfc lin»:owsky. C. si¬
ce min;: cx.ciiixnta with laa-ii*. virus tophus vaccine•

The ncoot Ixuxnt, Y-ur H.n.rc, is Daunt NO-1359, Prosecution
Exhibit 493, I Jun.: n ;>aic 7230 .f the rcc-r_, vr.s intr-.:uccl .’.ui'in-;
the cr .ss-exriiination of thWDofavVait .Jolt* aivl is a fils, lute ai.na.
or bavin. tlx. strap*! sir^aturo S the Defendant Sievers. This is
c.xcrniv; 2oschor*s assicaaonfc at Dach.au.

If T ur K-n. rs please, I request that y m n-w turn tt pa ;c 4
of tho in.xoc. You will n.to that n Exhibit 494 tho nunloer is copty
- thorc is n- .'..cuacnt naabor as si ?c£ to it. 4. ..arcntly we just
ciso. the nutter entirely Jirin; toe courso of prcacifcation, s 3 chat


10572


I July 47“---R£—17-3"lessor (Ir.t. V^r. SchvO

Court Ho. 1


ia an capty wcuniit mnber, Your H-nors. I will ^ivc the Secretary
Ocrcrr.l a file f Her with the exhibit nuober an! a n tati-n "Hot
..satined™ thereon, fir his files.

3!o next licutcnt, Yjur K;n_r, lhich is tho first .no listed
-n ;r. ,0 4 of your inlcx, is Docuoant NO-1328, Wilch is -fferod as
frosocutixi Exhibit 495, fun: on .a,o 7690. This was intreducol
Jurlnj the crass cxnuinati a the Defendant Brack. Far further
inf-raatioo c ncornin' the decuaint I believe it will be rncossary
to consult the cross examination, ina stuck as I ..ysclf an not too

* #

f *ni liar with this .iarticu3--r doauaont. This letter d cs, h uovor,
have the signature of the Dof-ndant Brack a.^carin- thereon.

The n-xt loculint, Y-ur K n-rs, is DocvLxnt HO-2893, :hich is
Prosocution Bchibit 496, which is f^un! an Pa.-c 7700 »f tho trnns-

0

criat, \r. a intro-Iucel lurin-. tho cross axntdnnti.n of tho Defendant
Brack by l-r, H ehwald end is excerpts froa a publication by Profess r
Bindin- an*. Hjchc, ro"crdin; tho auth-rity to annihilate life, un¬
worthy t. live. ..a 1 recall, he introduce:! that at ttatotlflo to
question ttw dofendart c-nocrnin- his attitude n the subject of
euthanasia.

Tho next document, lour Honor, is NO-2799, ihich is Prosecution
Exhibit 497, which is f-unl on c 7710 -f the. record an.'. was
introduce! Cur in; the cr.ss exanination of the Defendant Brack.

.»t that tine DBfonso C.tinsel for Brae:: b>octoC because f inadequate
>,V rtunity t: cr jss ccanino the affiant, I believe. The
objection ’.r.s vcrrulcd at that tiuj, as thv Tribunal ruled that
Froonchnann c_ul_ a.. ly f r the itness if he dc^-nol it necessary.

This affidavit c. ntains a Jurat arwl is in .vr»pcr order.

The next Clement is NO-2429, Pr-sccuti-n Bchibit 498, will
be f ju nC on pa,;c 7714 of the fficial record, and is an affidavit
-f .a: Gustav Clausen and founl to obtain tho .-r jper jurat end


10573


1 July 1947 - -.-PJ-17-3-Icsscr (lac. Von Scfaofa)
C urt !i • 1*


in -ocd fom, Xmt H n;rs. This a~a infer '.vccj durin; the <3-.as
cxnaifi*.tlon f the Defenl'-rt Brack.

Hicnc^t docuctofe, Y-ur H^nor, is ?D-2906, which is Prosccuti o
2Xiiilit 1*99, f -uc.' n ,n > 7721 i the ffici-.l rcc-r ’., mo intro-hrooJ
lurin the cr job cx.-uAn-.tion of the Dcfcalnnt Brock, nnd n this
document the signature A _ne SS Grup;cnfuchror Koppe in’

-no S3 Gru...-onfueJ»rcr Sp ;rrcrfcc

The next docuccnt is NO-290?, ihich is Pr.sccuti.n Exhibit 500,
fund -n jxi;c 7721 -f the wfficinl tic.nacri.-t, ms intrduccd durin-
the cross ca c xd. r r.tl n if the Defendant Brack, and there-n r.;,;«r.ra

tho -ri-ir.-J. at-.nature f SS Qru. cnfuchrcr Regies a.

0

The next foment, Y ur Hju, is KO-2911, vhlcft is offer*'.

" 8 Sthibit 501. S .•/, Y .ur H mor .A ht have s Ao difficulty finding

this ...

TTE r.dldilDZhT: I

Idl. IL3V?: I lute that Joegn^nt NO-1461 shall: be NO-2911,
a if y-u have .a doocxnt th-.t is .... it should be cr.rkal ill
pencil 2911. This is a letter t. 8S Oruppcnfuohrcr .-Iff, dated
22 February 1941, s th-.t you -.All identify it properly i.r
ar.rkin- it. Your H n r. Dj y-u fin: th-.t discrepancy?

THE rrUiEEJJT: Yes.

ICU HdJtDY: I ffor D oiccnt ilO-2911 ns Fr. secuti.n inhibit
501; tills is f Aint! on ;--,ie 7722 of th- fee rd an! ir.3 introduced
durin- the cr.ss exacinnti n f the Dofcnlrnfe Brick. Tr.ia Lcr.ro
the ri Inal si n-.tun. A 33 Grup enfuchrcx Kop.o, 1 believe.

T.ic next docoxnt, Y-ur id.i r, is Hcuocnt BO-2758, ufaich
is Prosecution Exhibit 502, which is f _n .r. e 7727 of the
record, tflich vaa introduced during tho cross-cx-ninati-n -f the
defendant Brack. Y a will recall, 1 believo, that the pur. sc ef
Dr. u cd. r.l it-.vin- suhalt ted t.iis durin; the cr ss-axmin.aticn


10574


1 July 47-. “FL-17-4-Usscr-(Int. V n Schco)
Cant So. 1


jf the Defendant Brack uas t suoat-_-.tl--.tc the chart which

drawn by the Dofendonfc Drock, .and this woa Sui r. tea that he tedo

prior to the draft in- -f the ri .inrj. chart that we have put into
exhibit in, I believo, Document 3cok Ho. 1. Offhand I cann.t ix.c-.ll
the -xact nuober .f the .ri-lnal chart.

The next Docuaont NO-3010, rhiefa is Proaccuti-n Exhibit 503,
which ia found n pa -c 7734 f tho official transcript, was introduced
lurin- the croao-exnxrinnti-n .f the Defendant Brack. Iju id 11 find
this is an .affidavit in - >od fora, containin; a Jurat and rxotin; tho
qualificationc -f tho Tribunal.


«


»


10*75


1 J'Jly-a-i'^— 1 9-1-*cloy (Ton Bchon)
Court I


The next docusont, Your Honor, ia HO-2614, is offerod cb Jihibit
So. 504, for conronienco purpoaea. It ia found on peso 7735, and it
is an extract free the tronacript of the International Military
Tribunal, duly authenticated by the Secrotary General. Thrt is 2614.
That vau introduced during the c roae-OToci nation of the Defendant
Brock, I believe.

EiO nort docuaent la another excerpt froc tho INI Judgnont,
vhich ia HO 2737, and ia givon Proaecution Hxhibit Ho. 505, for con¬
venience. It ia found on pogo 7740 of the rocord, end alao uaod
during tho croao-ex/aiination of the Do fondant Brock.

The nost docucont la Ho. 797, vhich la Proaocution Exhibit 506,
which ia found on Peg* 7740 of tho offioiol tronaoript, vhich . van
offorod during the croaa-oxnfiinntion of the Defendant Brack.

DR, PBOXSOaUDI: May I aek to aoo tho original? Hr. Proaldent
I objedt to thia docuaont bocauao it hoa no aigneturo of any roco&-
nizablo poreon.

13. HaRDT: Your Honor, If you vlU roaorro your ruling on thin
objoctlon until auch tino an I hovo boon ablo to rofor thia to Dr.
Hochvold. Unfortunately I m not in jqjooltion to toll you vhorc
coca pad every doc\»ent vo hovo introduced cjbo free, and I would
liko to hovo Dr. Hochvold infora bo aa to thia docuiaent.

JCTGB fflBRHP; Doec it have fl printed lottorheodl

13. HaHSYi Ho, thia ia puroly q cerbon copy, Your Honor, and
froa vhat filoa it ccao I «i unable to tall you. I vill hovo to
consult Dr. Hochvold.

THZ ??_5IDSi7: Gan you obtain that information froa Dr.Hochwald
during tho afternoon roects?

UP, EaHDY: I will coll his up to argue tho objection. Your
Honor, and then ve won't have to wait for it.

PH2SID2HT: The Tribunal will now bo ia recess, and you can
procure tho doctor in tho seantise.

(Thereupon a recess vaa taken).


10R?C


Court 1


1 JuIy-rt-19-l-A2G-ii_chan (VonSchon)

TnS MARSHAL: The Tribunal ia again in session.

DR. HELTE: (Counsel for defendant Kandloscr.) 1 [r. President,

I hav> hoard that you objected to ey handing in a document for trans-

•

l&ticn yesterday. For clarification, I should like- to renark that

this was not a docuc_rtt which I could hav offered in tr.e case for

• •

Professor Hondlosur. I subdtted ell cf tnesc documents. Tho
docuawjnt which I gave for translation yesterday afternoon for a
decision: the- staten_nt cf Professor R.iter on his examination of
72 HoVvi&er 1946. I could not give- this docunent to tho Translation
Branch sooner, because I did not hcvu the affidavit of Professor
Reiter, which tho Frosecution offerod in Docunent Book 19. I ask you
to take notico of this fact, and I also ask Jr. Hardy to make tho
statement concerning this document which ho precised yesterday. I
have given him tho original.

IH. HARDY: Concerning that original document. Your Honor, I
have had ay clerks check the files to seo whothcr or not wo havo
received any such document free Professor Reiter while he waa
incarcerated here In the prison in Hurnberg. Unfortunately, I did
not bring the document which Dr. Nelto gave to no, I will return it
to him later, but ay clerks havo been unable to find receipt of any
such document by the Prosecution.

DR. NELTE: Dees that clarify the matter, kr. President?

THE FRESlDSfT: YeS, as far an you are concerned. Doctor, I
understand.

UR. HARDY: If Ycur Honors ploase, cn page 4 of tho index of
t.-.eSe docua-Rfcs which have been marked for identification, wc now
refer again to Document IK) 997, which has been offered as Prosecution
Exhibit 506, which is found cn page 7740 cf the transcript and was
introduced during the cross-examination of the Defendant Brack, I believe
Dr. Froeschnonn has an objection. Hr. Hcchwald of cur office is here
to -argue- the objection.

TEZ FRESlDEiT: Uill Dr. Frcoscanann state his objection?


10577


Court 1

1 July-A-ig-a-^EG-Hceftan (VcnScMon)

IK. HARD?: In addition to that. Your Honor, the next document
on page 4, which is NO 365, which the prosecution offer as Dchibit
NO 507, which was also introduced during the cross-eX.-sanation of
Brack, on page 7743, counsel also intends to object tc that one,
and Dr. Hochwald will handle both objections at this tine.

THE PRESIDENT: The counsel for Defendant Brack will state his
objection.

OR. FaDSSCHttUV: (Counsel for Defendant Brack.)

Mr. Fresident, I object to those two docum-nts. They arc not signed,
they arc carbon copies of c letter which wo never recciv.d, and it
cannot be determined whether the original was written or by whom it
was written, it is nothing but a piece of paper which was used for
a carbon copy and cn which there are wtrdo .and sentences describing
sene incident. I don't tclievo I an too fcroalistio, but in view of
tho significance which the Prosecution attaches to this document, it
night be advisable to doteraino who Sent this letter out.

THE rTUSIDp.T: Ploaso hand the original documents to the
Tribunal.

KR. HARDY: While the Tribunal is perusing thoao documents, I
night ask the Defense Counsel for Brack if he has any other documents
concerning euthanasia that he intends to object to; I don't boliuve
there are any others, but if he has any intention of further objuctions,
I wish hu would make thorn now while Dr. Hochwald is hero.


10578


Court 1

July 1_A-20-1-HD-Ferrin-Von3cboen.


DR. FROESCHHAHH (Counsel for the defendant 3rack): Just
c moment.

THE PRZ3IDSKT: These handwritten Initials — oapltal

periodj scall "d" period, capital B H", period, capital

•

period afre singly written at the bottom of the first
par^e. They do not, apparently, correspond with any place
for a signature. We will hear from Counsel for the
Prosecution.

DR. KOCn 'ALD: If Your Honors, please, those two docu¬
ments are captured documents fr->m the files of the Mlnlotry
for the Eastern Territories. The initials which Your
Honor Just mentioned are Indicating that this duplloato
original, I do tnlnk 997 is a duplicate original, the
other one, 365, Is an original, were handed to tho Minister
for perusal. I do not know what tho "N" means, but "f.d.
H.M.■ is fuor den Horrn Minister", "for the Minister." It
is obvious that those dooucente were written by someono —

I do not know who it was — to hand to the Minister for
poruoal. These documents aro captured documents, and if
they aro not signed they arc perfectly admissible Into
evidence, and are Just duplicate originals of lettors
which wore written.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, these were written but not
necessarily sent; what do you think the probative value
of these documents Is and against whom?

DR. KOCHWALD: Tho probotlve value against the Defendant
Brack le that he — a conference Is described In these two
documents which took place In his presence, and he took
oart in this conference, and what was said and what was
decided-upon In this conference Is described In these two
documents. The Prosecution does not contend that this
letter, NO-365, was sent to the Defendant .Brack, but the

10579


C^urt 1 _

July l-A-20-2-HD-Perrln-rVonbcncen.

but the document Itself «hows what in this conference was
decided; and for this purpose, this document was put Into
evidence on the part of the Prosecution. The file note,
Document NO-997, la only supporting Document NO-365. Both
documents refer, obviously, to the same conversation, or to
the same conference which took place in the presence of the
Defendant 3reck. That 3rack made suggestions for the
extermination of the Jews Is dear from the lost sentence
of Document NO-365, which says, -There are no objections
against doing away with those Jews who are not able to
work, with the Brack remedy." So, It Is clear from this
sentence that it was the suggestion of the Defendant Brack

to exterminate those peoplo by gas.

DR. FROESCHMAHN: Hr. President, one document also
contains the express remork -draff. It 1. not even certain
that the letter was over written; an unknown person has
drartod a letter with no signature and I do not bollovo that
this is a dooument’of any probative value which could bo
admitted Into evidence. Both documents, as a matter of foot
soy -draff.

DR. HOCKWALD: lour Honor, the Proeooutlon doos not
contend that letters of this kind wore written. Wo think
this draft was for the perusal of tho Xlnlster, who
obviously wrote a letter os the same contents, but what
we want to prove by this document Is what was the subject
of this conference In which the Defendant Brack took part
and what was decided there. I -ant only to draw the
attention of the Tribunal to the fact that other documents,
the Hoogen documents, were put Into evidence and admitted
into evidence which have very much the same form and are
very such of the earn, nature as these documents.


10580


Court 1

jil-r i-A-20-5-HD-?errln-Von&choen.


THE PRESIDENT: These documents apparently have some
probative value In connection with the fact that a certain
solution of what was called the 'Jewish Problem" had been
considered. Counsel for the Defendant Brack will be at
liberty In his brief to argue that they have no probative
value against his client. The Tribunal -will then consider
the probative value of the documents. The two documents
will be admitted In evidence.


10581


1 July 47—A-S~'-21-1-Pr iataiVon Schon)
Court 1


UR. HARDY: Then, Your Honor, I reiterate that Document !K>-997
ia Prosecution ixhibit 506 and NO-365 is Prosecution Inhibit 507.

«e will now turn to Pape 4a of the index. Your Honors.

The first document ia Document NO-3282 , Wiich ia offered aa
Prosecution Exhibit 5)8 and ia contained on par,c 6860 of tho record
and was Introduced during the cross examination of the ‘'efomant
Rniglboeck,

*he naxt docuoent is Document NO-3283, which ia Prosecution
Exhibit 509 found on pe~e 886a. This ia an affidavit which was
Introduced during the croaa ..xnaioation of tho Oaforylnnt Buiglbocck.
These two affidavits nnd two ftocuanots are in g°© 8 order and havo
Jurats thereon. Your Honor.

Tho next document ia ?*3-3342, which ia Prosecution Exhibit 510,
which ia found on pago 8870 of the r«oord and which waa introduced
during the cross examination of the Defendant Beiglboeck.

The next documents, Your Honor, are tltose documents which wero
introduced during the in errogation and examination of the defendant—
of the witness — pardon ne — Dr. Ivy. The copioa that I have mado
available to Defense Counsel — I didn't bring additional copies,
but copies of the G enaan and the ©igliah I will make available in
larger numbers to Defense Counsel for their files if they so desiro.

The first one is Document NO-3967, *hich is Prosecution Ex¬
hibit No. 511, which is found on page 9336, which was introduced during
the examination of the witness. Dr. Ivy, concerning yellow fever
experiments, -fcis is an official publication put out by the Govern¬
ment Printing Office in "aahington D.C.

The next document. Your Honor, is NO-3906, idiich is prosecution
Exhibit 512, which is found on page 9136 of the transcript and was
introduced during the examination of the witness. Dr. Ivy . This con¬
cerns the work of Professor Strong and Professor Crowell in connection
with the beri-beri experiments as published in the Philllpplne Journal


10582


1 .'ulr A7-.V-SS-21-2-Priaeeu( vooSchon)
.ourt So, 1


of Science , Volume VII, 1912.

If Your Honors will turn to Page 5 of the index, the top
thereof, *e have Dccuaent V 0-3905, which is Prosecution Exhibit No,


513, wnichis found on page 9137 of the transcript and deals with
the plague exp riacnts by Colonel Strong and Professor Crowell as
•*oported in the PhiUipine Journal of Science.


The next docuamt is Document *<0-3907, which is Prosecution
r „xhibit 514, which is fcxiod on page 9138 of th« transcript and
was introduced during tho examination of th- witness. Professor Ivy,
This ic a report on Trench Fever snd is published by the Oxford
University Pr««».

Tho next is ^ocusent ?C-3966, which is offered as Pr«socutlon
Pxhibit 515, " ich is found on pago 9138 of tho transcript, introduced
into ovidcnci during thr exacd'iAti> n of tho witness Ivy and is an
-<xtract from caterial published by tho Arc ives for Internal
J’-'dlcloo regarding the pellagra oxpfTimonts on whito nalo convicts.


Tho next docuc-nt is Document NO—3969, which is Prooecution
Bchibit 516, which is found on page .9138 of the transcript, was
introduced during the testimony of the witness Ivy and is a state-
r*nt rel tlve to the prospective voluneers and applictions for
inclusion in the study of n*w» anti-ealarial conspounds concerning
ralaria exp»rlnents at the Stateville Penitentiary in the Stato of


Illinois in the United Statrs of Anerica.


The next docunent is *XV3966, which is Prosecution Exhibit 517,
*hich is an applicatisn f r participation in the various malaria
experiments at the federal prisons• This is found on page 9139 of
the transcript and was introAiced during tho testimony of tho witness


Ivy.

The next docuce- t is 3964, wh ch is Prosecution Exhibit 518, which
is found on page 9139 of the record and is an article concerning
medical experimentation on hunfin beings in Uexican orchitic typhus
experiments, as introduced during the testimony of Professor Ivy.


10583


1 July 47-A-°'t.21-3-Primeau(Von Schon)

Court No. 1

The next is Docuaent NO-3965, which is Prosecution Exhibit 519,
which is fcund on page 9149 of the record and was introduced during
the tostiaony of Professor *vy and is a radio script entitled,

Talaria Research Report" and pertains to the details of a report given
on the radio wherein the experimental subjects used at the State-
ville Penitentiary in the malaria experiments in the United States

intnriimd #

The next document is NO-3450, Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 519,
rtiich is found on page 9587, which is concerning statements of
expenditures in connection with influenza research assigrwent by
Haagen and was intro<4;ced during the examination and cross examination
of the witness. Professor Haagen.

The next document is NO-2874. This is offohed as Prosocution Ex¬
hibit 520 and is found on page 9651. It was introduced during the
examination of the witness Haagen and is a filo copy of an original
document which waa found in the Gaagon files. This is a letter
from Haagen to ftoso regarding tho production of vaccines.

The next document. Your honor , is NO-3852, which is P,s»secution
r .xhibit 521, found on page 9656 of the record, concerning tho
testimony of tho witness Haagen, and is entitled "Professor Haagen 1 s
diary concerning "Vaccine typhus yolk bags, dried."

The next document. Your Honor, is Document NO-2631, W.ich is
offered as Prosecution Exhibit 522, which is found on pago 9955 of tho r
record and »hich is an affidavit of Joseph Ackrnaonn, which was
introduced during tho examination of the Dof-mant Hoven. This is
in due order. Your Honor , and has tho necessary jurat thereon.

The next document, Tour Honors, is NO-2313, which is eff.-red
as Prosecution Exhibit 523 and is on pago 9958 and is a corporal
punishment report of prison* ra of th*; concentration ear.p Buchcnwald
which was intreduced durint tho examination of the Defendant Hoven.

This *:oming tho Defense Counsel for-Hoven requested thf t ho be
allow*>d to have an export examine th« wo res on the top of tliis document,

10584


1 July 47—A-o<-21-4-Prineaufvon Sc: on)
Court No# 1


and * am advised that the advice he received by his expert coincides
with the information •onveyed to the iriixxnal b: the interpreters
in this courtroon. That word is "died."

I

D.-i. GA"LIK(Counsel for Defendant Hoven): !!r. President, I merely
r.ant to object to the copies which were given to the Tribunal.

It just says, "Signed, signature." The document, however, shows that
this was not signed by the defendant, Dr. Hoven but by someone
named Plaza. I should like that, to be put in the copies so that there
is -o confusion with the Defendant Hoven.

MH. H RDY: There is absolutely no confusion. Your Honor. The
Prosecution never rxrported that that was the signature of liovon.

said that we worn unable to determine who».e signature that was.

I put it to Hoven, and I think the r^ord indicates thul Hoven
figured it out to be Plaza.

TOE FRESlTEhT: I reaeobor the matter of this document. It was not
contended that it had the sigrnture of the Defendant Hovun,

1®. HARDY: The noxt document. Your Honor, is NO-2312, which is
Prosocution Exhibit 524, which is found on pago 9960 of the record.

I introduced it during the cross examination of tho Defendant Hovon,
and on tho reverse side the signpture of Hov«n appears thnre and,
if I recall correctly ho identified it during the courao of his
examination.

The next docunont is Document NO-1944, which is Prosecution
Exhibit 525, found on page 9965 of the record. It was introduced
during the examination of the Dof yn dant Hoven and p< rtains to tho
securing of equipment for installation in Block 50 at tho Buchcnwald
concentration camp.

The Noxt document , Your Honors, is NO-2366.

JUEGE SE5R!H3: Just a moment. Counsel.

UR. HARDY: Does Your Honor have those last docur.ents in order?

The next dscum'nt is MD-2366, Prosocution Exhibit 526, found


10585


1 July 47-A-S^~21-5-Frloeau( von Schoo)
Court Sc. 1


on page 9969 of the record, which was offered -tiring the cross
examination of tho Defendant Hoven.

The next document ia *50-2380 , which is Document 527, which is
found on page 9970 , whioh was offered during the crocs < xamiikrtion
of the Defendant poven.

DR. GAWLIK: (Counsel for Defendant Hoven): !'r. President, I object
to this document. The document has no signature. It is simply a copy of
a copy.

HR. H/RDY: Your Honor, this document is in addition to the oth..r
document attached thereto. The two docuswnts won found together, and
an affidavit ia attached to th two documents ihich mads as follows:

"Affidavit. I, Dr. Robert M. *T. Keapoer, Deputy CMof of Counsel,
certify tha- I havo mcciv'-d the documents described as brief against
Standartonfuohror Koch and,othura, W»ich is HO-2366, written by SS-
Hauptsturafuehror Dr. ftorgon, and papers relevant to cornjption

A

in criminal cases against SS officers freo tho personal effects of
Dr. J'orgen to Captain Gutmann of the U.I.S," That is tho HiliUxy
Intelligence Service," Interrogation Center, Cfcerursel, Germany .
Signed: Dr. Robert K. *f. Kempfler, 16 April 1947."


10566


1 July-irJ:j-22-l-Sinaboek (Ton Scion)
Coart Z


S3 PP-HSIDBfT:. I do not find any such certificate attached to
tho doctsent bofore ae.

IS. EAeDY: Tile pertain* to both docueente, lour Honor. Tor
tho convonionco of the Tribunal I did not give Exhibit 527 and 2at-
hi'oit 526 the fo docunont nuaber. They cane undco tho sane covor.
Tho affidavit df Dr. loaner eppliee to both docunont*, ae you can
aoc. I hero given then individual docuncat nunbore aal exhibit
nuaboro for tho convenience of the Tribunal.

TEZ PESSlDaJT: I don't find cny etateaont by Dr. Kicpnor in
connection with oither of tho docunont*.

KH. IUHIJYj It'* in the original docunont, Your Honor. I dldn«t
hnvo that r^xroducod, a I only gave you oxtracta of tho original
docunent. I will paso it up to lour Honor for hie qjproval.

31, OitfiXXi Kr. Progident, thie dooe not lndleato that it ro-
fora to this docunont too. Thie docunont ha* no eignaturo. Thoro
io no indloatica whom it canoe free, who eignod tho origin*. It
la oirnly c typewritten pioc* Of ptgjer.

IS* 1.J3Y: I roquoet that the Defeneo Couneol roal tho af¬
fidavit of Dr. Xtnpnor attachod to theeo p^ore, end I ac infoming
Dofoneo Couneol that theeo two docvcont* ccoo undor that affidavit
.10 elated in tho affidavit by Dr. X<epnor. If nocoeeary I will got
Dr. "mpnor toococuto anothor affidavit if that ien't cl Oar onoutfi.

2H2 ?:SSIDIOT: Tho probativo veluo of thoeo oocunente cay bo
doubtod, that 1* a not tor of argueont, but thoy will bo rocoivod in
evidonco, and Couneol for tho Dcfondant nay arguo in hie briof
CoCiinot tho docunont* as haying no probativo value, and then they
till ho coneidorod by tho Tribunal.

IS. EaEDY: Tho next docunont. Your Hotter, ie on affidavit x&ich
I 3 docunont Ho-3963, which i* Proeecttticn Sih lbit 528, an affidavit
of S-u-i Tauboock which I introduced during tho cross extclnation of
tec Defendant Paicorsy. Thie has a jurat theroon and ie properly


10587


1 July->l , ^-22-2“Siruxe*iclE (Ton Schon)
Court I, Cose I


authenticated cad certified thereto. Your Honor, that cccplotos
tho catiro list of docicents which tho Prosecution introduced during
the caso of tho defense and narked for identification.

How, ct this tine. Your Honor, I wish to distribute to you and
to Dofonso Counsel Goman copies of affidavits which the Tribunal
hnvo admitted provisionally upon procuraoont of o Jurat by tho
Prosoctulon. I hare thcc bound together ’in a little voluco oo that
vo can intcoduco then formally now, inascuch ns thoy aro only r.o-
coptod provisionally pending the rocoipt of Jurats.

Do the iatorprotors and court reporters hovo copios of thoooT
I will noroly refer to nusbors and not read tho particular affidavits
If Dofanso Counsol has an objection, if ho will kindly wait until
I got to that particular affidavit/ If Dofonso Counsol will put
on his hondphoncs and hoar ny presentation ho n ay withdraw his
objection. Vould you toll Dr.Prooshcann to put on his hoadphonoc and
ho idll hoar when I prosont tho docunor.tsT Vould you klnkly toll
Dr. Frooschnann to put on his onxphonos and ho-r ijy presentation
of tho docunonts boforo ho starts to objoct to thono docunonts?

ED P.uSIDSHT: Ho hasthai on, counsel. Ho is woaring then
right bosido you thoro.

hR. iuJSJY: Ho took thoc off now. fhoso docunonts. Your Honor
aro clrordy now in the hands of tho S ocrctary Gonorol in propor
ordor. I didn't have then brought into tho courtroou. Tho first
ono is Docuaont H>861, which wasoffored as Prosocution Exhibit 280
in tho early days of tho dofango's case, and this was introduced by
Ur. He Her.ay, I believe, on the 28th day of January, and it Was
ednittod provisionally at that tino pending tho authority of tho
person issuing tho oath. Tho porsr. issuing the oath was Guy Favnrgor,
end as you will recacbor, that was clocrod up in an affidavit by tho
Chief of Counsel, General Telford Taylor, and vhon Hr. Kc Haney vent


lGScS


1 July-A-MJ-2&-3“Si nabuck (Von Sclioa)
Court I, Coso I


throu^ those particula* documents this was ono that he oclttod
to trJco up at that tino before the Tribunal.

This is in proper order and contains a jurat, and at this
tino I offor it foraally for acceptance into cvidonco rathor than
provisionally.

JUDG- S13FJH0: Counsel, I didn't understand. V hat document
book was that ini

:i 2 . iLiiOT: Just a aoccnt. Your Honor. It is Exhibit 280 ,

Your Honor, and yc*i will find it in Docuccat Book Ho. 13. Tho next
dooucoat, Your Honor, is tho affidavit of Ludvig Lchnor. This af¬
fidavit is in good foro and now has a Jurat. It is Document JO-863,
which is found ir. Docunont Book 14, part I, and tho Jurat now is
sicnod by Horbort H Moyor, and you will noto ho is on tho list who
has tho authority to adsinistor oaths as grontod by Goaorol Tolford
Taylor, Chief of Counsol.

DP, JEOESCIBUWt Mr. Proslddnt, if I renttibor corroctly tho
uitnoos Lohnor offorod on affidavit with a considerably dlffOront
content and a different dato. Tho nffidawit that is now offorod
bears tho dato 30 March 1947. I cannot rajeebor that this affi¬
davit wan offorod, thoa I objoct to it, bocauso this docunent woo

sicnod at a ti-.c whon it could havo boon shown to tho Dofondont

%

Brcok or tho witness Pfanccuollor.

U3. H.u-fflY: Your Honor, I suboit that of course whon a porocn
suoers to a signature they have the docupont retyped and tho nen
signs in his prosecco, but I can ovorcouo that and put it in as c
rebuttal document if Your Honor wishes to striko the other ono and
trio this os a ncv_ono and give it a now exhibit number or let it
rotain its old one. It rebuts evidence given by tho dofondant and
by tho witness P fanrcuoller. Vhatowcr Your Honors wish to sco, this
docunont now contains a Jura* in tho order proscribed by tho Tribune!


10589


1 July-A-M^-2 »-4-*Iinabaok (Yon Schon)
Court I, Case I


for admissibility. If Tour Honors wish to hnvo it boar the acne
exhibit ammoor or kovo no give it a nev exhibit ininbce, I will do
viatoror you wish.

2H3 PiZSIBUTT: Do I understand that the objoctioa node to this
document nado whoa it was:first offered was that thoro waeno Jurat
attcchodT

I'JU EiSBIl The first objoction, Tour Honor, was because it
was not a a'./era stotecoat, and now it is a sworn statement.

2HZ P2SSID27T: Of courso when an affidavit is sworn to it must
be dated tho day upon which it was sworn to, not soao prior date.

IJU ElPDT: Ifcti’s correct, Tour Honor.

TK2 PiCSIDHHTs If it is adnlttod that this doeuaont is tho oodo
doeuaont that was admit tod provisionally upon boirg again oltorod to
tie proper Jurat, than it will now bo adnlttod. Of coarso, if it lo
a difforent affidavit, difforont questions aro to bo prosonlod.

IS. H^RDT: Inasmuch os'I don't hnvo both affidavits, Tour
Honor, I will assuco for convonionco that it is an entirely difforont
affidavit, and I will givo it Q now exhibit nuubor and offer it ns
r. rebuttal document. It sotes to uo icnatoriol Mother-

TEH PRZSID27Z: It is ontiroly imoatoriel.

IS. HiHDT* It's in porfoct order, and if it is difforont, it
porh^io ary bo difforont in fora in aabo ono or two words, but in
substance I am suro that it is tho saio. I iuegino wo sent Hr.

Koyor ell the way up to St. Volfgaag noar Vasserburg in ordor to
obtain t-.is Jurat end hero him roes; ecu to tho affidavit* in his pro-
•cnco» #

TES PHHSIBEfl: If thoro is day variation in tho affidavit it
should bo adnlttod os a new exhibit.

13. ElHDT: Then, Tour Honor, I will give it a now oxhibit anc¬
hor. This is Document HD-863 which' is Sdhiblt iK-551, Prosocution
imich was formerly Exhibit SO 333. If Tour Honors will put that


10590


1 Jul^-^y^D-D-Ninabuci: (Yon Schon)
Court X, Case I


down, rad If cay roforcaco is node to this ia oar briefs as ggiibit
3Go tfc.vill bo referring to Sxfclbit 561, and we withdraw herovith
Z liiibit 333 as such.

2 iC next document that I hod contained in this little collco-
tion of rffldavits hqiponod to bo tho affidavit of Hovcn which was
cleared up this norain& by the Tribunal end is in ovidcnco as in¬
hibit 281, so X will not discuss thfl at this tlno. Your Honors,
of courso, have copies of all those, either in your docuuont books
or sutuitted later when used then at later days during cross on-
faination poriode.

Tho noxt doexuont is Docunont HD-910, which is Prosecution
iiiibit 138, iich was tho stateaont of Ignat Sauor, which was
as you will recall, free tho Yionna police file. Oho docunent now
oontains a Jurat, as I hod it sont down thoro and a uoubor of tho
0,1.0,, Llonol A S chef fro, cnllod in Nr. Bauor and took his oath.

JOT02 S2BRIH0: Did it oppo a r in a bookt

12!. iuJ?BY: P erdon. Your Honor?

Z'JUjZ S-SRIKOi Bid it appear in a docunont book?

§

HR. al?. BY: Yes it did, Your Honor. Just a uoaont—138 was in
Docuaont Book »>5, Your Honor. Thdfc's tho soa-wator docaionto.

-he na.-t docunor.t, Your Honor, was or. affidavit which was HD-911,
which is Prosocutlon Sxfaibit NO-130, and sinilar to tho Bauor affi¬
davit thlo affidavit of Tschofonig also did not have a Jurat thoro-
on, and I have obtalnod that. Ttut was in Bocunoat Book ND-5, tho
aepo situation.

ZaZ PBBTMHa Vhat is tho exhibit nunbor of this docuucnt?

12 . HaHDY: Tho exhibit nuebor of that is 139. Tho next do-
cuaont, Tour Honor, is an affidavit of Pillwein, which’was HD-910,
which is Bxhibit 140 und like tho othor two documents did not hrvo
a jurat thereon and was adnittod provisionally, and now thoro copies


10591


1 Jais-tW- 20-6-Sinobuek (Ton Schoe)

Court I, Case I '

boar th* Jurat. That ficr.ifcit 140 and is also fount in Document
3dbi: jo- 5. *llo, Tour Honor, the last document la BO-1427, which
ia —xn i bit X-431, which we* on affidavit which was swore tc by
Hr, Hodoll, end Hr. He Haney oocittod to indudo thi* whan ho i-oai
off the document* or affidavit* worn to by officor cortifiod by
Coaoral Irylor'a affidavit which gave then tho authority to adnin-
istor oath. * t thi tin* I oo calling that to your attention,
inaauuch a* it wo* odnittad provisionally, and I ca calling to your
attention now that Zxfcibit 431, which la in Dociwont Book UO-16,
contain* a propor Jurat.


10592


1 July-A-FI/-23-l-Losscr (inti von Sc ton)

C:urt Ho. X

I think,lour Honor, that elders ilo ell of tho Prosecution exhibits
■rich worv odaitted provisionally and which wore .-.dnitted for identifi-
er.tion. I tovu one aoi\, Prosecution docut>-nt book, rebuttal docitrv.nt
book, which is'being prepared, which I will offer as soon ns it is cco-
plated. At this tiflo. Your Hory», I have ono copy of the judgment of
tv x~w~tot£onal -^*'tEry Tribunal, a bound voluae which was published
*f/ictrlly, «nd I wish to present this to the Tribunal and request that
they tal® judicial notice of the Judgnont»of tto International ililitary
Tribunal. I do not believe it will be necessary to give that n document
lumber. This is the entire Judgoent. Tto specific s-cticna of tto Judg-
, - nt which tto Prosecution and tto Defonso have wished tho Tribunal take
Judicial notice of have town put in individually, but Ihis contains tto

entire Jud&aont 0 f the International Military Tribunal, for judicial no-

•

tlcu of this Tribunal. •

THK mESIDfliT: That copy should be .narked in some way, as indicating
that that copy has boon turned over to Military Tribunal I in connection
■ith this trial.

Mr. HARDY: Your Honor, I will give it an exhibit nunfcer if that will.
b* convenient.

• |

JUDGE SlcRUiG: If you give it an cJiibit nuntor you any bo placed
in Uio pooition of having to furnish copios to the Court and to all
Kunsel. I would suggest you givo it to tto Sucivtary Gonoral aix! lot
fcia etnap it "Filed" before hia.

Mr. HARDY: Pine, Your Honor. Kith the exception. Your Honor —

THE PRESIDENT: This book should not have an exhibit number. Uy sug-
{-stior. was that it -aorciy be narked as the identical copy which was
Placed boforc the Tribunal to bo used in reforring to nottors of which
y * Tribunal should take Judicial notice.

lir. HARDY: Yea, Your Honor. New, Your Honor, that completes what-
”' r '-viAmco I hevc to offer in robuttel, with tto exception of ono
-■M-.-nt book which I u ncs preparing and which I hope to have r-ady


10593


1 Jul7-A-FL~23-2-Ljascr (Int. von Schon)

Court So. I

in duo course. I, unfortunatoly, do not have it ready today, and I will
check on it this evening. It is a document book which will contain tho
two interrogations I referred to in connection with the Hoven affidavit;

0

also cue other affidavit of the witness who appeared here, tho witness
Hern, which I aa offering in robuttal; and it has in it several docrees
esneoming Austria. and other countries as to the status of the pcoplo
and citizens of those countries after tho occupation by Goraany; and
r.ss, I bolievt, one order of Hinoler. Oth.r than that I have no iurtlxr
evidence to offer in rebuttal unless I have southing of n cdocellnnooua
rature that appears in the rxxt few hours, and I aa now ready to turn
3ver the yest of the tine to Defence Couns-1 to introduce their suppio-
aefitol docunont books. .

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, in connection with your phrase "due couroo",
how long do you ostiaeto the course will bo?

Hr. HAHDY: Your Honor, I will chock on it this evening. I think tho
prosecution has nou got very little left to put in. !fo are putting in
thjso dccroos. and so forth, or.d it will toko a little tine to procoso
thi docu»-nta, I think We have tho translations pretty well in hand, and
•» soon as I can havu it asseobled 1 will introduce it. It will be be¬
fore the end of the session on Thursday, I assure you.

THE PR£SIDa?T: Very well. That was th:t I was concerned about.

Th. Tribunal will new hear Defense Counsel io have any docu..iento to
offer. I have socu on ay desk. Here's a docuck.nl book. Appendix 2, by
Ofendant Voltz.

'Jr. HAHDY: Defense Counsel for IXfond.ant Veits is not bore in tho
«>srtrooa. Your Hcsicr.

Dr. FL232FG: Mr. President, you Just said that you had docnixnts
•” a several de'fcncc counsel. i.ould yxi be kind enough to tell ix all
’ — naevs, and then I shall See which of those defense counsel I can find,

THE PRESIDENT: I was just going through the list. Doctor. Defense
kw*s-l 3oeha, for Poppundick.


10594


1 Jul7-A-rL-23-3“I>- ss~ r (Int. von Sc hen)

Court No. I

Hr, HARDY: Your Honor, it nay well be fchet sock, of th-so docu^-nt
bjoks that you have hrd delivered to you as supple®, ntal document hooka
.tv- already boon introduc-d and Defend Counsel gave you copies of
th.n during the ties that they wore introducing thus and you have just

r.coived, through channels, your official copy. I found that sane si¬
tuation . I picked ip a lot of supploaontcl books this aft-moon and dis¬
covered that they had nLr^ady been introduced. I wns rather gleeful that
■e tad southing to put to the Tribunal today but I foturf layseli to bo
badly mistaken. There are no otter supplemental books available at this
eon-nt that I noticed.

B

THE PRESmEOT: That is possible. I have two copies in Gorman, ap¬
parently each one of Ko. U, on behalf of Defendant tori Brandt.

IS-. HARDY: If Your Honor will h nd down to oc the copies you havo
teioix you, I can tell you whetter they have teen introdkced yet or not.

me HU3ESKT: Very woll.

Ur. HAI'uY: The on- that you have, the Goman copy of Dr. Sorvatiuo,
has not been introduced to ay knwilodgo, lour Honor. The one on Defond-
•nt tfeltt ivas be-n introduced. Th-t was introduced hy Dr. "ill*. this
a rning — that is ttx affidavit of Dr. irth. I aa not certain roout
this affidavit on Poppendick's behalf, affidavit of Vonkenrv-1. It r-uoa
to rl that it was introduced. I an uncertain, actually.

THE PRESIDENT: I Seea to have saa- recollection of that nr.x, but
1 -n not suro.

Mr. HARDY: Otter than that. Your Honor, there are no supplemental
volumes available. This orw of Dr. Senratius, that is in German, do
you have an English copy of that?

THE FttESIDENT: Mot unless it was telivorcd aoa- tdae ago. I do not
think that wo have.

Ur. HA*'vDY: In view of the circumstances. Your Honor, I think wo
are ct a stal-octe now and wiU h~v~ to adjourn until translations cro
vilabl*.


1 July-A-FL-23-i-Lissur (Int. von Schon)

C:\Xt Ho. I

0 •

7HZ PBSSWBSi It 9j-ns so.

Dr. SAITT^E (Counsel for the Defendants Bl-o^ and Ruff): :t\ Preoident,
tho situation is non as follows: Various defense counsel still hsvu do-
-ua^nts in tho Translation Branch. I doubt whether the translations of
those documents will be ready by toaorrow or tho rvxt day. I wondered
row the situation could bo dealt with, since wo are at the end of tho
presentation of evidence. I liad tb. following idee. I should like to
suggest this to tbs Tribunal end perhaps tho Tribunal will agree with
a:r If the dofenso counsel can give the Tribunal the German original of
these documents which wor- have bo-n down for translation but not re-
turn-d yet, rnd assign an exhibit nuabor to than, then it might be pos¬
sible, in order to expedite proceedin':s, for th- Tribunal to accept theso
•Jjeuments provisionally, under the condition that tb- Translation Branch
then s.nds the translations to the Tribunal. This will be done auto-
aatic-Uy - we hovo no influence on tha.t. But this procedure mi^ht mHo
it possible for the Tribunal to settle the whole question of tho docu-
o.nts not yet received without do laying thj ease, i.e would be grateful
Hr. President, if you could toll us whether it can be dono in this way.

TH£ PRESIDENT: It we^as to a. that Couno-1 for the Prosecution made
soae such suggestion.

Ur. HAHDT: Tour Honor, I havo a su^gostion that wo night follow. It
epp-ars to ao that with the exception of the Defendant Sievers, the Do-
ferdmt Schroodor, md th- Defendant Brack, ell other defendants only
have ar.ybo cno or two miscellaneous documents to introduce. If tboy
have German copies of those documents, it would soea to no that they
e:uld introduce then, bringing tb- original with then. In most instances
I imagine they are effidevits which have jurats thereon. Tho question
jf admissibility I can easily determine by seeing whether or not tho
affidavits are attested. Then they can introduce than, and if tba parti¬
cular sections to which they nave reference ar_ not too extensive, they
can aljwly read then, and we could have those particular translations in


10596


1 July-A-FL-2>—5-Lesser (Int. von Schon)

Court Ho. I

\

the record, and then at a later date we could get the official trans¬
lations froa ttv- Translation Deportaont and have thus included in our
docunent books.

TH3 PBBcHGVT: That would appear to bo entirely feasible.

•tr. HARDY: So, Your Honor, as I sec it, wu can wait xi Uk Defen¬
dant 3rcc-c, the Defendant Sieverc, tte, Defondant Srugowsky, and the
Dofcndnnt Schrocdcr, and th-n could clean up these single documents
that other defendants have to offer in the aanntr I have just outlin-d.

I will confer with Ur. Hodges, Chief of Ux, Translation Department,

-ad ask hin how long hu thinks it wiU take to coopleto these other trans¬
lations, if you will wait Just a aoaont.

TH& PRZSLlBfT: I understood fron Hr. Hodges th-t soao rioemwnts
would bo available tomorrow aorning.


10^97


Court 1

1 July-A-2Z,-l-AEG-GrQ33 (VonSchon)

DR. Sn’JTrS: Hr. FreSidont, another possible procedure would bo-
I don't knew nhothcr tho .'.ncrlcan court would approve It - that the
defense counsel first give the Tribunal and tho Secretary G-ncrr.l tho
original of the documents still outstanding and that during the recess
before the /Inal pleas, the Prosecution can determine- whether they have
any objection, and then the Tribunal sight inform the defense counsel
in writing whether tne documents are admitted or not. That tight ex¬
pedite matters even more, but I don't know whether that is permissible
under your rules.

TOE PRESIDENT: I wonder how many docua-nta will bo available in

the morning. Can )'j. Hodges give us any information on that?

13. HARD!: Hr. Hodges informs me that the documents of the

Defendant 1'rugcwoky will be ready In the morning and the documents for

Rcsu will bo ready in tho (warning, or nearly ready. Ho thinks tho

decuswats for llrugowsky will be entirely ready and the Rose documents

aay take a few minutes but will be ready in the morning. Zt souas to

Ce that defense coins. 1 might get together all the miscellaneous

dccuo-nts - I soo Romberg has 1 document, Hovcn has threo documents,

Pokomjr has two documents - and get them tegother in the Gorman

language. I presume that 99% of thus arc affidavits. If they properly

worn to, then thoru is no point for objection on the part of tho

^ •

Prosecution, unless there is evidence in the nature of ro-rubuttal
-videnco, and the Tribunal ecu Id determine that at a later date when
they get the copies, and then they could guide themselves in the us-
c*’ thus and we could forestall any ether difficulties here.

THE PRESIDENT: I understood that these documents by the defense
th-.t you mentioned were practically ready tc be presented to the
Tribunal in the usual form. I don't kn^w when those documents Were
presented. Ur. Hedges assured a, that all documents which hod been

given to him up to a certain hour in the morning last Saturday w-uld

. /

-- huro by Wednesday morning. They will be her-, I understand. ”:*»


10598


Court 1

1 July-A-2Z*-2-ABG-Gross (VcnSchon)


the only documents which will not bo presented tccorrow ire docunuits
th--t have been delivered tala week, delivered yesterday and today.

UR. HARDY: Pren locking at this list. Your Henor, it doesn't
Seen to ao thoro arc store than a handful of documents, rfter you
.lisinato the Brack documents, the kivgewsky documents, the Schrccder
documents, and six documents for Karl Brandt, and it is ay assumption
that, of course. Defease Counsel for lirugewsky and Brack and Scnxwfer
rust have had their documents in bofero last weok.

TliS FR3SIDENT: Uoll, the docun-nts for the Defendant Urugowsky,

: r. Hedges informed x, were turned in on last Friday, Jun, 27.

HR. HARDY: But he says those will be ready tenorrem nerning.

THE PRESIDENT: Hu says these will be ready tomorrow naming.

UR. H«RDY: Then, after yeu eliminate those three large document
cases, you only have miscellaneous d-cuaents from each onu of the
ether defendants. It swoos tc no they could put those in through <

the interpreters.

THE PRESIDENT: It seefis to Oe also that if Defense Ccxinsol
■ho Just hnvo one or two documents could be prepared to havo those
docununts hero In German and that scoo system can be evolved whereby
they can be received in evidence and possible the important parts
read into tho record. Of course I understand tomorrow morning wo
have quit,, a bit of work to do on the documents which will bo r-idy
at that time.

UR. H«RDY: Your Honor, c-uld it bo possible for Your Honor to
issue a directive that all dof-nae counsel be litre tomorrow morning
■1th the documents they wish to put into evidence so that wo can go
take up each caso and go through docuount for document, be it trans¬
lated or ba it net translated.

THE PRESIDENT: All counsel will be in attendance before the
Tribunal at 0930 o'clock tomorrow morning and have their documents
either in Gercran onl Englisr. or in German, and the matter can be
presented to the Tribunal and wo will find cut Just exactly what has


Court 1

1 July-A-24-3-«EG-Groa» (VonSchon)

to bo done.

Anything further, doctor?

DR. SAUT31: No. I will see to it, Kr. FreSidont, that all tiio
dofwnso counsel arc hero at the boginning of the session tooorrew
serning.

FR0E£CHMA:« (for Brack): Hr. Proeidc.nt, I would bo able to give
pu all tr.u Goman documents. Six of thus wore handed in for trans¬
lation last week and tho other four yesterday or today, because I
received then only yesturday or today. If the Fresident desires I
could offer these documents right new and save tine for tomorrow
earning.

iHZ PRESIDENT: What dry were the six dec uniats last wock handed
in for translation, do ycu knew?

DR. FR0ESCt3 : .'.NH: They woro hnndfcd in cn 23 Juno, Hr. President.

THE PRESIDENT: Roll, I winder if those are included in tho
decuflents which will bo r^-dy tooorrow oernihg. Could Ur. Hodges
advise us?

m. HaRDY: Your Herver, the Brack documents will be included in
those ready fcoocrrtw ooming, tho six that ho put in last week. I
prrpose that he Introduce then all together, and ho can put the ones
that haven't been translated In after ho has put in the si::. 1 think
if - It counsel are hero tomorrow noming w« can reach sono understanding
and put then in in the Geraan lagnuag® and get the translation at a
later date.

THE PRESIDENT: '..’ill all the defense counsel be preo-nt with their
djeuaunta either in G-man and English or in Genoa toaorru* luorning
0930 o'clock.

The Tribunal nlll now bo In rue os* until 0930 toa-rrow noming.


10600


2 July li7-ii-w.TD-l-J.-Cross (Inti Brcnm)
Court Jfo. 1


Official transcript of the American Military
Tribunal ia tho matter of the United States
of ^.mrlca against Tarl "randt, ot al,
defendants, sittin- at .'umbers, Gomany,
on 2 July 1917, 0930-091;;, Justico 3oals,
pro si fine.

TIE H.3SHALs Pursens in the court roco will ploaso fine' thoir
soats.

Tho Honorable, tho Judeos cf Military Tribunal I. 'ttlitory
Tribunal I is now in session. God save the United States of Aaarioa
and this honorublo Tribunal* Tlicro will bo order in tho court.

TfE PRESIDENT i ICr. ’larshal, will you ascertain if tho
dofon !ants aro all presont in court?

TIE IOSP.Xj !toy It ploaso your 5fensr, all the Oofondants
aro prosont in court with tho oxcoption of tho dofondant Oborhe-usor,
absent \:o to illness.


THE IPESIDE’T: Tvj assistant S-.crotary Gonural 'dll noto for
tho roo>rd thu prosonco -f all tho ’afendante in court savo tho
dofoncfcnt OborluuB r a has boon oxcuaod on account of illnoss.

Tho assistant Socrotary Oautrr.1 has an announcorwnt to rvdeo for
tl» bonofit .f tofanso counsel, ill tho assistant Socrotary Oonoral
tako tho pc Hun and naicu his announcement.

ASSISTANT S2C!CT..Tf GENIAL I I wish to tako this opportunity
durin' opon prcccoHn.8 to clarify sort; adainistrativo nattors with


tho dofenso counsol. It ia frequently difficult for no to clarify
thoso points ■'ith you in:’ivi biaily bocauso of difficultios in Goman
and English. I don't spoak too well in O.rtnn and I don't understand


too nuch.


xinloss y^ur documents are propurly submitted
vill bo Joopar liiod to a cortain
a re. .rt to tho Tribunal on tho condition
tho tir- they aro considered. I placed a

I *.ish you woul nako thoso notes as to


10601


2 Jure 1*7-y-,,7D-l-2-Orc 5 s (Int. Brown)

Court 'Jo. 1

First, I would like to knar how many document books havo boon
prepared for each defendant. Listed under those document books aa
supplements there is an additional group of documents. For exar.pl o,
you havo Itocuncnt Book I and Supplasents 1, 2 and 3 to Docunont Book

otc., down tc L or 5 docuaent books. In addition to that, I nood
to know what oxhibit and the corresponding document numbers are found
in thoso document books and suppleasnts. I need to knew the docunont
book an-', .ago on which thrso ebeuments aro found. I noed to know
what aw tho date when the >fccicxnt was formally accepted into
ovidcnco. Further, I nood to know what witnesses havo apr, 0 arod on tho
bohalf of your defendants and what date they appoaroi.

Recently, I sont to oach laabor of tho dofenso counsel a list,
that is a nlnoc graphed or typewritten for:-., for ycu to fill out
an! Captain JtLco aslcod you tc fill that out and send it back to no.

I wish that you would brir*; that up into final Torn and submit it
to no at tho torrdnaUon of your caso, soao tino in the noxt few dayu.
I liavo only two of thoso so far. If you havo turnod this in to
Captain Rico got it back and aako a caaploto report to no on that
^ottor.

Sono tino wi thin tho noxt few days I would like each and o voryono
of tho dofonso counsel to oo:x> into n? offico, which is room 2 ? 2 .
rrlng your socrotary an! consult with no on tho natter cf thoso
oxhibito, boarinc in idivi that I have only boon in this caso for a
ccuplo of wooks and thcro is a lot of information which I !on«t havo
and must havo to certify tho rocord in its final fora when it is
sent forward for review.

I would appreciate ycur cooperation in that respect.

Non, I aif-ht ask before I leavo the poJiun if thcro am any
qv jo ticas fren defense counsel, ’orhaps Dr. Servatius could speak
:'or tho defense ccunsol and a3k my questions, or any other couraol
if you have any questions. It is fairly simple. Give no a coaploto
picturo of your docusmts, ycur document books, the exhibits, the


10602


2 July h7-H-:.TD-l-3-Gross (Int. Broun)
Court So. 1


ATMhit nuriars, and the pag os cn which they are found in the docurent
book.

DR. SSRVAHUS: !!r. Pros! dent, the only objection I oan sutedt
is a lack of tine, tfe all havo only one secrotary each. shall
hasten to coot the wishes of the Secretary General so far as wo oanj
we are also interested in achieving clarity in this natter. I shall,
t in r of ere, bo grateful if wo could have a certain extension of tiro
because we also in addition to this havo to conclude our closing
briefs by 7 July. After that wo oan handle this natter.

T!E FBSSUGNT: oil, ccunsol, as statod by the Assistant
Secretary General, this record is roquirod by hin largely for tho
purioso of cortifyin. tho rooord to tho Military Governor for roview
of tho Ju'^rxjnt, That aattor will not havo to bo certified for souo
tine. So, it doos not soon to an that this -attor should interforo
with what you havo to do now, Tho Assistant Socrotary Oonorol is
roquirod by his official Outios to certify this record after it is
cosiploto, but that, Ilr. Socrotary General, will not havo to bo dono
until after th? Judpwnt is rotumod in tho caso. So, I think that
tho work nood not interforo with tho preparation of tho briofs and
tho isuxUato prossuro under which ovorybody is workin; within tho noxt
ton days.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY CENTAL: I wish to explain thio furthor.

I an not conplotoly fa:iiliar with records. I havo tho records up
99> ocrroct ani all I neod is a little information from you to taako
suro I do havo then csrroct. J'aybo ym s A s un d e rstood no or I didn't
nxdco nysolf .door in that respect, but a visit, net nocossarily fron
you, frou your socrotary or your assistant defense counsel, would
servo tho purpose, Jist ccno to ne ^ccotino before you leave Numb arc
and finish this case and soo that ycu hero ooapletod your rooords.

This can bo takon care of in a :otter of a fen -inutos. It is vory
sir-plo. Thank you.


10603


2 July lj7-H-AT!>-l—i—Gross (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

'.n. HAPDYs !fcy it pleaso the Tribunal, Dr, Tipp introduood
an affidavit cone ami rv the translation of ttocuaont JO-135* Prcso-
cution foals that they do not wish to roach an aereocent as to the
acceptance of that translation. Prosecution hassutedtted a trans¬
lation on roviow of their Translation Departnont which thqy wish to
oontont to be the proper translation, Tho defendants Schroodor and
Bcclcor-Froysonc, roprosentod by If. Tipp, havo an altomativo
translation. Prosecution will not cbjoct to tte a dnissicn of tho
affidavit as to tlio altomativo translation arvl foal it should bo
loft up to tho Tribunal to docido on tho basis of tho context and any
othor ovidanco, which nooninc is intended*

THE PRESnEtfT: Vory well.

!R. HARDY i If tho Tribunal wishes Dr. Tipp can road Ids now
translation into tho rooord or would you liko to have that proparod
in another fom? And Prosecution 111 road theirs in again. Howovor,
ours tbos appear in tho rooord on ono oooasion.

THE RBSIDBHTt I don»t kne in what fom Dr. Tipp»s etatenant
is proparo.J*

IT!. TIP?: Dr. Tipp for Schroodor an;' Bockor-Frayson;;. Tho now
translation, Jtr. Prosit’ ont, hns boon proparod by no in tho usual fora
of on affidavit which was dram up by tho hoad of tho Ehrlish Dopart-
nent of tho Intorprotors InsUtuto of tho Dnivorsity of Heidelberg.

I think it would bo wall if tiis affidavit could bo road into tho
roccr .1 in tlx? scat, way that tho uxport opinion on tho art of the
translation branch was roa 1 into the record* Tho translations ara not
yot in*

T" PRESIDENT: Voxy "oil, counsol. Proceed. "oil, thon I would
Sti ost wo wait until thoy aro in so that wo sight follow you. How
Ion- is the Affidavit, counsel?

DP.. TIP?i This affidavit is 2 pages, your rfonor.

THE RESIDENT: You my proceed tc roa'. it now.


1060 A


2 July li7-K^TD-l-5-Gross (Int. 3rcxn)
Court !fc. 1


IS, H13DT: He has the affidavit both in English and C-ornan
language it is notarized in both languages, Scons to no that ho
could have a stencil cut today. It would only be a natter of 10 or
1 J> rdnutcs,

THE rSESIDENTi Uo expectod we would have copies, would liko
that but I since counsel brought tha natter up he nay road it into
the rcoord and furnish the stencil later,

DC. TIP?: This is Bockor-Froysong Dccunont ?Jo. 80 ,

UR, li’.SIE: It would bo difficult for the translators to
follow in this brief argunont that is proparod in the affidavit
without ooplos unloss ho poos vory slowly, I think it cculd bo taken
up later,

THS raESIOPffl Very well, wo - ill wait until the English
translation cones in.


10605


2 July z,7-U-S-2-l-'.alo (Brow)

Court No. 1

DR. TIPP: Thia ia Becker-Freyseng Document 80.

Vfe have the English translation, Your Honor, if you would like
to have it read now.

Thia ia an affidavit by ?r nz Rudolf Mattia, who aa I have
already said ia chairman of the English Department, of the Interpreters
Institute, University of Heidelberg. The document reads, "Expertise:

The Document No. NO-185, submitted by the prosecution contains the
following sentences:

"Ich atehe heute wider vor einer Entacheidung,
die nach zahlreichen Tiereund auch, Nenschen-
verauchen an froiwilligen Vcrauchapersonen oinc
endgultige Losung verlangt: die Uiftwaffe hat
glelchzeitig woi Verfahren zua Trinkborwad.en
von Meerwaaaer cntwiekclt."

The quostion to be clarified ia whether thia sentence ia ambiguous,
and what translation does it Justico.

The sentence is sonant slipshod, apparently written or
dictated in haste. Howover, the styUstic defects — such as " a
decision which demands a solution " - do not affoct the logical
implications of tho sentenco: thrso rathor ederivo from tho adverbial
modifications "after numerous experiments on animals and human beings
too" (nach zahlreichen Tier - und auch Uenschtnv« rsuchon) and "upon
voluntary test persons" (an freiwilligcn Vorsuchsporsonen)•

If this sentence is spoken rhythmically as it ordinarily wuld
be, a definite rest follows "Hanschenversuchcn’', leaving the
edv-rbial f* 30 "an freiwilligcn Versuchspersonen" to be related
to tho verg "verlangen." Thus, the following E-iglish translation
results:

"I stand today again facing the necessity of raking a decision
which, after numerous experiments made upon animals and human beings
too, demands conclusive experimentation on voluntary test persons."

10(06


2 July 47-ii-S^-2-2-Kaloy(Brom)

Court So. 1

If , on th* other hand, the German sentence is arbitrarily read in
some such way as;

"Ich stehe heute wieder vor einer Entscheidung,
dio oach sahlreichen Tiarversuchen - und auch
Honschenversuchen an freiwilligen Versuchsporsoncn -
ftino endgultigo Losung Verlangt."

The English equivalent would shape as follows;

"I stand today again facing the necessity of raking
a decision which , after numerous experiments on
animals as also on voluntary test persons, demands
conclusive investigation,"

Such arbitratiness, however, seerzo to ne indefensible."

It follows the sign ture and certification by the Notary, in
Heiielberg.

THE PRESIDEIT: The affidavit nay be received in evidence.

HR. HAHDY: Your Honor, in order tokeep the record straight it
might be advisable to reed the Prosecution’s translation at the samo
tins with this 0 '>e, so it cay be put in. This nmo has been put in
the record before. ' merely will read tho prosecution's contention.
Document NO 185, is that the translation in issue should read as
follows;

"Today agpin I stand before a decision which after numerous
animal as well as human aaperimmts on voluntary experimental
subjects demends a final solution."

THE PRESIDENT: Very well. The record is now in concise form
before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal has received Supplement IV, documont on the dofondant
Brack.

Counsel may proceed to oif«r these exhibits.

DR. FROESCHKANN: Froeschnann for 3rack.

This mo mi "g I was informed. Tour Honor, that supplemental

Volume IV has been translated into English and handed to the Tribunal


10607


2 July 47--S-2-3-toloy< Brow)

Court Ho. 1

I was ftirthei'informed that Sufpltcental Volume V, which was turned
in day before yesterday to the Translation Department has not yet
been translated.

The documents free Document Book V which have not yet been
translated, say I put then to the Tribunal in the original German,
so that I can conclude the presentation of these this morning ?

THE PRESIDENT: Yes, counsel nay do that with the consent of
the Counsel of the Prosecution. Is that satisfactory with tho
prosecution?

MR. HARDY: Uy understanding is he is going to offer ftjpplecnental
Book V in the Genmn. I will follow him with the original oxhibits,
Your Honor. It is perfectly satisfactory.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol may proceed.

DR. FRQESCHUANN: I ?hall then put in froa mjppleoontal book IV
for Brack, Document 55, the affidavit -

THE PRESIDENTi Counsel, the first document in thia book is
Document 53.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Yes, but I wish to put these in saaowhat moro
different order, in order to nako there moro perspicuous for the Tri¬
bunal, and I wirfi to begin with Document 55.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well. Counsel.

DR. FROESCHMANN: The first document will be Document 55, affidavit
by Hein* Heggcnrainer, 8 Hay 1947, Exhibit 45, *»«ich is on page 13,

Book IV. It is signed by Heggenrainer and certified by the local
Mayor. I shall now give the original to tho Secretary General.

Document 56, affidavit of Karl Freiherr Hie he 1 von Tuos sling,
of 9 June 1947, page 15, Book IV. Document 56, Exhibit 46. Now,
from supplemental Volume V, ihich the Tribunal dons not have, I put
in further affidavit —

UR. HARDV: I don’t see the reason for jumping around from one
document book to anottvr. *tiy can't he content himself with Book IV,
and then go to document book V.


10608


2 July 47--S!-2-4-iialoy(Brom)
Court No* 1


THE PRESIDENT: Yea, Counsel, proceed with Cocuntnt Book IV, and
then proceed to Docun«t Book V.

Efi. FROESCHUANN: Then I continue with Document 57, affidavit of
Thea B ra ck, 7 June 1747 , Document Book IV, page 7, Exhibit 47.

The original I am new handing to the Secretary General. This proves
that the defendant Brack , as brought to light in ay defense in June
1944, net Brigade fuehrer Globocnik in Berlin.

Now, ccoes Document 53, the expert opinion of Dr. folther
Runp, 11 June 1947, Exhibit 48.

UR. HARDY: I oust object to this affidavit. This affidavit of
Dr. hunp contains information concerning the availability of X-ray
tubes, and their consistency. On page 4 it says they are no longer avail¬
able after 1942, and on page 9 it states no longer available after
1941. As to the probative value of the dccuoent , it seems there
isn't any. If X-rmy tubes »e:*e aw liable in 1942 they certainly would
be available in 1941, and it seems that X-ray could be perforced if
there was one tubo as the witness Belicky said he was sterilized
by X-ray nachines, erri the photographic evidence bears this out. The
affidavit shows inconsistwicy in dates. This affidavit has no pro¬
bative value whatever, and is immaterial when the manufacture of
these tubes took place.

DR. FRDZSCHVANN: I do not understand the proeecution's objection.

In D r . Hucp's expert opinion of 11 June 1947, it statea on page 9, per¬
fectly clearly, consequently it is ay task to ascertain whether at the
beginning of 1941 it was technically possible to administer an X-ray
dose of yXJ r to females and 500 r to males, in order to bring about
a state of sterility. The date mentioned here ia 1941.

This, Your Honor, is on pago 2 of the Engli* translation, sentenco
before the last.

Now, Document NO 203 and 205 referred to the date March 28, 1941.

In other words, this expert is investigat ion the possibilities of
permanent sterilization at precisely the time that this report is drawn

10609


2 July L7-U-5+-2-5-1 'a ley( F rown)
Court So. 1


up. Therefore, I cannot understand rfiy the prosecution wanted to
say that this expert -

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, the Tribunal will receive this document
in evidence. Counsel for the prosecution nay call attention to any
discrepancies therein in the prosecution’s b rief and supplemental
brief. This document will be add tied as Brack Exhibit U 8.


10610


Court l.

2 July^3-l-AB0-itechan (Brcwn)


». FHOiECHIC.SJ: In this affidavit, I should like to draw the
Tribunal's attention tc the concluding passage which states the expert's
opinion that at that tis_ it was not possible tr carry our a p. naan«nt
sterilization in this way.

The next document will bo Dccucont Ho. 54, an affidavit of
Pleikard Stuapf, 20 June 1947, page 10. He considers the question
freer the specialist's nodical point of view whether on the basis of
report MO. 205 sterilisation was possible. He says "Ho". I gave tho
original to tho Secretary General. This is Brack Exhibit N-. 49.

Tho next dccuaent will be Dccuo-nt Mo. 58, an affidavit cf lira.

Then Crack of 7 Juno 1947, page 18. The prosecution yesterday put
those two docuaents in which 1 objected to, frets which tho represen¬
tative of tho prosecution, Dr. Hochwald wanted to prove that Brack
participated in the oxUmimticn of Jews. In the crosa-uxamiaaticn,

I have already raised an objection tc this and in three exhibits I
have prevod that during tho ticj free Sept-da.r, 1941 until the end
of October, 1941, the defendant Brack was co sick leave in Southern
Germany and in Tyrolo. The dotailo cf what went on duri:»g this sick
leave are to bo ascertained free this affidavit, of Ire. Brick, which
I new put in as Brack Exhibit No. 5C.

In this connection, I likewise put in as the next document,

Document No. 59, an affidavit by Walth-r Kiefful, dated 24 Juno 1947.

He also confirms that in October or 1941, Brack was in Southern

GuTscny, and Tyr-le on vacation and consequently between the 18th and

25th cf October ho c.uld net have had any conference with Wetzel.

*

This dccuaent will be Brack Exhibit No. 51.

So much"for Bock 4.

Mew, Book 5, containing affidavits, to wit; the following fivo
documents, two cf these dacua-nts contain affidavits by the Defendant
Brack, regarding the documents which were put to him during tho cross-
examination cr put in Very recently. These aro dccun-nts Ho. 63 and 64.

H-iRDT: Ycur Honor, I challenge the adaissability cf affidavits

10611


■


Ccurt l.


2 Julj^:-3-2-A31->;cUian (Drown)


concerning docunents which we put to the Defendant during crcss-
uxanination; ha had aaplc tiae to explain the documents at that time;
thu purpose of then during the cross-exaninntion wore rebuttal in
nature. The defense counsel had an opportunity to re-direct the
defendant and did so, I don't think t -at it is necessary net: or I
think good practice to accept affidavits of that nature.

THE PRSID . ’fl JT: Ceunscl, when defendant Brack was under crosa-
oxaminaticn and these documents were called to his attention, you had
aeplc orrertunity ir. r.-dir_ct cxanlmtion cf the defendant Brack to
cover thus* documents. What is the necessity for future documents new?

DR. rRODSCHl'-M: 1 did that ix. the rc-diroct oxaalnation, too.

I put a nur-ber of questions to the Defendant Brack, which roferred to
those decuijonts. Two cf those dccur^nts Were theso documents that
rofurr-d to the fact tnat Erack with scao, Wetxol, in October ef 1941,
negotiated regarding the extemination of the Jews; that is thu al¬
legation. On the basis of the dceuronts then put in, I have in the
neantir.o put forth considerable efforts te find where Wutsul was at
this tiue. I oven asked the prosecution to rfckw the radio available
to us, so that I should have that opportunity to firxi this <«ntsguricht-
srot WutSel and get in touch with hin. I pers-nelly went to various
caaps in which internees were Shewn to oe whesu rmcos wore Wetzel, but
I did net find that nan. I beliovo, therefore, that it is Brack's
right, in view of all that I f_-und out in the aonntloo, to raako sup¬
plemental explanations - and those are only supple/v-ntr.l explanations -
in that decuaonts. I consequently ask that these documents 63 and 64
bo accepted in evidence.

JE. HnRQT: Tour Honor, I don't soo the necessity for the admis¬
sion of tiia evidence. It is very apparent that Brack is new executing
an affidavit in rebuttal to the doconaots, i:hich Kero presented to hin
in cross-oxraimtion. I think we have taken ample tiao ef the Tribunal
in direct, and ro-lirect cross-cxaoinatic*. I also believo that the
charges .against Brack are perfectly ebvius x-xl he is not like scao of


Court 1


2 July -U-3-3"«t£-!Lfoehen (Brown)


the ether defendants, having eight or nine charges against hia. He
has a aininua nurl^r of charges, nnitely Euthanasia and Sterilization,
they were presented and apply covered during cross-exonination and
re-direct examination. This would new give a chance for the defense
to open rebuttal evidence.

IKE PHESIDrJ.T: It would seec that the defendant Brack had acple


opportunity to discuss these dccua-r.ts. neither tho defense or the


prosecution can keep on indefinitely presenting evidenco when ho has
aspic opportunity to rebut them. Those documents will not be re¬
ceived In evidence. The objection is sustained.

!?.. HARDY: It is ny suggestion that inasmuch as these docu/^nts
arc net adrdtted into evidence that the Translation Department will
bo given notice that Documents Brack lies. 63 and are not being
received in evidence. T.iis will sav thoa that much difficulty down
bwlow.

THE IHES1DE..T: Very Well, if you can said that word ta the
Trans La ting Department.

DR. PF-OESCHLAHH: I can quite understand the ruling of tho
Tribunal to the extent that it applies to documents presented during
cross-uxani.natior., tut these decuc-nts woro put in last Saturday.

Brack had not had opportunity to answer thaa.

LR. HARDY: Your Honor, the documents put in last Saturday again
“ere clearly rebuttal. Thu defendant Brack waa the last oao to tako
the stand on Euthanasia and si:»cc then no other affidavits or no other
witness woro presented concerning the question of Euthanasia since ho
left the stand. Tho ether was rebuttal evidence. It a etas to no that
the defense counsel is r. t aware of the theory cf rebuttal evidence.

THE :RESIDE<T: IVcurvoits and all evidence of this nature right
be admitted for tho purpeso of attacking the credibility of a witness
or of a document, cut insofar as it concerns rebuttal evidence wnich
the defendant had an arple eppe-rtonit- to introduce, it is not -.dais-
sable. The Tribunal net having the decuewnts before it is soaowhat


10613


Court 1.


2 JuljHi-3-4-Afl5-Moohin (Brawn)

ardor a handicap, but trtm tr.o uxpLanaticn asdu it docs not appear
that these documents are odaissable.

DP.. ?H02SCHlj\HZZ: Dccun.nt No. (C will be Exhibit 52. Thia
affidavit by Tucssling ccncorns Brack's activities in having priacnar'a
released fer Christa:.a. Hitler's birthday, etc., frua concentration
coaps. I just received this a ccuplo of days ago. This is Brack
rahibit He. 52.

My next to Inst d-cuncnt will be document Ho. 61. This is an
affidavit by Charlotte Brack, who is a distant relative of the defen¬
dant Brack, in which also the fact is confirmed that tho Dofondant
Brack in October of 1941 was an vac ti n. This is Brack Exhibit
No. 53.

*nd oy Last docuxnt is r He. 62. Ir. the docuauit in which
Brack is accused of participating in the uxteminati n of Jews by
having a conference with Aotcgurichtorot :/etzel, tho prcsecutii-n has
rop-.rtwdly said that 3rock sent his Choaict, Knll/aojur, to figs or
SvCewhure cn the Baltic Coast. I have succeeded in getting an affi¬
davit free Dr. Kallaufur. That is the Inst I should like t^ read into
the record because it is vory brief and proves definitely that the

defendant did not do what he is accused of by the Prosecution.

4

Kr.llBeyer says, 'H.ither in the autuon of 1941 or at any other
tine was ho ever in Riga or the Baltic r^gi n. Brack r.eVcr spoke
about sending ao to Riga in .rder tc got the necessary data and
apparatus.

Secondly, I knew neither .ertsrnt fatswl fren thu fonacr Roichs
Ministry of the Occupied eastern territory or the SS Polizeifuehrcr
for the Ostlond. I kn-w nothing of uiy request that h- was t= be
sent into that region." The affidavit is dated 20 Juno 1947, signed
-7 Kallaeycr and certified by tho n_t\ry in Kiel. That is Exhibit Ho.
54.

MR. ;1-RDY: I request that defense counsel take the affidavit of
KiHaeyur .and tell us for the purpose of the 1 record the present address


Court 1.

2 Jul?-ll-3-5-ABW^ohan (Br^m )

cf K&Uneyer. The prosecution wants ..is address, will you read into
the record the present address of thu witness Fallawywr?

DR. raoascauum: The address is Huctten/::itniborstol.
iSR. HARDY: Whore is that?

DR. rTOESCH:..;^: In Schleswig - Hclstain.

131. HnRDY: Thank you.


10615


2 Jul-’I-’E-U-l-Cool; (I-t. Brora)

Court Ho. I.

DR. FROESCEI&K: This excluding the affidavit fron Kolst which
the Tribunal prosiised to acfcait a few days ago, concludes my eahibits.

7KZ iRSSJBEfT: The exhibit will be admitted with the exception
of the two against which the objection was sustained.

DR. SA7T2R: (Sauter for Blcce):

I have only one no re document to put in for Blome, an affid¬
avit by the defendant Bloom dated 1 June 19b 1* correctly certified.

It has not yet been translated but is in this process. This affid¬
avit concerns itaolf with a document which the Prosecution put in on
last Friday, namely the docusent in which a file note is contained,
regarding a conference with business mnagor Dr. Haubold of the Foreign
Dofortannt cf the P-oich Chanter of PSjysicians, and in some way or othor
this is ouppesod to incriminate the defondnnt 3lone.

Of this Foreign Department of the Reich Charter of Physicians
there had never teen any mention befero last Friday in this trial; Dr.
Blaae has drawn up an affidavit to that effect and it is very brief. I
quote....

!R. HARDY: Your Honor, I question the a<faissibility of this
before he starts reading it inacnuch as tho Proaocution has charged
Dr. 33 coo with nodical experimentation in general. Dr. Blome has
denied any knowledge of nodical experimentation and when examined by
mo on cross examination many, many weeks’ ago, enphatically donied any
knar lodge of these matters and this document which is introduced by
the fVosccution in rebuttal clearly shows Profossor Blone had some
interest in tiio matter and had scce know lodge, and in the eyes of the
Frceecution is a perfectly jwoper rebuttal document.

DR. 8AUTZP.: This point of view by tho Prosecution in this

very last moment in tho taking of eridorcc makes a natter of principle

of this ifhole business and I cannot _r.derstand how it is possible or

•

permissible for tho Frosocution on tho last day or next to the last day
of 3 trial tret has lasted months to put in a wholo lot of new documents
with new charges and then say these are all rebuttal documents, and,

10616


2 Jul-4i-JB-ii-2-£ook (Iat. Bream)

Court !fo. T.

•

therefore, the defendant has no right nor occa si on to make any stato-
cer.t regarding then. In this document which was put in last Friday
a brand new assertion was contained, naaaly, the assertion that there
was a Foreign Depart® nt in tho Reich Charter of Physicians, and this
is the assertion that Blows was responsible for it in a criminal tray,
because we are dealing in this trial only with crinos. How tho Pros¬
ecution just states in a sore or less stereotyped way this is not a
char go against Dr. Blase, but obviously all of those documents are
put in to incriminate the defendant, and it scans to no that justico
demands that the dofondant onto now statements regarding the so docu¬
ments. Those documents could have been put in months ago, as well as
last Friday. \Iq are not allowed to tiirow in such docurwnts at tho
last moment, and consequently I don't think tho Prosecution should
have tho right to put in whole volumes of documents to which wo can
nako no objection) that would bo unjust, and It. President, if that is
considered to bo just, wo should leave this rocn with tho fooling that
tho defendants wore not given their full rights in this rogard.

THE {RESIDENT: Counsel, was this docunont to which you refer
put in by tho Prosecution oxhibitod to tho dofondant Blono whilo on
the stand by way of cross examination.

DR. SAUTE''.t No.

THE IRESIDE/T: Noll if this docunont which tho Prosecution
racontly put in was not oxhibitod to tho dofondant Blono on cross ex¬
amination, tho Tribunal will receive tho docunont now, offered by De¬
fendant Dlcco.

DR. SAUnfei This affidavit oy Blcrc makes a statement regard¬
ing tho now charges that were nndo against him last Friday in a now
docunont. Ho says, and I quote the affidavit. It is very short:

*Fro« 1939 until I9h3 I was Deputy Director of tho Roich Cham¬
ber of Physicians, the cfiiof of which was Dr. Conti, and in this capa¬
city ho boro the title "Roich Physicians loader". Pursuant to the law
it made up the Reich Chamber of {fcysiciana of 13 Doceatoer, 19kC. Tho


10617


2 Jul-WS-U-3-Cook (lot. 3rcrm)

Court Ko* I.

representation of the Reich Physicians leader was stipulated as fol¬
lows*

■Paragraph 1, Section 1 reads as follows:

■The loader of tho Heich Chanter of Physicians (The lioich
Physicians Loader), looks after the interest of tho Reich Chamber of
Physicians and represents that cteabcr legally and otterwiao. Ko has
a permanent deputy. Ko can also authorise otter persons to represent
hia in certain instances, or to watch after tte interests of tho cham¬
ber", that is tho conclusion of that pcragrr.^i 21.

Blono continues:

"Tint among those people whoa tho Roich Physicians Loader gnvo
tho right of Doputy, among thoso who did not belong undor tho authority
of the Roich Fliysicians Chamber of tho Reich Physicians Lciodor was Dr.
Haubold, loader of tho Foreign Doixtrtecnt. Othora .also, such as tho
director of tte Financial Depart -.ont and tte Dopcutaont for Kedicnl
Post Graduate Training and Press, varo in tho snuo category. 1, accord¬
ing to orders free* Dr. Conti ted n-it ter tho right to givo ordors nor
tho right to auporviso. I only saw Dr. Haubold, tho leador of tho
Foreign Department only occasionally, porteps ovary a quarter of a
year. Dr. Haubold took care of this office at tho sgdo tiro ns te
ted Jobs outsido tho Roich Chartoor of Physicians. In his cnpcclty te
was director under Dr. Conti, for oxmplo in tho roscttlencnt of Oor-
enro from Russia. In those otter fiolds of ^rork of Haubold, I ted no
insight at all, nor do I know anything about tho financial natters of
tho foreign department. In this respect, oq Conti's orderc, tihis do-
partoont was so indopondont that, not ovon ay roforont for business
natters ted insight into the so financial natters.

"The question whotter Dr. Hr. _>old over discucsod tho valuo of
tho production of tha typhus vaccine with ao or tte quostion of bman
typhus oxporbajnts I can only deny enphatically."

Kuronborg, 1 Juno 19ii7, (signed) Kurt Elmo. This is 31ccao
Docunont 27, and it will bo Exhibit 25.

1D613


2 Jul-J>'3-i;-ii-Ccok (Int. Brown)
Court Mo. I.


That concludes ny defcnso, Your Honors.

DR. S2WATHE (Dr. Servatius for Karl Brandt )s

7H.: fBES2Dc2fr: Well, Doctor, I do not boliovc tho Tribunal
has received tho English documents for Karl Brandt.

DR. SSRVATIIS: This is docurcr.t 117, that I put in to tho
Translation Dopartnunt two W-cks ago and haven't yet received back.

It is an o labor a to and a cost Important dcciront in ny ease.

THE PRESIDE-VT: Uy point no rely was wo have a one English docu-
nonta hero for otter dofondanta and wo could no re convoniontly jrocced
with those of which wo havo tho English translation nnd wait until tho
English translation of your docunont arrives.

DR. SERVATTUSi That could tako days. 1 understood today
was tho last day.

TTE HtBSlDdHTi Woll, I understood tho docuoonts aro caning
in today, at difforont hours, frfcn tte translation department and in
the order as ttey corao in we would procood with thoso which wo alroady
tovo in Siglish. If today is not long oneugh to rcceivo nil of thoso
docuaonto -n opportunity will bo afforded you to put in tho document*
lator, but wo have sooo in-English tero and I thought wo could proceed
with thoso more advantageously.

DR. SERVATIUS: Than I shall wait.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has aono docunonts on behalf of
tho defendant irugovsky, I think, Bock III. Has tho Socrotary any of
thcoo document books on behalf of tho dofondant Krugowsky?

THE SEC-'ETAiO': They aro not hero yot.

HR. HARDY: I do not have any Krugowsky books. Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: These were delivered to no this corning by tho
Translation Dopirtnont.

If*. HARDY: Your Honor, is it possible that they dolivored tho
copies to tho Presiding Judge inasmuch as you iron tho order in which
you wish tten in erdor to present thee?

THE FRESTH2T: None but these w_ro delivered to ao«


10619


2 -Cook (Ir.t. Brown)

Court !io. I.


IP-. HAHDT: You don't happon to haws a fifty copy so that ono
could bo available to nc, do you? •

THE HlYSZZSHTi I have two copies of this book apparently. I
think it aostly consists of the transcript taken free tho evidence in
the Pohl trial.

!£. HIRDIa Does Dr. Floating have an oxtra English copy?


2 July-4W?-5-l-Hay3e s (1st. Brown)

Court I

HU IL3<rr&: Cfce of the books contains thoso excerpts fron the
xohl trial. Tho other book contains affidavit!.

?H2 FHSSnOBTl I havo a Gernan Becuncat Sonic, Suppler:ont III
for !Ju,:ov»ky f but no Scurliak translation.

IS. 7LSKIFQ: Three contains tho oxcorpts fmn tho pohl cnao,
and Book II con to. In a tho affidavits.

22. EA3DT: In tho caao of 3onk III, thoro would not bo any trans¬
lation problcn air-co already tho En,'lioh nnd Coman exist.

EZ HlZSIIMTl I'll hand Counsel this Goman Docunent 3ook III,
Hru^nwsky.

MH. HAPJJYt Tho Gorr.an will not holp no nuch. If tho English oxisto,
I do not soo why I oauld not havo it now and then follow hin nnro
handily with tho English. If ho is Introducing oxccr-to fror. tho Tohl
case, which ore five orcorpt and I can soo that tho Socrotary Oenorcl has
cortifiod thon t >< bo truo copios, then I havo no objections, I can
road thoso lator. Sut of tho othor Docunont Book, I vr uld liko to
road tho English. Tho only quostlon with regard to thoso oxcorpto
froc tho Fohl ease, that is tho trial downstairs, is whothor or not
thoy nro cortifiod by tho Socrotary Oonoral. If they nro, thoro would
not bo nny objoction by no, and I can ot tho copies lator.

THE PBSSIIOTl I'll hand thoso to Counsel and ho nay oxanino thee.
Thoy woro handed to ns Just boforo tho oponini; of Court. I ha.d no
opportunity to oxer.ino thon.

DR. mxy.ISG: On 25 Juno, I rpro thoso do cun on 18 to tho Socrotary
Oonoral with tho roquost that tho7 bo cortifiod. Vhothor tho Tribunal
alroady has then in cortifiod forr. I do not know. At least, thoy nro
all nir.oogrnphod copios.

THE FHSSIIBBTi Tho Translation Sop arte on t infoms no thrt theso
wero turned over by Counsel for Kru^oweky only last Friday, on Juno 27,

23U EA3ST: In this ease of IV'Cccont Book III,, thoro actually was
not any necessity ”f tumin* it over to tho translation Bopartnont.


10621


2 July-i4-JP-5-2-f:aynes (Int. Brcwn)

Court I

All you havo to do is request 15 Copies of tho Goman transcript, tho
pages that you acod. 15 copios of the English transcript. take tho copy
to tho Socrotary General and have It certified and sulcit it to Major
Eatfiold ns an exhibit. Ec does not havo the exhibit, and he dnos not
have the fegllsh; and th-t is s-rothing that should not go to tho
Translation Doprxtnont.

TEE JESSIHSTTs That should not havo gono to tho Translation
Dopartncat, oxoopt that I aesunod that it was accorpcniod by certain
affidavits,

HE. EAHEYi That is another book,

THE PHSSUISl! Aro those copios cortifiod?

IE. 3LHIHCTG: Hr. Prosidont, I did r.ot oer.d this Do cur. on t Book
to tho Translation Dopartront. I sont it right to tho Socrotary Gcnoral
and asked hin to cortlfy it, bocauoo thoro aro already English tranolo-
tions of thoso passages froo tho original transcript. On 25 July I grrvo
than to tho Socrotary Goneral to. bo cortifiod.

TEE PRESnOTT: In soco nystori'us way it appoars to havo landod on
tho Trraslation Department, but, of oourso, it should not havo tnkon any
of thoir tiao, siaco only cortifiod copios of tho transcript boforo onothor
tribunal woro rsquirod,

EA2DY: Thoso tw« voluros you have hnndod no, Your Honor, aro
saroly cortifiod copios of s^aobody's transcript file, which I will
hand back to you,

ffiE DBSSIDaTTx Just keep then. • t will be possible to havo thto
cortifiod by tho Socrotary General.

MR. EARDY: Thoso apparently belong to s-cebody's C'-aplotod filo.

They nay possibly bo froa your file.

TEE FRESHEST: They were handed to no by tho Translation Dopartaont
diroctly. I noticed that, but I —

HR. EA3UY! I'll roturn than to tho Translation Dopnrtcent.

TEE PEESI33T: Veil, no. Just return than to no. They dolirored then

10622


2 July-K-JP—&-3-Eaynos (int. Brown)

Court I

Wc thou havo no English translation of Mru^-weicy Document Book III.

IE. ?L23iI5G: The translation of 3ook II is cot ready eithor,

I aaaiEO—Suppler.eatery Book II.

THE PR2SICTT: Apparently It has not boon rccoivod. Arc thoro

I

any other coaplotod Document Books that havo been turaod over to tho
Secretary of tho Tribunal?

IE. 7LS33H0: Tho tranalntloa Depertreat hne had then aiaco lent
woek, and yoatordny—

TEE FRESHETT: Since laat Friday, Doctor.

IB* TLSIIOG: Slnco Thursday or Friday, yoa, end tho Chi of of
tho Translation ropartr.ont aald yoatorday that thoy would ho roady today,
ao porhapa I cm postpone ny proaontation until tho translation lo horo.

THE PRESIDENT: ko will wait a fow nlnutca, Doctor. Tou nay
rostno then*

Jffl. HARDY: Your Honor, I Just rccolvod Proaocutlon Robuttrl
fticunont Book 19. I can procood with that la a fow nonoata If I <^>t
tho other ooploa*

TEE HIE SI DEPT: Tory woll. Counsol.

K8. HARDY* I'll hero to wait until I rocoivo tho Oorr.an ooploo
for tho Oornnn Counsol to follow no. Your Honor.

THE PRSSID2IT: Vhilo the Tribunal la In rocoao, will Counaol—

1GU HARDY I It could woll bo that I could tako up tho introduction
of thoao In tho scco r.annor that Dofonao Counaol havo In that I put
In tho English of Robuttnl Document Book 19 and conploto that. I
don't boliovo thoro will bo any objection to oono of those. Eowovor,

I will havo to got tho original of tho oxhiblto. If thoro aro any of
tho ottaor Dofonao Counaol that havo docuaont books ready to put In, thon
I could got thoao woll arrangod and ;ut thee In a noro ayatcnatic nmner.

TEE PH2SID22T: Havo any Dofonao Counaol ary df'Cment books that
aro roady to bo prostrated? How enny Dofonao Counsol havo furthor
doemont books to offer?


10623


2 July—J?—5—^-Heyno 3 (int. Brown)

Court I

(Show of hands by Dofer.so Counsol)

THS I22SIIE5-: Six- During the nornlng recess will Co unsol for
dofendar-t Ilrugovaky tako up with the Socrotary General tho natter of
tho certification of those extracts fr^o tho Pnhl trial that ho dosircs
to lntroduoo in cvidonco. The nettor will bo triton up with tho
Translation Dopartnont to aacortain what is availablo fron there.

HE. HARDY: Your Eon-.r, I an infomod that tho Goman copioo of
tho Robuttal Doour.ont 3ook arc not rc-'dy. I'll not bo rondy to
procood with thoso. Tho transcript of tho interrogation of tho do-
fondant Hovea was in English. That had to bo translated into Gor-inn.
Thoy havo not got tho Goman daemon t book together yot.

DR. raoSSCHlARH (For defendant Erode): Tho ruling of tho Tribunal
*>n tho application by ay colloaguo Sautor nakos no boliovo that perhaps
tho Tribunal nieundorstood no. I cannot talk ns loudly as ay onlloo&uo
Dr. Sautor, no porhaps I did not nako nysolf so clear.

Tho othor affidavit that I wantod to put in for ny cliont contalnod
f'>ur short str.torionts regarding four docur.onto put in on Saturday, in
which 3rnck is nccusod outright of crinoo against hunonity, and thoso
aro new crir.os insofrr ns ho is accusod of having participated in tho
oxtomination of Jows. In ono docxnont it is said that a nontally ill
person diod in Lublin* thoro was tho otatonont that thoro was a
outhnnasia station in Lublin and that in this outhnnneia otation this
Jowloh woe an was killod, this is a non clnin.

SHS PEZSIZEST: Counsol, I undorstood fr^r you that thoso do cu¬
rrents that you woro offorinr on bohalf of tho dofendant Brack wore In
refutation of dnevronts which had boon oxhibitod to dofoniant Brack
while ho was on tho witness stand and which wore then narked for
identification and woro later introducod in evidence by tho Prosocution.
Is that corroct?

a. jBCBSC&UHF: Fo, your Honor. Tho first Brack affidavit was
to rofor to tho d/.cuaent put to 3rack during cross examination, and
this tho Tribunal ro.'cctcd. Then Saturday Eochwald for tho Prosecution


10624


2 3uly-W-JP-5-5-Esynes (Inti 3rnvn)

Court I

put In now d/.cur.cuts which had not boon put to Brack during hie croon
ox ar . ln atlon, in which thceo aeecrtione ere narto—needy, thet in tho
Lublin nr.ttor that I Just rontion, ho holped kill a Jowl eh insane wan an
■ocondly, that In 1942 at a o^nforonco of tho Hoich Ministry of Justice
ho dolivcrod a lccturo which Brack also has not boon ablo to nako a
statccont about bocauso this was not pit to hin boforo; thirdly, a
do cunont was put In by 3oefc.

TH2 FE2SmzyT: I dn n"t ranersbor that Dr. Hochwpld introduced any
now documents. I night bo wrong. I thought ho was noroly explaining
docaaonts which had horctoforo boor, eutnitted ns Exhibits for tho
Prosocuti^n,

fS. HA-1DT: Tour Eon'T, Dofcnse Counsel has statod that thoeo aro
now chargot. I with to call Your Honors' attention to tho Indictnont.

In tho Inlictr.cnt —

THZ FRBSI2DT: Counsol, the question Is not altogothor ns slnplo
as that. Ln b fioctronts whloh woro cxhlbltod to tho dofcndnnts In
tho 00 UHO of crocs oxrnizvtion nnd woro uarkod as Prooocutlon Iden¬
tification, t'no dofondant then had n full opportunity to nnswor thoso
d'cunonta on ro-diroct cxrr lnatlon. If othor do cur. ants woro offorod lntor
which woro not oxhlbltod to tho defocdnnt whilo tho dofondant was on
tho a trad or offered by way of robuttal, and Tory proporly, tho Tribunal
is dlsposod to allow tho dofondnr.t to deny those affidavits if they had
*>t boon collod to tho defendant's attention whilo tho dofondant was
on tho stand* That was tho occ"cl'n of tho ruling on tho dncinont
offorod by Dr. Sector.


10625


Court 1

July 2-1 i-6-i-.-.D-Gross-Brown.


UR. HARDY: Veil, Your Honor, suppose Che situation be
this - that we withdraw all the rebuttal documents and put
Chen 1 n when defense has completed the case.

DR. ER0E3CHSUNF: Trier, I say assume that this second
affidavit of sine any be put In and accepted In evidence
because reference to the document w-s not put to Bracks
attor.tl n during the time he was here on the stand.

UR. HARDY: Prosecutlvn requests, your Honor, that the
Tribunal oeruso the documents we put In rebuttal In connec¬
tion with the Euthanasia caso to see whether or not they
are rebuttal evidence. Prosecution contends they are.
Therefore they are not admissible.

THE PRESIDSHT: If they were exclusively rebuttal
ovidenco and br ught In n • new srtters they should not now
be denied.

UR. HARDY: The only question Is that Dr. Frooschmann
Is trying to bring up that wo did not oharge 3rnok with
extermination f thj Jews. Vo specifically chargod him
with cxtorclnntl,n of the Jews in the Indictment. The
theory of the Sathanasia case was that Euthasasla was
and -vontually oxlstod in the extermination of tho Jews
as utlined in the Indictment.. He has known from tho first
day ho reoelvod it. It is nothing now, your Honor.

DR. FR0S8CHMAUH: If the Prosecution now states that
Brack is not being charged with participating In the
e: termination of the Jo-,:s, then It Is clear that I do not
have to do any refuting hero. But Kochwgld explicitly
stated last Saturday that Brock was charged In partlcipating
lr. extermination of the Jews and I consider It my duty as
defenso counsel to give my client the opportunity to make
statements about these new charges or documents from the
Prosecution.


10626


Court 1

July 2-M-6-3-HD-Gro«8-*3rowr.»

THE PRESIDENT: It seems clear counsel that the charge
was In there against the defendant Brack In all stages of
the proceedings Including the Indictment and when Braok
took the stand In his own behalf he had the opportunity to
give full testimony concerning the charges given In the
Indlctoont.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Yes, but these are new documents, your
Honor - Document NO-3355, Exhibit 552.

THE PRESIDENT: Those documents, counsel, according to
the Prosecution, I have not read them recently, are simply
In rebuttal to evidence of defondant Brack. He had a full
opportunity to tostlfy. Prosecution presents further
ovlde.nce to the effect that the testimony of Defendant Brack
Is lnoorroct. Thoy have that right In offering rebuttal
ovldenco. "rack on the stand had the opportunity to tell
his story. Prosecution on rebuttal has tho right to show
his story Is Incorrect. That cannot be carried on
Indefinitely by then denying what Brack had tho right to
testify to whon he was on the stand.

DR. FR0E3CHMANN: In my opinion these documents are
not rebuttal ovldenco but are brand new statements, brand
new material.

THE PRESIDENT: They are entitled to do that, of course,
on rebuttal to bring In any evidence In rebuttal. That Is
the pur-jose of rebuttal evidence - to bring In any evidence
which tends to prove that the evidence by tho defendant on
the stand was incorrect.

DR. FR0E5CKKANN: Veil, but then the defense ought to
have a chance to sta to his opinion about this new evidence
because It might be an obvious error. How am I going to have
a chance to refer In ay brief to that which might be wrong.

1 fully agree here with Dr. Sauter.

10627


Court 1

July 2-H-6-3-HD- Sro 3 a-3rovr,.

KR. HARDY: Your Honor/ isn't It my understanding In
rebuttal evidence that If we Introduce any new evidence
that the Tribunal will exclude new evidence In Judgment.

If we have offered any new documents they are clearly In¬
admissible and If one of the documents wauld be a new factor
It seems to me they would merely Ignore It, because the
Tribunal won't pay any attention to new evidence any way.

THE PRESIDENT: On rebuttal, as stated by Prosecution
Prosecution must limit evidence to rebutal, refuting evidence
by the defense, If there Is new saterlal In It the Tribunal
Is Justified In Ignoring It. Counsel In his brief may
call attention to the fact that It Is not proper rebuttal
evidence and should be Ignored. If there Is suoh evldonoo.

The Tribunal will now be In recess and we will ooe what
onn bo done to dear us those documents.


10623


Court Ho. 1

2 Jul 47-K-10-l-ZlDt-=eyass (Rosier)

THE XAr.SHAL: The Tribunal la pga 1 n In session.
hS. EAEDT: Kay it plweso the Tribunal, &■. Servatiua has four or
fire or eix documents that I think ho can cut In nov in tho German
language. At tho coepletlon of that, Dr. Tiop has two docuaenta that he
can put In In the Geraen language. I believe that Dr. Soldi has one;
Rudolf Brandt has another, and I think Poppendick one, and Hoven one, and
Belglbocek one. I think those can all bo handled nov.

®. F.OJTJ’JlH (Counsol for defendant Pokorny): Mr. Proeident, loot
Friday I finished cy submission on behalf of the defendant Pokorny. Tho
Tribunal permitted no to submit another two affidavits, one affidavit by
tho dofendant and one by the vltnoss Dr. Jung. In tho record it Is
expressly stated that I vae oomitted to submit thooo affidavits ns soon
as they rro roady. This vae tho etatenent cade by tho President.

Today I have those tvo affidavits and I trlod to submit thon to the
Translation Department. I w o told there that thoy could not bo accepted
anyaorc. In addition, .11 tho docc-onts which have boon subolttod slnco
Monday vero sent back with the notation that thoy could no longor bo
translated. I ehould like tho Tribunal to rulo in ry special coso that
thoso tvo documonts bo nccoptod for translation and ooually that oil the
documents that have been subnittod this week should also bo tranolatod.

In ay cose I would not have boon able oven at the best to get theoe
docunonts road" any faster. I think that originally the Tribunal gave us

tlno until today or oven until the 3rd of July to submit tho docunonts

•

to tho Translating Division. I fool that ve ere horo concorned with a
aisunderotending cf the Translating Division.

TEn ?=LSII£”T: I renumber tho ruling of the Tribunal vns that
these docunonts night be offered uo through today and possibly tomorrow,
but that did not neon that thoy would bo accented nfter that. Tho
counsol nay present this rottor this -fternoon. Ve will nov proceed

with hearing Dr. Servatius end the documents he hes to offer.

MR. EABUT: In regard to Po^oray's case, the Tribunal did grant
permission to the defense counsel to submit an affidavit from Pokorny


10629


Court So. 1

2 Jul 47-K-10-2-E3<-Haynss (Easier)

fclnsslf. I think vc could teke these two later la Geraan, and In tho
period of the week'a recee: and ec forth they could eventually got to tho
Tribunal before you set cut to write your judgment.

TEL pa25IE£HT: The dofoadant Pokorny having been the last defoninnt
to testify, naturally hie docucents vero delayed. If It le etatod by
tho counsel for the prosecution that he agrees, these nay bo offered In
Goman this aftornoon.

MH. EArJTf: Pine, Your Honor.

THE PHiSHETT: We shall hoar frea Dr. Scrvatlus, counsel for Karl
Brandt.

IE. SiP.VATIUS (Counsel for defendant Karl Brandt): Hr. President,

I offer now tho Document D-11S re Exhibit 102. This is an official
docuaent of tho Puehror, Adolf Hitler, In which Karl Brandt rocelvos a
special assignment In his capacity ns Gonoral Cocnisslonor for tho Hoalth
and Medical Sorvlcos. It tonde to iirustrntc his position as It was.

Tho docunont is not yet trarelrted; It is very short and I shall road it
Into tho record:

■Puohror Kerdauhrtors, 26 October 1942.

"The cere for tho voundod demands an evacuation of the hospital
bases. Therefore, the interests of all nllitrry end civilian ngencloo
havo to withdraw. I cooalsslon the Chlof of tho Vehrnacht Medical Ser¬
vices with tho building of those now hospital bases and also the Oenoral
Qiartomastor of the Amy. The Chief of the Vehrnacht Medical Services
and the Gonoral Quartermaster of the Arny will receivo the nocossary
authorisation In connection with ny General Coaalsslonor for Health and
Medical Services. (Signed) Adolf Hitler"

K3. HAHUT: Mill Dr. Scrvatlus kindly nako a statoaent regarding the
authenticity of this docunontl That is, *toere tho docunont cane fron,
and so forth, for the record.

EE. S1HYATIUS: I received this docunont fron ny colleague Dr. Kolte,
vho in turn has received it fron Eandloser. I havo a photostatic copy
teforo no end I have no doubt as to the authenticity of the signature.


10630


Court So. 1

2 Jul 47-K-10-3-EEH-Eey ne• ( Ba r-1 er)


KB. EABDY: Is this the original signature?

IS. SI5VATIUS: I have never had the original In ny hands.

K?.. HARDY: That Is supposed to be Adolf Hitler?

DR. SECYATIUS: Tes, that Is supposed to be Adolf Hitler.

KB. EARDY: I recognise the slgncture as being that of Hitler. I
think the docur-ent Is authentic, end If defenso counsel vill rvtfco tho
statement that It vas received fro- Professor Handloser and that Handlosor
had bed It In his possession as an official docunont, that will neet
tho qualifications of the Court. Ko can nede a certification to this on
a later dato. Just to assure us f tho authenticity for the Court rocord.

I won't object.

ER. SLRVATXUS: I will subnit a etatonont of that naturo.

KB. HARDY: The statesont need only bo In the English lnngungo
- Just a briof stotonont rs to its authenticity.

THE S&3SIJ&KT: What exhibit mriber will that boar for Karl Brandt?

IB. SERVATICS: This will rocoivo the oxhlbit nunber 102.

KR. HARDY: It is ay understanding that this is in tho translation
nill and we'll have English copios in due tino.

THE PRESIDES?: Dr. Scrvatius hre stated that it apparently wont
into tho translation two weeks ago.

DR. SZRYATIUS: Tes, it wr.s submitted for translation.

I now sutait Karl Brandt Document 117. It is a ccnpilation of
crocrir.onts taken fr* a scientific lecture dated tho yonr 1937,
entitled "Infectious Zrperiaectotion on Hunan Beings". The docunent
was sutnitted to the Translating Division two weeks ago but is not yet
available. I should like to esk your pemission to sutcit it in tho
Gernan langungo and- the translations vill arrivo later.


10S31


2 July 47_H_JjC_ll—1-Groee (2*-l«r)

Court Z

ZB. SiST-TtUS: (Continued) It is a sunration of a number
of expcrinocts tc vhlcfc I shall refer in =y final plea. In parti¬
cular it refera to the question of the voluntary nature of the
subjects.

Zhe next docuacnt will be KB-131. Hiese are a few pagos froa
a docusont which was already subnlttid by the Froaecution aa Exhi¬
bit So. 512. This case fron the "Philippine Journal of Science,"
including the cxperlacnts of Strong. I have hero the covor ond
the p»goa 171 and cages 377 to 37Q vhirh hare beer photostatod by
no. It concerns the death case which aroso during tho oxporlmento
•nd I subsit this docuacnt in s^pl 04 station of what tho Prosocu-
haa already offered.

l-Q. KAHBT: May your Honors plcano, the original docuacnt lo
in tho i-nglish language.

». 51RTASIP3: I don't knew whether the Tribunal has tho
entire article bef re it. I hr*7. tho original book here froa tho
Univorsity of Munich rnd I should like to hand it to tho Tribunal
so that it nay take official notico of it although they would havo
to return it at a later date. I considor it lsqjortant that tho
Tribunal get a picture about these oxporinents and will sco how
such exponents ~cro carried through, how voluntary subjects wore
obtained, and vfc*t circumstances played a part. I ask tho Tribunal
to p.ctjoptnc original document and hand it back when they are
finished.

Ttt FHLSX2..': V c have four pages of photostats. Doos that
cover the or tire dccuner.t or net?

IS. SIE7ATITS: So, the document itself hao 130 pagoo and could
not bo copied. I sorely want tc hand it to the Tribunal so that
they nay gain insight »nd rain a general opinion about the oxporl-
serts. Prosecution h'3 pres r.ted part, the expert Ivy referred to
it, and I think It expodient if the Tribunal would get an insight
into the document.


10632


2 July 47_H_#jC_lL-2-C-roBS (H*=lcr)

Court I

•

7EZ PPXSIIZST: The volunc say be deposited In the office of
the Secretary General to be available to thoTribunnl.

IB. SIEVATIU3: The last document will receive Ixhiblt So. 104.

The following document 13 129 le offered aa Ixhibit 106. It
la pc affidavit tinned' by the vitncea Weaao. Thia vitncee had
beon approved by -e for the purpoao of croaa oxnninatlon. In
agreement with Proaecution and in the preacnce of a reprooontativo
of Proaocution, I interrogated thii witr.caa -nd I have layed down
hia tcetiBony in the fora of an affidavit. Tho documentation
divlaion ha.o not tr»nalatcd that document and with the approval
of tho Tribunal I would read it into the record, Tho document hno
about three pa get.

THL PRLSIELMT: Hpa counool for Proaecution oxanlncd tho docu¬
ment?

MB. HARDY: Tho docunont la in order, your Honor. It has tho
•ffient'a aignr.turo on it. And, if I rocall the Tribunal gave
pcrniaalon to call the witr.caa for croaa examination purpoaoa.

Dr. Sorvatiua chooo to got an affidavit and did interrogate the
wltreaa in tho proaonco of Froaccutlon and thia io hia affidavit.

I think thia should be adaitted. Ae to tho tranalatlon problon and
cooplcting it. I think it ct«ld be read into tho record but that
wouldn't sake an available copy for Proaecution, bo he could road
tho portinent parta, or.

TKi FBI SiaiT: The document will bo trnnalated into tho
Ingliah by the T r nrsl"'v-on Divlaion.

MB. K*2DT: I think that la nil that will be ncceaaary.

TEL FHISIIMT: Counsel nay proceed.

m. 3LH7A?IL*3: M r . Prcaidont, then the Translation Division
must be told to carry out that translation because they roturnod
the docunont to mo.

TEL FHL3IILi' ? : When did you deliver the document to tho
Trer.alation Department.


10633


3 July 47_M_J‘jC_ll_3-C-ross (Healer)
Co3t I


DH. SIEYATFJS: Two d«y* (“go, on Monday, after I had interrogated
the witness. I didn't have the witness available beforo that tine.

THL FRLoILiiT: The Transition Depart nor. t will be instructed
to translate the dccuaent.

31. SiaVATIUS: K r . President with refcronco to tho contonto
of this doeucent I say state that the witness talks about tho
Reich Cosnlttee and about Euthanaola of children. He discusses
tho procedure which was used there, the type of children usod. In
particular he Breaks about his knowlcdgo of Profiesor Brandt's
activities. He says that he didn't know Brandt, had nevor scon
hie nor »rythlng in writin/ about hin - only told that Brandt was
tho leading personality in that respect.

The noxt docunont, your Honor, will be E3 130. I offer this
doeunent as Exhibit 106. It is an affidavit signed by a certain
Dr. tfilhola Hoscnau. Hr. President, I have intorrogatod this
witness yesterday and he sadc this affidavit for nc. Ho wns a
witnoss beforo Tribunal III in Cose III, the trial of tho Judgoo.

“c was hoard thorc regarding the ouostion of sterilization. Horo
he testifies ns to Euthanasia. I considor hi* to be e vory iiaportnnt
witnoss who unfortunatoly only appeared toward the end of tho pro-
coodlngs. I did not know hia beforo. Ho is a Jew in this enso of
tho Hurnborg laws and was tho head of the Mental Institute noar
the Rhine in Sein whoro all the Jews who were Insane had boen con¬
centrated for purposes of cure. He states that questionnaires wore
sent to hin but that the questions contained in the questionnaire
with reference to Jews and other points were put in thero for pur¬
poses of casrouflage. He further says that Jews concentrated in his
nertal institution were not transported away and stayed there until
the end of the Var. Towards the end of the War, the Gestapo sent
thee away, but they were not sent away withln'the Euthanasia pro¬
cedure. The statement ie not very long and perhaps I can bd
peraitted tc reed it into the record.


106%


3 July *7_y_J JC_11_4 _C-tcsc (Sealer)
Court I


TEI PRES HOT: V^at tearing does that affidavit hare upon
the caao cf Karl Brandt?

IS. SERYATIUS: The affidavit concerns the questionnaires.

The Prosecution charged Earl Brandt that he knew about tho ques¬
tionnaires and possibly helped In the drafting of theoe forms. So
was charged that Jews were mentioned In the questionnaires with
the obvious intention of leading then into Euthanasia, you will
remember that the defense of the defendants maintained that a num¬
ber of points are contained in the questionnaires which have noth¬
ing at all to do with Euthanasia but seroly served the purposo of
camouflage to conceal the sore setter of the lntontion. This, of
courso, was a statement which could be set with certain amount of
suspicion, but now hero we havo a Jew, the head of o Mental Insti¬
tute, who confirms that fact. Purthcrsoro, it has boon charged
that the Jews wore actually transforrod and Earl Brandt, as tho
head of the Euthanasia proccduro, is held to account. Horo this
hoad of the Jewish institute says that thoy wero not actually
transferred, oxcopt for a few cases. I should like to road this
statement into the record.

THE PRESIDE..": *hen did you turn that document into tho
Translation IcpartccntJ

DR. "1H7ATIU3: I only received it last night. I tried to
give It to tho Translation Department thio Doming but thoy re¬
turned it to sc. However, I do think that its contents aro oo
ocscntial aa to give ue a completely different picture about the
question of tho Jews thpt what we have already. M r. President,
perhaps you will rcsosber the tcetiaony of the defendant Brack who
stated Jews were to be expepted from tho Euthanasia becauso that
act of grace it was only to be given to '-eraans. That we6, of
courso, a strange statement but it rust be surprising new if here
tho head of a Jewish Institute confirms tho fact ""hat was too
good fer then, they wore saved for something woree." Only the

10635 .


2 July 4"-K-TjC.ll_5-C-rooB (Sasler)
Court I


Gestapo wanted to deal with them. Such a noble procedure was
too good for them* and here you find the heed of a Jewish
institute saying that. I think this is of coneidoratlo signi¬
ficance for the caoo of Earl Brandt who had nothing to do with
the Gestapo and who, as he maintains, lntendo to carry through
the Euthanasia act in nodical practice and orderly fashion.

THE PHkSIUBT: Of course, new witnesses sight he cosing in
now for the root of the month. It sust cose to an end to the timo
when now wvidenco will he introduced. Has counsol for Prosecution
examined this record?

KB. P-ABDT: I hare examined it. The docunont has a Jurato
on it. As to its admissibility, I can eeo soso aorlt in Dr.
Serratiue statement. But it is Just an affidavit from the hoad
of ono inotituto and nay not have ary probative value. It is up
to the Tribunal to docidc that. I think ho is a littlo lato in
Introducing it.

LB. SIRVATITO: Mr. Prosldont, a dead lino hao boon sot. I
think this is the limit of tho doad lino and I have still arrived
in tlno. I might add, if tho witnoes only appears throo dnyo
lator I night havo boon able to submit it sooner. I still camo in
timo.

HR. HARDY: The solution is to have Dr. Sorvatluo translate
It hlnsolf. Be is capable of doing so and can havi it cortifiod
and put it in.

THE PELS I IS-.-: Very well, that nay bo dono.

IE. SIH7A1U3: Would you like ->c to read it into tho record
or shall I submit it later?

THE PHIGHEST: Counsel may road the document into the rocord

now.

IE. 3S3YATTUS: I quote: *1, Dr. Wilhelm Bosenau, official
physician in Diete/Ircis Unterlahn, have been told that I shall
make myself subjoct to punishment if I make a false affidavit.

10636


p M


July \7-lLJ jC«ll_6-firo«i Uanlcr)
ourt I


I atate In lieu of oath that sy atateoenta correapond to the
truth and are beln« sade for Military Tribunal I, Palaoe of
Juatlce, *urnberg.


Court So. 1

2 Jul 47-K-13-l-i3i-Kaloy (S«=ier)

"Proa the year 1940 until 1942 I was bead of the Mental Inetitution
Seln of the Reich Association of Jews in Germany. And approximately
at the end of 1940 all Insane Jews who were in need of being cared for
in an asylua were transferred. °ther institutions were not allowed to
accept Jews and keep thee there. The Instituion Sein had to fill out
the cueetionnaires for the euthanasia procedure, and the sterilisation,
in the sane way as all other institutions. The auestionnalre contained
a r.uaber of Questions which we did not feel to be consistent and we
agreed that part of these auestione served purposes of camouflaging of
the original intention of euthanasia. The questions regarding "Jews"
we considered to bo irrelevant in that connection. On tho basis of
those questionnaires no Jsws at all wore called from our asylum. Two
or throe Jews who were given care free the outsido had to be transnorted
to Eglf ing-Ha&r, and we had heard nothing from then after that tlno.

Since it has been told to ae that defendant Brack on the witness stand
has statod that euthanasia was not to bo granted to Jews slneo it con¬
stituted an act of grace froe which only tho Geraans wero to bonofit,

I can state that this was ontlrely our opinion, too - that is to say,
the opinion of tho then responsible heads of the Jewish agencies, and
also sy opinion. I have stated this fact sooo tine ago when testifying
before the Trench Surete. Tho patients of our asylua, after they had
boon cured, wero transferred from their htce ulaco to Poland by tho
Gestapo, as they were not able, as was the case of a fow of then, to
get passports and oaigrate. The rest of the patients as from tho 14
March 1942 wore transferred to Poland in general large scale Jewish
transports, to Poland, together with the personnel of the institution,
whore they disappeared. In tho case of only the Jews who wero in so-
called privileged nixed aarriages, and in the caso of Jews of foreign
nationality, were not transferred directly to Poland, but stayed thero
until very late, and were then sent to Berlin, *iere the Jewish hospital
at first had instituted a tpoclal department for then. Tron there thoy
were sent to Thercsienstadt. I know that recently three of them were

10638


Court So. 1

2 Jui 47-H-12-3-*at-Xaloy (Raolor)


still alive. I have personally seen this special departaent la Berlin.
Jfcernberg, 1 July 1947." (Signature) Hilheln Rosenau.
and following the certification.

HR. HAEDY: Kay Z ask a fev questions of Dr. Servatiut concerning
this field. Tour Eonor.

TES PRESIHXST: Tee.

KR. HAHDT: Vke this affiant a Jewhiaself, Dr. Servatlus? le the
affiant a Jewish person?

m. SLRVATIUS: Tee, he testified hefcro Tribunal Ho. Ill in the
case of the Judges and said ho was a Jew, In the sonse of the Huornborg
lave. Re reiterated that yesterday.

KH. H A R DY: He was retAined as chief of the asylua In Gernany during
tho war?

DR. SLRVATIUS: Tee, thore was a Heich Association of Jews who
enjtyed cortaln rights, aaoog others tho adainlstoring of this Institution.
I think It nay be expedient to rofer to hie testlaony beforo T-itunal Ho.
ZZZ.

KH. HARDY: Vas thle Jew, tdio was a Jew, according to Huornberg laws,
a nuaber of tho Sail party?

IR. SnRVATIUS: I asked hln yesterday whether he belonged to tho SS,
SA, or Party and he said "no".

KH. HARDY: Ho further questions, Tour Honor.

THZ PRESIDE;?: Does this conclude tho list of the documents counsel
desired to offer In evidence?

IR. &KHVATXUS: Tos, thle concludoe ay caso on behalf of Karl Brandt.

HR. HAHDT: Concerning this affiant, do you mean he was married to

a Jew or is half Jewish or some such situation as that? He Isn't a
full-blooded Jew?

IS. SAE7ATIUS: Hr. President, I haven't asked hln about this deli¬
cate subject. I aa sure the prosecution before Tribunal III has dealt
with this question In great detail, and you will be able to look It up.

MR. HAHDT: That will not be necessary.


10639


Court Ho. 1

2 Jul 47-M-12-2-EHM-Kaloy (Sailer)


THE PHESIDEST: I* counsel for Rudolf Brandt present?

22. VSISOISB1S: Counsel representing IT. Eaufaann, representative
of defease counsel Brandt.

Is counsol on behalf of Rudolf Brandt thero are tvo documents which
I wish to sutoitj one is an affidavit executed by Gustav Schoenlng,
residing in Teltow, who nakes a stataoent regarding Rudolf Brandt's
personality. The affiant is an old social democrat and states that is
the reason he is thus auallfled to sake a statesent on this question.

This docunont is offered by ao as Rudolf Brandt Exhibit 20.

Tho noxt docuaent Rudolf Brandt Ho. 21, which I offer as Rudolf
Brandt Exhibit 21, tfcloh is an affidavit of Trau Erna Broslg, nee Ladevig.
Thie statement also is a statesent concerning tho defendant Rudolf Brandt's
personality.

This concludes the eutoission of ovldence on behalf of the defendant
Dr. Rudolf Brandt.

THE PRESIDENT! Tory well, counsol. I will ask counsel for tho
defendant Xrugowsfcy how sany docuacnte he is proposing to offer?

KR. BASZff: 1 think Dr. Soldi has ono docuaent ho could put in

ouickly.

THE PRESIEEET: Very well. Vo will hear free Dr. Soldi.

2>. SEIDL: Counsel for defendant Earl Oebhardt.

Mr. President, I ask to eubolt the docuaent which I was aoprovod to
sutoit at a later dato last Saturday. Ve are concerned with an affidavit
executed by Dr. Earl Gobhrrdt, which is Docuaent Ho. Karl Oobhardt 47,
and I subolt it as Exhibit Ho. 45.

THE PRESIDES!: Ho copies in English of this docuaent are available
to tho Tribunal, as far as I know.

IS. SEIDL: Last Monday I handed the copies to the translating
division. Apparently they have not yet been translated. I aek for your
ooraission to eutalt the original now and hand the translations to the
Tribunal when and if they are finished.


ME. HABIT?: This ie the document. Tour Honor, in answer to tho

10640


Court So. 1

2 Jul 47-H-12-4-I»-Haloy (Hosier)


prosecution affidavit of one Frits Suhron, which the prosecution offerod
In retuttal on Saturday. £$ la an affidavit hy the defendant Gebhardt
hlneelf. I think we dlecueeed'-that earlier tfci» week one tine. I an
confuted; I forgot the ruling of the Tribunal on thla-particuler docuaont


le-pa^tic


at that tine.

THE PBESIDEST: Without the translation or knowing anything about
tho docunent the Tribunal cannot deternlne whether It le adaleolble under


tho rules or not.

KH. HAEDTi I think Dr. Seldl purport* that thle affidavit 1* In
anawer to tho affidavit that the oroeocutlon aulnlttcd, which le datod
In April 1946 given by Frits Suhron, the fomer coocandant of concentra¬
tion caup Ravenabruck, and In thla affidavit It la pointed out Frits
Suhron had knowladgo concerning tho activity of Oebhardt at tho canp and
the atatua of tho girl*. It wne qy opinion when arguing thla onco
before that tho affidavit of Suhron waa In rebuttal, nttoaptlng to
rebuttal Oobhardt'a esaainatlon. Dr. Seldl vlehoa now to offer thla


affidavit of Oobhardt na aur-robuttal.

THE PRESIDES?: Thla will be recolved In evidonco.

DP.. SZIDL: Thla will be Oebhardt Exhibit 45. If tho Tribunal
with, I can aubcit four coplea In the Geraan languago until auch tine
aa the Engllah tranalatlona are available.

TEE PRESIDES?: Very well. Tou cay do *o.

K?.. HARDTx I think dofenae counsel for Poppendick ha a another
affidavit, or you cay wlah to adjourn at thla tlao.

THE PRESIDES?: It cay bo eubclttod when tho Tribunal reconvene*


at 1:30.


I would aak Dr. Fleecing, couneel for Poppendick, how nany affi¬
davit* he propoae* to offer, crutalde of thla transcript fron Tribunal
So. II; all that la neceaeary to offer with that la a certificate free
the Secretary General. Outaide of thet I understand you have five docu-


centa?

IE. FL2HMIK: Kr. President, in addition to the docucenta which


106a


Cjurt Sc. 1

2 Jul 47-K-13-&-EEM-Maloy (Sealer)


nr a being certified toy the General Secratary, I heve another 20 doeunonte.

I vould auggoet I hand the orlglnale to Mr. Hardy, which would enable
hla to look at then with the aeelstence of hla Geraan epeaking aaelatanta,
and that I would be permitted to aubalt then to the Tribunal after
receaa.

THE PRESIDCTT: Ve have Document Book III by Mrugovaky.

IR. TLIWISG: Theee are the excerpte free tho Pohl record. The
ether docunenta, the other affidavita, t&ich I aubalt, are In Supplenent

XI.

SHE PRESIDENT: I here here a "Table of Contcnte of Supulenent III"
by Mrugovaky, evidently what appeared by the etatenent of the oroaecutlon 1 a
wltnoaa logon.

UR. 7LEMMING: Tee, thoee are tho teatlnonlee of logon In the Pohl
tribunal. Supplor.ental Voluae 2 la olao the other one I Intend to off or.

MR. HARUT: Supplenent 2 la the one Mr. Hodgoa eald we would got
today. I think we could hold up on Ik. Planning and I think wo will
get tho Engl1ah today.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will bo In recoaa until 1:30.

(Thereupon a receae wae taken.)


C


106^2


Ceurt 1.

'?f7

2 July-i- 13-l-»EG-iCe©han (Brown)


aftzsmoc* session.

(Th- hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 2 July 1947)

THZ EnRSLiL: The Tribunal is again in suasion.

•H2 PRESIDENT: Thurc will be filod with the Secr«itary-Genural
the excuse free the prison physician or. the absence of the defendant
Horte Ofcerhausor, who is ill.

DR. TIFF: (Defense ceunaol for the defendant Beckur-Freyseng.)
!!r. President, I have two documents for Bockcj'-Freysong, which I have
still to put in. Bcckcr-Preysaig docunurt. 3D, which was Exhibit 65 .
This Is an affidavit free Dr. Uajc Jfatthos dated 25 June 1947. Tills
docuaent I received only yesterday for translation, but do not J:now
if it is translated; however, I should like to read sene of the ln-
portant parts into the roc.xM. Tho document is not Very long, tho
ioportant passages d^ not asbmcu a re than two pages. I think it
would be best if *ro had it read into the recoxd now.

/-.TOY: It is a little latu. Your Honor, for this docura-r.t.

DR. TIFP: That is not our fault. Your Honor, but tho fault cf
the bad postal connections between Numbers and B.nn. Y7o asked for
it a lens tins but cnly yesterday did wo receive it.

THE FRESIDENT: Frcccod.

DR. TIP?: "The affiant liax liatthos, Bonn, Kaiser Friedrich
Stress, after the importance of this affidavit -.nd punishability of
bearing false witness has boon brought to his attention, signs tho
following affidavit to be put in as evidence before tho IJ.litr.ry
Tribunal Mo. 1 in I.'um’c.rg: I. Regarding tho Person"

I nay cki? the first few sentences and I shall begin about two-


thirds cf the way down:


-d $oaa^ffc\ncy Service Loader 5 (Worth) in Oslo, after
- ^'prepared myself l this pest by working on the documents on

sea erteigenc 7 s^rvicq/ (difcft of tho conference report, sea emergency
eXpO^iunce report^' etaf) which Professor Dr. Anthony and Dr. Becker-

.. 10643


L'arch of 1943 I, as chief nodical officer


Service Loader 5 (Worth) in Oslo, after


this pest by working on the documents on


Court 1 .

2 Julr-.’.-i3-2-«BG-L'cc:;an (Brown)

Fr-vaon* put at cy disposal. At the end cf March, 1944 I was trans¬
ferred in the some- capacity to the min center cf gravity for s«a
emergency eorvicu, namely the Black Sea. After the Baltic retreat
1 w-s -pp.-int^i os the .favy Tr'ining Director for thu nodical person¬
nel the ::ovy Fursennel School of thu Luftwaffe, Lobbe at Rucgen."

The other sentences in this part are not important. I no? turn
to !.’ , 2. Regarding the facte:

"1 - In the conference cn nwiical problems in aoa cnerg-acy and
winter distress of Octob r, 1942, which took place in iurhbe-i y„ I did
not take part. The- c ntents of the lectures duliverud there becnr*,
known tc me only later through ro-ding thu printed reports on the
conference. Which Were distributed in 1943 -ad in which tho scien¬
tific grounds fer t U. theory .f rapid rewaraing wer- given. So far
as I have dlacussjd this t.:u.. witr. medical officers and troops
cffic.rs Li the se- -ciergency oer/ico, th '07 n^ver mentioned .any
alleged unporjisB*.ble hu-an experiments end did not ev w *n nint at
thus."

"2 - Rapid TeW-raring had already boon introduced when I was
transferred to the s-.a emergency service at the beginning cf Jiarch
1943. This includud: a) a spocLal memorandum, which was distributed
in the sur.aer of 1943 to the troops and was to replace the memorandum
of august 1942 in the soldiers' book of the Luftwaffe soldiers in tho
Northern and Sact.m -Te>a; b) instructions f.r handling cases cf
ouveru cooling which occurrod Li chips nd boats, as well as in thu
emergency rlrplanos of thu Luftwaffe, and which . Iso replaced previous
instructions in which slcwr rewarding was ordered; c) ’Instructi. ns
for Trocp fhysicians', distributed by the- Inspector or Chief of the
.dical Service of tr.e Luftwaffe. It was distributed to th> trocp
:cctor 3 in Norway in the summer of 1943."

‘3 - Tho Gerran Mavy also, cn the example of the* Luftwaffe,

- .‘.reduced the method of rewarning persons who had bean s»v_r^ly

- led."


10644


Court 1.

2 July-A- 13-3-,v3>-L<_ chan (5rcwn)

I can skip tfc_ next sentences. I go near tc He. 4.

"4 - la order tc carry out rapid reaming, the f0ll.wi.-4g tech-
.dc'l ne-ns were issued in the aoa cc_rg-ocy service:

(a) In the ship hospitals of tU rescue ships, hot baths were
installed. (.Then I an*ivod in Norway this reconstruction had to

a large pert been.) Moreover, there were electrical heating roona
us.d there.

(b) Ir. the emergency rescue boats, the radiator water, which
was 45 degrees centigrade, was piped to a shewur rota.

(c) In the ecergenc7 rescue airplanes there w..re two electric¬
ally he ted sleeping br.is, which w.re heated up to 40 degrees centi¬
grade.


10645


2 Jul;*-_-::j-14-l-C ook (Brown)
Court I


(d "Efforts voro node in ell morgoocy rescue stations on lend
to have boats end airplanes and hot bathing arrangements avrail—
able in the innediit e neighborhood of where fee ships landod.
uhero no other neons were available, electrically heated bogs
vero used.

* 5. firing ny activity in the tcergency oca service I
frequently fcppliod this nethod of rt^id rewarding. I never
observed fatalities or sorloua or lasting injurios to the body.

On the contrary, whoa a troop transport sank in tho Block S ca
I o^ierienced this castrcpfao. whoru wo did not hcvo tho necceo-
ary oqulpcent for rapidly renaming thoso vho hod been frozen
and voro tho innodi at o transport to hospitals was not possiblo in
dl coboo; end in tho casos which could not bo subjoctod to rtg>id
ro-varxiir.fi thoro voro fotolitioo, vhoroas thoso who hod rapidly
boon rowaruod had no fatolitios.

"6—- According to tho oxporionco roporto of tho tfavo, thooo
on ships hod good cxporinncoo with this nothod of req>id rowoniinfi
in tho case of porsons who hod experienced ship wreck. A t any
rnto tao nuubor of porsons sontionod in thoso reports who woro
cavod by this nothod of troatnont is vory large .*

L*o. 7 I rny skip and liko wi 8 o 8 , 9, and 10 also aro not of
decisive inportanco in this .trial, so I shall skip then.

*11. According to the reports I know of at that tino tho v
units of tho Goman S oa fiiorgency Bescue Servico carried out
noro than 6,000 successful rosucos, of which ton por-cent vero ua>
be:s of tho air forcos and navies of tho .ollioc/"

I shall dispeaso with rooming tho rest of tho docuoont;

It was signed in Bonn on 25 Juno 1947 by Dr. Max Katthos end
on tho 26th it wan certified by tho notary in Bonn. I shall put
this document in as Bocker Proyseng document 80 , which will bo
Exhibit 65.


10646


2 14— £-Ccok(3rovn)

Court I

~o last Bockor 7reysen£ Itocu^oat I have Becker Brcyco^;
Docuaont Bo. 81, which will be Brhlbit 66. This is an excorpt ;
froc tho publication of the Preach tc ad any of Sciences of 7 Oct-
• ober 1935. It is a scientific paper on lrcunl ration by Blanc, lio-
vrit end 3cltcsar. This work, kr. President, was discussod by tho
witnosa HooGOn in his direct examination here. The Prosecutor at
that tino wished to have this document shewn to hin and I m taking
into consideration that wish and the document is now. The tron-

•t

slation into English is not yet ready but I nay perheps put it in end
I cn suro the translation will soon bo here.

IH. HaHDT: after considering tho testimony of Hoogoa I think
tho Prosocutlon can ditnonso with rocoipt of this copy and thuo
disponso with the translation if dofonso counsel wishod to withdraw
tho document.

B2. TIP?* Thlo concludes Bockor Praysongio dofonso.

> D3.DU3Q: TOR DEPaUalTT PCPPS-iDICX:

I havo one noro document. Tour Honors. This document wan
tpprovod by the Tribunal S a turd ay afternoon. This is on affi¬
davit by tho defendant hiasolf. I should like to havo this affida¬
vit road into tho record.

TIC PP-ZSIB2TT: The &glish translation has not yet caio
throu,Eow long is tho docunontT

DR. DU2rh: Ono half a pago, Tour Honor?

TH2 PHESCafT: Before proceeding I would ask if any of do-
fonso counaol know ’.ioro Dr. Voissgorbor, counsol for defendant
Siovors, is. I understood his document book was to be ready r.t
half post ono. Vo could procood if ho woo horc.

HR. TIPP: So far as I know, Tcur Honors, V eiosgerbor was
info mod of this. Ho said that ho would ccce os soon as ho hod
rcceivod the English translation in tho Infomotica Contor. ap¬
parently thoi-nnslation has not yet been received.

10647


2 JUly-*rMJ-l4-J-Cook (Brows)
Court I


PHXSIDBB: Proceed, counsel.

DUSES; I shall now offer Poppandick Srhiblt HPO 35, which
viU bo a*hibit 34. After the usual introduction it roods:

■Eegarding Professor Toitke's lottor of 29 *>ril 1943 to no
I say to following:

* At the tin© whon I wasaa assistant at the Pirst Modical Uni¬
versity Clinic, 1929 to 1932. Tietke was Chief Physician at tho
■mo clinic. Toitko later boctco the diroctor of a large nunicipol
hospital in 3orlin, nmely tho Urban Hospital, About 1943, Profoae-
or toitko was tdeen into tho Public Hedth Ministration in Polar*.
Toitko know that I woo actiro in the Raco and S ottlecont Offico, but
ho hcd no insight into ny activities and tasks. Toitko wroto the
bovo cited lottor to ne since he know no porsoholly and boliovod
that I could give kin information about tho abovo nentioned quoo-
tionnairo end horoditcry card fllo. I did not howovor know this
quootlonnalro and still don't know of it. Tho Dlocknann Publishing
Houso, was so, far no 1 know, tho houso that worked for tho Roich
Ministry of tho Intorier; and tho card index on horoditory woo in¬
troduced by tho Roich Ministry of tho Intorlor to bp usod in tho
Municipal Hoalth Offico, Consequently I was not in a position to
glvo tiotko the infomation ho roquostod. I rencober, Toitko
shortly therooftor emo to Berlin and tolophonod no to ask about
this letter. I advised hin to turn to tho Health Department of
the Roich Ministry of tho Interior, since in ny opinion, that
offico was oorpotont. I novor had anything officially to do with
tho nattors nentionod in the lottor, tho taking core of Com®

Soldi or o' childron born of Polish wceea, and neror found out any¬
thing about that uattor thereafter. This lottor tf Professor
Toitko's to no with tho roquost for infomation about natters that
had nothing to do with ny fielf of work, was an absolutely unique


2 July-A-W—14-4-Cook (3rowa)

Court I

occurrence. It* ccuse is to be found in the fact that Teitzc ro-
accborod hi* noquclntonco with ne and had tho vague idoa that I ;iigh
be able to give hin sooe information. 1 The document has beon cci'-
roctly certified. That concludo* tho defense of Poppendick.

S3. ll&Zx Jor Professor Dr. Schrooder.

Kr. President, I should like to put in five documents for
Schrooder.

2E2 P23SIDSHT: Counsel, have those documents been translated?
Have those .documents been tronsloted into &iglish?

DR. hiSX ? They have not yot been translated. Therefore, I
should like to trice the liberty of giving tho originals to the
Tribunal.

Z1Z ?a£SID£> 7: V e will proceed first with the docunonto which
wo hove aircody translated into English. I understand that tho do-
ouner.ts on behalf of the defendant Slevors havo now boon translated.
Zb that corroct, Sr. Voissgorber?

DR, USISSCSRBSR; TOR SI3VXRS:

I havo Just inquired at tho Infomation Center for tho Rnglioh
translations. I wastold they wore not yot thoro and t hat it would
toko Q little vhilo Still.

TH3 PRiSlDK.*?: Tho Tribunal was assured tho y would bo thoro
at on»-thirty o'clock.

DU. ‘JDISSSSiBER: I havo Just ccqo fron thore end thoy aro not
thero.

DR. EOFIVaH: Tor Dofondant Pjrknorqy:

I bcllovo that none of ay colleogues havo tho Inglish trans¬
lations cvoilablo now but thoy aro on the *ey; but I ro suro that
ay t rrnalntlons will not croe in today, so I ask poroission to put
those iocuunnts in now end poroission to rood thro into tho record.

EAEDT: I night Inquire whether or not my dofenso coun-

106t9


«w


2 July-±J-l.S-Cook (Brown)

Court I

eol cthor than these hero la tho court roan aow have furthor
doors oat i to introduce.

E3 PH2SIDEJI: Vhother or not dofenae ccunaol who ore not
in court now ore odviaod aa to that I don't know.

2AEDT: Vo night toko tino to find out now how nuch
thoy nro going to bo and adjourn until tcnorrow; and ay rebuttal
doousonta I con put in in fifteen niauteo tcoorrow afternoon. If
wo hero firo docuueata for Schroodor and two for onothor end two
f-ca cnothor then*© night be in good atoad and adfourn until to-
uorrov uorhing.

TE3 PPJSIDZ/T: I waa aaaurod tho S iorora docuuonta would
bo roody at one-thirty and wo ohould have tho rost thla oftornoon
end Z do not doalro to rocooa, md wo ocn go ohood with thooo thia
afternoon.

12. H^OTi They aro not hero yot, Tour Honoro. Shall wo
wait for thas a fov ncconte?

2H2 PfCSIDZbT: Has counaol for tho Proaocution ox/clnod thooo
doouionta of tho defendant Porto my in Goman?

12. HirUY: Bo, I haron't your Honor. Dr.PIaileg—

DB. TLSKIBG: Z hare one docunent I can put in now if I ora
get an a^lioh copy later.

223 PRZSII>a?ri Tory well, Dr.Timing. Dr. Timing we will
hoar fron yew now with tho document. Tou noy proceed to off or
the docunent for Dr. S t dr.honor.


10650


2 Jui~A—J3—15-I-Haynes (Int. Brown)
Court So. I, Case So. 1.


OR. FISCCDG: This is an excerpt fron the police record of
Koellenralner, the gypsy who testified here yesterday. This is Docu-
ner.t Beiglboeck 1*0, and it will bo Exhibit 35. This is the record of
Hoellenrainer's previous convictions.

THE rRESIDSHT: It nay be received.

DR. HCF71IAN: Mr. President, I should new like to put in the
two documents for Dr. Pokorry that I did no- have available during the
presentation of his case but which I was «naitted to put in later.

First, there is an affidavit by rofcorny hins^lf, which gives
an exhaustive explanation of wh a t his thoughts were when he drew up
his lotter and explains why he thought that caladium sequinun could
not be used for sterilisation. I do not wish to read the docunont in
its entirety into the record. It will be translated. However, I
should like to road the aoat inportant passage.

HARDY: I don't seo tho nocosuity for reading somo of the
passages out of this. It is an export opinion on the part of Pokorny.
His own tostimony was heard on direct, arxl this is his expert opinion
on why ho thought it was of no valuo.

THE PRESIDE;.?: Tho exhibit nay be roceivod in ovidonco, but I
see no reason for reading portions of it in the record, Counsel. Just
offor the exhibit and give it a nuxaber.

DR. HCFFMAN: Very well. Then this affidavit is Document 29,
and it will be Exhibit 29.

The next affidavit is an oxpert opinion by Dr. Jung of tho
University of Wuerzburg, vho states his opinion regarding the question
of sterilization with caladivaa scquiiuc. This affidavit is also to bo
translated, but if the Tribunal will permit, I would like to road the
suaiary at the end. It is very brief.

THE FRESIBSirr: Very trail. Counsel.

DR. HCFrllAI.'Hr The expert coses to the following conclusion:

"liadaus and Koch aade an Inal experiments on sterilization
through caladiun sequinun. The conclusions set down in liadaus and

10651


2 3—15-2-Haynes (Int. Brown)

Court Ko. I, Case Ko. 1.

Koch's pacer, 'Animal Experimentation as Elucidation of the Question
of Sterilization by Way of Drugs, Using Caladium Sequimsn', are cer¬
tainly honest, but are of no importance regarding the question of
caladiua sequinua's sterilization effects. These effects are part of
a general toxic effect of caladiua extract. Caladium can be used for
sterilizing, or achieve tte same effects as castration, but not more
and not less than can be achieved with hunger, vitamin deficiency, in¬
fection, inflanaation, and so on.

"The experiments of Hadaus and Koch with respect to their ap¬
plication to human beings are in no way proof of anything. Tho symptoms
in the sexual glands of the experimental animals are only a revortiblo,
partial symp^co, part of a permanent injury to tho organism as a v/holo
ondangoring its lifo, and havo nothing to do with true sterilization
or castration. Fokorny's suggestions, which arc based on cortain com¬
pletely unfoundod conclusions from tho adaus paper, can roadlly bo
recognized as fallacious by oxperts in the field."

This is Pokorny Documont 30, which will bo Exhibit 30.

That concludes qy presentation for Pokorny.

Tin PRESIDENT: Counsel will deliver those documontc to tho
Translation Dopnrtraont, which i-ill translnto them ro that tho English
translations aay bo filed.

DR. KCFPKAHN: Very troll.

DR. PRCSCH.iANN: 1 havo only a request. Your Honor. At tho
conclusion of tho morning c.seion I was told by tho D 0 fcnso Center
that the throe Brack Exhibits approved this naming by tho Tribunal—
naocly, 52, 53, and 5U —would not bo translated save by explicit in¬
structions from tho President of the Tribunal I therefore ask that tho
Translation Doportscnt be given that explicit instruction.

T -. *. PRESIDENT: The Translation Do .artnent will be so instructed.
I spoke to the Chiof of the Translation Department this noon, and he in¬
formed at that the department had not refused to translate ary documents
it all but had simply told Defense Couiisol bringing in documents late

10652


2 Jul-A-’ 3-15-3-Haynes (Lit. Bro 1 m)
Court Ho. I, Casu Ho. 1.


that they could not bo ready by tomorrow morning, or this morning, but
I will give instructions that these docuscnts be translated, arxi, Dr.
Frcschoann, if you will again offer the second docunont that you of¬
fered this aorning, which the Tribunal rejected, that second document
will bo admitted in evidence.

DR. FitfSCHHAKH: I shall do so isoodiately.

HR. HARDY: Your ftjnor, I request that tho admission of those
two documents be forestalled until such time as I got an English copy
so that I can rondor a propor objection, I do not think that tho
document is admissible. I have not scon it> in English. I think I
should suo it in tho English language in order to objoct to it.

THE HIESIDENT: *ou can if you desire.

DR. GAiTUX (Counsel for Dofondant Hovon): Hr. President, I
have one document, an affidavit which refers to tho docunont put in by
tho Prosocution on Saturday, naaoly, HO 2631, which was accepted in
evidence—an affidavit by Ackcminn. I couid not put in this affidavit
oarlior than right now because tho Prosecution put in its Document 2631 ,
Exhibit 522, only last Saturday, Since this tbcusont was accepted in
ovidonco last Saturday, I could not bring this document oarlior. For
the oojaj reason, I do not have an English translation. I could have
this affidavit talcon down only yosterday afternoon.

HR. HARDY: This noeds clarif ication badly. Documont 522 rras
put in durine tho cross-examination of Hoven, not on Saturday. Fur¬
thermore, Hovon stated on diroct examination that ho novor just arbit¬
rarily selected anybody for exterminations or injections. This affid¬
avit completely rebuts his testimony in that an eye-witness saw Hovon
point out the window and sy, "I want that nan's sknll on my desk in
the morning." It is testimony of a witness on rebuttal. 1 do not soo
any occasion for an answer.

THE PRESIDENT: Witness Hovon expressly denied tho testimony
to which you arc referring. Who makes this affidaivt. Counsel? Is
this an affidavit?

10653


Court No* I, C?so No» ll

Dll. GAULIK: This is an affidavit regarding Ackemnrm's crcd-
►

ibility. lir. President, to bo sure, Hoven denied this, but I must
have the opportunity to substantiate Hoven*s denial.

THE PRESIDENT s If the docuoont you offer concerns tho cred¬
ibility of tho witness Ackcmann, you nay offer the document.

DR. GAJUX* Very well.

THE PRESIDENT: It would not be received if it is simply con¬
tradictory as to facts, but if it attacks tho credibility of tho witnass,
it may bo received.

DR. GAiUK: Very well.

131. HARDY: Your Honor, I want to know who the author of this
document that ho is putting in is.

THE PRESIDENT: Vihoso affidavit aro you offering?

DR. GAT .UK: Paul Dorn is thu affiant. Ho was a witness horo.

At that tino I could not put this quo3tion to him beenuso at that tine
this Actormonn issue had not arisen.

Jfl. HARDYr It is perfectly all right if ho puts in tho affid¬
avit of Paul Dorn. He is one of tho witnossos that appoared horo bo-
foro Hoven took the stand. Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel nay prococd.

DR. GAS.UK: This is an affidavit stating, "I, Paul Dorn, bom
16 February 1916 in Wins ho in"—and than tho usual introduction.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, how long is tho affidavit?

DR. GAHLIX: One page, Your Honor.

TIE PRESIDENT: Proceed.

DR. GASUK: "I oa the saao Fhul Dorn who testified horo as a
witrwss on 5 end 6 Juno 19U7 before Military Tribunal I.

"Josef Ackemann's affidavit Docunont 2631, Exhibit 522, has
been shown to no. I know Josef Ackomann. I made his acquaintance in
the concentration camp Bucbenwnld in 19lil. I know tho general reputa¬
tion which Josof Ackernann enjoyed in tho concentration camp Suchonwald.
Josef Ackomann enjoyed among tho prisoners in tho concentration canp a


10654


2 Jul-A-K3—15-5-Haynes (Int» Brown)
Court No. I, Case No. 1.


vary bad reputation* I still rencabor for certainty that Josef Ackcr-
aanr. in about tho year 191x2 or 19U3 betrayed a few prisoners who had
stolon some food in tho canp to tho SS cruap nanagosent—narEly, to tho
hoad of tho ndainistrative custody canp, Schobor. Anong tho priaorurs
whaa Josef Ackomann denounced was included the forcer political
prisoner Heinrich Bach, a nodical student by profession, fron Finstcr-
waldo. Tho S3 caap nanagenont thon carriod out exhaustive investiga¬
tions of tho parsons denounced. Heinrich Bach was to bo transforrod
to the quarry work doteil, where ho vary probably would have died. It
is only to bo attributed to Dr. Hovon's intervention that tho SS cnjnp
nanagenont could not carry out this plan. Dr. Hovon first accosnodatod
Bach in Block li6 in order to withdrew hin fron the clutches of the SS
canp coeuand. Isthink it therefore quite possiblo that Ackomann had
a disinclination toward Dr. Hoven because Hovon helped tho prisoners
when Ackomann had do nouncod at that tiaa.


10655


Court 1.

2 July-A—16—1—.lEG-Gross (Srewn)


"I statu further Dr. Heron rWVer had a skull on his desk. This
I know for Curtain. Uy statuAerrts hurt refer to th~ period from 1941
until his imprisonment in September1943. I, therefore, consider it
cut of the question that Horen asked Ackemann to giro hin a skull
for his desk."

This will be Horen Document and Exhibit i.'o. 20. I ask that thu
Translation Department bo requested to provide the necessary S\glish
translation.

THE PRESIDENT: The Trcnslr.ticn Department will be so advised.

IS. HaRDT: Ycur Honcr, after hearing this document I ceuld
stipulate that Horen didn't wont the skull for his desk for an cma-
nont. Hovon wanted the skull put cn his desk. This affidavit has no
value. I will stipulate new Horen didn't want the skull for an
ornament for his desk.

THE PRESIDENT: The affidavit has scoo value- as to the witness
Aokurnann. In so far as stating a fact it is not proper rebuttal;
but it has suae pertinency regarding «ckerannn's credibility.

Dr. Uarx, how aany affidavits have you to off«r7 How many
exhibits?

DR. KARX: Six, your honor.

THE PRZSIDS'T: V7hon wuro they delivered to the Translation
Department?

DR. L«RX: Host of th-n abeut 10 days ago. One Wunt to thua
a little bit later than that. I have Just h-ard that most of then
hav« already b-on translated. Dc.s the Tribunal have those trans¬
lations?

THE PRESIDE,T: Not yet.

!?.. KARDT: In as ouch as nest of these aro translated can't wo
held up the pr-se.atnticn of tho Schrocdcr ones?

THE PRESIDENT: I wasn't going to have thua pres.ntod, nerely
wanted to knew when they were handed into tho Translation Department.
The Tribunal will new t-_ in r.--c,ss a for mecents irhilo I ccaounicato


1C$56


Court 1.

2 July-A-l6-2-«£G-Grcss (Brcwn)

with the head of the Translation DcportCe-nt. In tho noantiao I would
have Dr. Frceschnnnn interpret the document to 1>. Hardy, tho one he
road hero in Court.

The Tribunal will new be in recess.


10657


2 July 47-A_JjC_19-l-Cock(Bre«n)

Court I

TEL MARSHAL: Persona in the court toob will please find
their scats.

Tho Tribunal la again in session.

IE. STLI1SAUS?.: (Counsel for defendant Prof. Dr. Belglboeck)

Mr. Prcsidont, according to =y applicatioh, the witness Josef
Tschofcnig had been brought to fiurnberg for the purposes of cross-
examination. Then making his testimony about his activities ns an
X-rey Znpo at Opchau he raised an serious accuatation against my
client to the effect that a nan, in his opinion, bocano a victim of
tho scawator experiments. In order to rofuto tho credibility of
that witness, especially with rcferonco to his activity and know-
lodgo as an X-ray export, I have called upon an export, an X-roy
technologist, Dr. Gerhard Ean=or, tho head of tho X-ray Institute
of tho Hospital of iurnberg, and asked hin to give us hio oxpert
opinion. Tho said nan is an elderly nan, a very busy phyoician,
and only this aorning in the hospital havo I boon ablo to got hio
opinion. In view of the irportanco of this natter and In order to
rofuto tho credibility of the wltnoss I ohould like to got the
pernisoion to subnlt tho opinion to tho High Tribunal. s lnco it
woo not translated I shall only read the beginning and the end of
that statement.

MB. HARDT: Your Honor, in this connection, Bight I ask
dofonsc counsel what association Dr. Gerhard Hp = or had with
tho witness T»ehofcalf?


10652


2 July 47-^-?jC-2c.i_H ey7 iea (Hauler)
Ccurt I


S' ! TIHBlUf3: Dr. Ha=mer hue no personal connection at
all with the witness Tschofonig. He does not know him personally.

I have subsitted to hie the court record In its original, and I
asked his to check Tschofenlg'o t03tloony on what happened in
this record, especially with refercnco to his statoaento which
he aa.de as an alleged X_ray specialist.

HH. HaRDT: If the expert witness has no knowledge of tho
work of Teehofcnig in Dachau, where Tschofonig was working in
the X-ray institute and was not a Xapo, as etatod by Defonoo
Counsol, I do not ooe how this witness would be qualified to testi¬
fy as to the witness Tschofonig. He never saw the witnoes toko
an x-ra7. never saw tho witness analyse an x-ray. Tho witnoso
did not testify to the condition of the insato whon hu claimed


diod as a result of the seawater plates. tostifiod fron obser¬
vation. I think the docusent in cocplotoly inadmissible inaomuch
ns the export has no knowledge of tho work of T 0 chofonlg to rofor
to and hao novor soon "schofcnlg operating x-ray ceulpmont and
has never soon Tschofonig analysing an x-ray. I do not sou how
ho can qualify to give orport testimony as to whothcr or not
Tschofonig is qualified to testify in the annror that ho did beforo
tho Tribunal.

THL PR1SIDE-.T: Dr. Stoinbauor, I do not soo how this affidavit
can bo adaisslblo in tho abecnco of any knowledge on tho part of
your witness of Tschofonig's personality, work, ability as an x-rny
can. *his application win have to be denied.

IS. S7LIH3AULR: Tschofcnig in appearing as a witness has
stated that he ccrriod out 300 x-ray treatments daily, which would
represent about 10,000 x-ray treatments per year. This export
proves that this is impossible.

Furthermore, ho exactly described the etato of the x-ray
picturo of tho alleged victia of tho seawater expericonts. The
expert states his opinion on that natter too. On tho basis of

10659


2 July A?.JL-JjC-2C-2-Seyros (Easier)
Covet I


thl* stateaent, it can be clearly established that Tschofenig'o
teatloony ia incorrect, and in order to refute Tachofenig'a
credibility I have brought thia opinion to the court room.

TS msiOITi The Tribunal la of the opinion, Doctor, that
thia ia not proper rebuttal at thia tl=e. Your application ia
donlod.

I undoratand that Counsel for Defendant Sitvera la ready
with aoao docuoenta. Counsel nay proceed.

IB. yilCS GFBP (Counsel for defendant Siovere): Mr. Prosldont,

I an going to aubeittll aupploaental docuoenta. The first document
in ay ''tuppleaenUl docuoent voluno is a lotter sent by Rudolf
Brandt to Sierera with reftrenoe to Professor Hlrt'a roaoarch with
lntrarital oicroacopy. This la Eoeuaent HQ-059 of tho Proaocutlon.

I shell prove with thia docuoent that Hianler attached particular
isportar.eo to Elrt'a activity and for thetrroaeon it aayo in tho
laet oenter.ee of thia docuoent, "Plcaae contact Hlrt ao ooon aa
possible on thia creation and try to think out the boat vay of
gottlng Hlrt into a atlll closer conncetlon with ua."

This docunont win ro oolvo Exhibit Hunbor‘49.

The next docuoent will bo Sievor'e Itecunont 5*. Thia will
rocolve Ixhiblt Huobcr 50. I shall remind you that Slovene, in
connection with tho conference which ho had with Hiaelor at
Iaeter of 1942, tried to separate the dopartaonta dealing with
nodical questions froo the adriniatration of tho "Ahnenerbc".

Hiaalor opposed that suggestion and roforrtd to the so-called
Coeaisaar Order with roferoncc to Eirt'a aeaignacnt. Tho Coaaiasar
Order itself was not aubaitted durln/ tho proccedinga beforo tho
IMT. I have not been in a position to get a copy of this original
Coaciaaar Order. Eowcvir, in order to enable the Tribunal to gain
a picturo of the contents of this Coanieear Order, I have extracted
the directives for the units of the chiefs of tho Security Police
and the SD, which are to be attached to tho Stalags. I have aubaitted
thrt in this docunont, and this docuoent waa also subalttod before


10660


2 July 47-A-JjC_2C_3_Eeyre B (Easier)
Court I


the E<T as USA ixklllt 486. I am merely suteittlng this document
in order to Illustrate what Eimcler meant when ho reforred to the
Commissar Order during this donfcror.ee at taster 1942.

Che next document, your Honor, will he Sievers Document 55,
which will receive Slcver's Exhibit Ho. 51. ^hia is an affidavit
signed by Dr. C-lsele Schmitz, dated 21 April 1947, It aloo deals
with tho special protection which Ki-rslcr afforded Eirt and which
caused Sievora to sponsor Eirt'o research work in tho manner ho did
on tho basis of hio position as Ecich Manager of the Research Coun¬
cil. I think that I can forego tho reading of this affidavit.

Tho n<xt document, your Honor, will be Slcvor's docuacnt
number 56, which will rccoivo Stovers Exhibit H 0 . 52. This la ano¬
ther affidavit olgned by Dr. Glscla Schmitt, who, olnco sho was a
secretary of the Ahnenerbe from 1937-45, la in a position to illuntrnto
tho evonts of that time. I remind you that Siovora during hio dlroct
examination has stated, among othor things, how ho protected tho
goclogiot Dr. Lais, who was a profossor at the University of Frei¬
burg, whon ho was rocovod from hie office because hio wif 0 was
J cwloh.

Furthormcro, this affidavit tells hew Sjovoro protoctod
Trolhorr von Rokitansky because ho, not bolng of pure Aryan doccont,
foared difficulties in the continuanco of his duties.

Tho next documont, your Henor, win bo Siovor'e H 0 . 57, which
will rccoivo inhibit So. 53. This is an affidavit signed by Profossor
Dr. Joseph *ittig. *ittig is a well known Catholic clergyman who is
woll known biyond tho boundaries of Germany. This Profossor Hlttig
cortlfics that ho made Siever's acquaintance through Friodrich Hicl-
ochor in the yoer 1932. *ittig had known Eiclschcr well and had
been on friendly terms with him since 1932. P< discussed with Bicl-
schcr his fight against Rational Socialism, end on which occasion
Eiolscher rcpcatodly told him about the task which he had given
Siovora. I quote the fourth sentence of this affidavit: "Ac c

10661


2 July 47-A_J jC-2 G -4-. H cyr.e3 (2*aler)
Court I


Christian theologian I can testify that I an deeply convinced of tho
ssoral ulna and the profound aeriouancas In vhleh they coanenccd tho
taak of flfhtinc the Third Belch by applying similar tactlco to
thogo of the Trojan Horae.*


10662


2 Jul-A-4G--2I-i—Priajau (Int. Easier)
>Court No. I.


Tho next document, your Honors, will oc Sievers No. 53 which
will rocoivo Exhibit Number Siovors 5U. This is an Affidavit signod
by the Dutch university professor Boheers who rccoivcd support fron
Sieve rs. Siovors had supported hir. in unde mining Saxo-Frisia and
Fry aka Rio, two political and seai-cultural sociotics in Holland,

The noxt document is an affidavit and an opinion by FTof-
ossor Villingor regarding Siovors. This in Docunont 59, Exhibit 55.
Alroady before Slavers' direct examination I have ondoavored to ob¬
tain a psychological ppinion regarding Siovors's personality. Prof-
ossor Villingor, professor of psychiatry and nourology and the direct¬
or of tho University Nourological Cli n ic at Marburg, has agreed to
carry out this task* It is only duo to tl» amount of work this prof-
ossor has to do that I was not able to submit this opinion during tho
diroot ex a mination of Siovors. I shall forego reading this oxtonsivo
opinion into tho record and I should merely liko to draw tho attention
of tho Tribunal to the last pa go of that docunont whoro tho Tribunal
will find c sisaaory of Dr. Villingor's opinion. This opinion, ns in
tho ccso of all tho other docunonts, is cortif iod in tho proper mennor.

Th. t»xt docunont will bo Siovors No. 60 which will rocoivo
Exhibit number 56. This is en affidavit signod by Count Anton zu
Innhauson and Knyphausen is datod 27 !by 19U2. It was cortifiod by
« public notary*. Knyphauson, although Joining tho NSDAP in 1930,
was an opponent of tho Nazi regime. For that reason ho was sentenced
to death by a German Peoples Court in tho year of 19U2. Ho was san-
toncod thus in absontia. Now this witness describes how Sievers sup¬
ported him in his illegal iw>rk which ho oarriod out against tho
National Soc ia list rogiao free Sweden,

I shall only quote one sentence from this affidavit: "With¬
out Siovors' support my activity lasting for five years as a courier
would not have boon possible."

Tho one but last 3cntor.cc is very important and throws con¬
siderable light on Siovors — and I quote: "Sievors never accepted

10663


2 Jui-A-33-21-2-?riaeau (Int. Rosier)
Court Ho. I.


any remuneration. He always acted entirely unselfishly'. Occupying a
position which offered almost limitless possibilities for profiteer¬
ing, he was just as poor as before when I saw him for the last tine
in Novanber 19li3, on the evening before qy oscapo (to which ho ad¬
vised co and which ho covered up, oven though ho was bound to be
held responsible as a guarantor)."

Tha rext document will be Sievers Document 61 which will re¬
ceive tho oxhibit nuabor 57. This is a: short Excerpt fron the book
of the present Bishop of Munich and Froising, Johann Ncuhaeuslcr.

This Bishop Ncuhaeuslcr, froo tho yoar 19U1 to tho yoar of 19U5, had
boon an inmato at Dachau. This is ^.rosult of tho activities which
ho carrlod out agai n st tho National Socialist regime as vicar of
Munich. Uouhocuslcr, in an oxtonsivc book, dofinod his attitudo to¬
wards n number of questions which ar«- very interesting in connoction
with Siovers* defense. On page- 15 of his book Neuhocuslor states
that again and again after the war Ik had been asked, "Whuro was tho
rosistanco against national Sooialisu?" Tills classical witrvj3c for
tho oovecent against tho rogiso says with groat onphasis: "Tlw ro¬
sistanco was right hero." It doscriboi in detail tho difficulties
which every rosistanco entailed. Ho said, for instance, that tho
spreading of leaflets was inpossiblo. Ho quotes uttorancos of Card¬
inal Mundelein froo Chicago in order to prove that tho vorbal en¬
lightenment and tho opposition against the National Socialist regimo
was oxtrcDoly difficult.

Hoading another chapter ho speaks about thu zones of tho
Third Roich, tho Chinese Walla in the Third Reich; then ho gives us

*

v.ry interesting experiences of his in tho concentration ccuap of Dachau.
This is particularly interesting in view of Siovers 1 testimony.

This classical witness on page 25 of his book 3ays: n ..'o respect
the soldiers who risked thoir lives during severe battles, but I think
wo also must respect the silent fighters in the country who, throughout

thu years—lasting 12 years-against* a bitter and cruel eneny within

106(4


2 Jul-A-i3-21>->?rizoau (In.. Racier)

Court Uo. I.

the country, have risked their lives Tor truth and Justice for freodon
of tho people and froaden of the church, for the ov.rcoaing of tyranny
and Godlossncss."

The next docuaent will be Sievers No, 62 which will receive
exhibit nuffbor 58, This is an affidavit signed by the attorney. Dr.
ffelckannn, the defense counsel of dofondant Dr. Schaefer.

I renind you that ay client was charged during th_ trial here
while ha offorod hiaself os a witnoss before the X.H.T. Sievers then
explained that ho had been brought hero as a witness by force and that
te. was heard against his will as a witnoss for tho defend.' before a
coRBission,

Dr, Pelckaann points out that ho had written hin a latter
whuro ho pointed out to hia that he was a aosber of the resistance
novc.rn.nt. Those statCBs.nts are corf ire od by Dr. Pole toe nn, who at
that tine was representing tho SS in tho proceedings against tto InUr-
national Military Tribunal.

Tho next docucunt, your Honors, will bo a letter written by
Robert Foix detod 10 February 191*6 and addressed to Dr. Schmitz-Xahl-
aann. I shell point out at tho outset that this letter has no certi¬
fication and I shall try to toll tho Tribunal for what reasons that
was ir^ossiblo for no.

Tho witness, Kobort Foix, who workod tfith Rasetar developing
the polygal drug, I had ss arc bad for for n long tiau before finally
finding out his address. Tho witnpss r.^x.caro to !iurnborg and I had

A.* — w*

an opportunity to talk to hia briefly ono ov.ning. I intendod to aoct
hia next corning in this build ins end got an affidavit froc hia. I
intended this acting for the orri of the morning session af that day.

Tihon I returned to ny offico in the Defense Information C.nt^r
Feix ms co longer there ini I was told that he had beer, pickod up by
l rojrosentativc of tho Prosecution and it was no longer possible for
no to establish further connection with hie.

After this incidont I iscodiatoly md_ tho application to tho


10665


2 Jui-A-IB-21-u—Friaeau (Int. Has lor)
Court Ho. I.


Trilaxnal that th i s witness Foix be put inaodintcly at ny disposal for
the purpose of Bokolng an affidavit, Neither the prosecution ncr tho
Gororr 1 5ocrotary wore able, however, tc tell ise tho residence of
Robert Fcix.

Itr. Hardy, on 20 torch of this year, upon the request of this
Tribunal stated that Foix had boon arrested hero and had transferred
to Dachau.


10666


Court I

2 Jul 47-A-22-l-£E<-Kaloy (Easier)


I finally vent to Dachau on 22 Kerch .and I wee told there that Falx
could not he placed at ny disposal. I tried twice again to sneak to
7elx In Dachau hut I did not succeed. Because of these efforts I was not
In a position to obtain a proper affidavit signed by Robert Falx.

Cai the other hand, however, I ar very anxious to show the Tribunal
through Robert Feix how Slevers helped hin In the concentration caap at
Dachau. The letter dated 10 February 1946 was written at a tloe when
Slevers could not at ail expect that he would at any tlao be placed under
indietaent; therefore no one can say that this letter was written In view '
of the currently running trial. Therefore, this lottor no doubt has a
certain probative value, and I would like to ask tho Tribunal to adait
thio letter in evldonco In particular view of the circunstancea, as I
havo doscrlbed then before. The prosecution at that tlao had Bade It
lnposslble for ne to obtain a proper affidavit froo fair.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, this docuaent has no Jurat as to vhethor
It bo written in 1946 or 1947. It le clearly inadaiesiblo. Tho docuaent


was obviously vrlttsn to assist defendant Sievore at such tieo when he
was Incarcerated, and being interrogated extenelvoly, I presuao. I don't
know the circumstances but it seess to ae that the defendant aust adhoro
to tho regulations of this Tribunal.

THE PRESIDES!: Tho docueent offered for defendant Slovfcrs Is
neroly a lottor purporting to be signed by one Robert Folx and boars no
Jurat. It Is not sworn to, and It Is also ouroly cunulatlve evidence,
tut duo to Its fora If previously presented It would not have been
adaisslble at any tlae. Objection sustained.

H*. VSISGZEBEB: As the last docuaent. Your Honor, I a= subaltting
an affidavit written by ay cliont dated June 30. When the prosecutor
last Friday subaltted his supplementary docuaent book, I asked tho
Tribunal's perolssioa that I obtain an affidavit froo ny client In
regard to one docuaent offered by the prosecution. This was approved
by tho Tribunal end I should therefore ask you to accept this affidavit
as Slevors affidavit Ho. 60. The affidavit has not yot been translated.

10667


Court I

2 Jul 47-X-22-2-ESX-Xaloy (Hauler)


XH. HASUT: I don't recall aay approval on the part of the Tribunal
to adult thla ov* dunce. I don't recall that at all, Tour Honor.

THI PRESIDES!: The only thing stated In connection with theso
sattere vaa these docunonta could bo offered, if offered in tiae, and
that thoy *^uld be considered. Thero is no approval of the docunonta to
e*reo to their subaission. It siaply appllos to tho pomisaion to offer
the documents.

hH. H A Hflf l I don't see what wee broujjit out in the way of new
ovidenco in tho rebuttal docunant book in connection with tho defendant
Siovora and would give reason for a sur-rebuttal docunent of this
oaturo. It soecs to bo nothing to no excent \tjt t Slevers did as chief
of tho Ahner.erbo, end inascuch as ho tried to lialt his rooponsiblllty
in this in hlo cross examination—


THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has no copy of the affidavit and is
thoroforo not advised as to tho ototcr.onto.


MR. EARDT: Thero is a Gorman copy hero, Tour Honor. Thoro pro no
English copies. It night bo helpful if dofenso counsol stntod what ho
purports this docuoont to provo.

THE PRESIDEST: Dofenso counsol nay state the substance of this
affidavit.

ER. VEISGZRB2R: Tho prosecution last Friday oubolttod Document NO-
3629. This was a letter wrltton by Slevers to Kirt datod 3 January 1942,


*iich reforo to Hirt's rosewch work. I remind you that during Sievors'
direct exnnlnaticn Hirt's research work was already discussed. During
tho cross examination at that tino tho prosecutor did not make use of
the contents of this letter. For that reason I was not in a oosition at
that tiae to answer this letter. Slnco the prosecutor has done that now,
using his suppleaental docunent volune, I eek to be permitted to define


ay attitude towards that lettor.

XH. HARDY; The prosecution doesn't see tho aateriality of this in


this connection. Your Eonor. They have had ample opportunity to testify
to those fects. This is a rebuttal docunent, rolutting the testimony of


10663


Court I

2 Jut *i?-A-22-3-lHX-Xaloy (Easier)


the defendant. Turtbernore, I cannot fur‘.her ascertain what =y objection
sight be to It vltfcout seeing the translation, end I insist on seeing
the translation in this connection.

I don't see cause for further affidavits of this nature, particularly
when this is in thetrue nature of rebuttal evidence.

DR. WIISOUBIE: Mr. President, if I aa not to be alTo^od to define
=y attitude towards a letter which has only lately been presented by tho
prosecution, the contents of which have not been oontioned.during tho
diroct nor the cross exaslnation, I oust consider that the righto of
defenso of ny clients are being llnitod. 7or that roason I oust ask you
to pernlt this affidavit to enter tho record, slnco it is not too long
and sinco its translation will not nake too auch difficulty. However,
a writton translation is not available at tho ooasnt.

MR. EARDY: Tour Honor, the prosecution wishos to point out, for
tho sako of futuro trials, tho theory of robuttal ovidonco. This docu-
aent, which tho prosecution Introduced in robuttal, is HO-3629. Defen¬
dant Sievors testified on direct and on cross oxnnlnation, in thoory,
that ho was only aore or less a rubbor stamp in tho Job as tho chiof
of adainistrntion of the Ahncnerbe Socioty, that ho did not lnstigato
nodical experiments, that he in no way tried to bring nodical oxoorinonts
or scientific research in the concentration canps under tho yoke of tho
Ahnenerbo Socioty. This docuaent states clearly and shows tho efforts
cade on the part of Siovers to so do what he donlod. I don't soo the
purpose of allowing hie to ccce back and give another answer or explana¬
tion of this, when this completely refutes and rebuts his tostlnony.

MIISOLEBER: Mr. President, if such a letter completely torn
free Its context is suddenly presented, it nay under circunstancos bo
nlslnterproted. I think that it is therefore necessary to clarify the
circumstances under tdiich this lettor was written, and show its connec¬
tions, and 2 had opportunity to do this neither during the direct nor
the cross examination.

HR. HARDY: Your Honor, I will pass the document up for Your Honor's


10669


Court I

2 Jul 47-i<-22-4-i£X-Xaloy (Saaler)

perusal. I want to call your attention to paragraphs two and three,
which are tfcii^s which will he very faalliar to you.

IE. VZISGER3I3: That doee not altor the fact that thl« letter ie
being presented here completely torn fren its context and for that
reason can well bo aislnterproted, and therefore I want to submit this
affidavit.

THE PHESIDIKT: If counsel believes that a lettor liko this, which
Is an exhibit in evidence, cculd be sislnteroreted, that is a nattor ho
could explain in his brief and argue as to the true interpretation of
the lettor, according to his viewpoint. Tho letter in question, counsol,
is clearly proper rebuttal evidence, to be introduced on behalf of tho
proeocution, ae it tends to destroy tho tostir.ony of the witness
Siovers, which hs gave frou tho witness stand. Bcw, tho dofondant
Siovort had all the tino he doslros on the wltnoss stand to oxplnin his
position in thesenattors. Sow, if ho could bo allcvod to prosont fur-
thor docunonts to attack such ovldenco, after this tino tho prosocutlon
could offer further docunents to attack this affidavit, and tho chain
wvuld novor ond. Tho Tribunal le of tho opinion thr.t this affidavit ie
too loto.vhon offorod at this tine, and the objection is suetalnod.

Vhon I told dofenee counaol that froa tine to tino thoy vero por-
nittod to offer a docuaent, it einply gave then tho right to cell thoeo
docunonts to the attontion of tho Tribunal. Ky statonont had nothing to
do with the question of the admissibility of the documents in the caso
cf an objection's being urged to then. It is simply that the Tribunal
would hear any offer on the part of the defense counsel and then deter-
clne the natter.

Objection sustained.


10670


2 Jul-A-lB-23-l-lfechen (Int. Roller)
Court No. I,


DP.. T/ZISGEHBaR: This concludes =y defense of Slevers.

THZ PRESIDENT: he will hoar frcti Dr. Froschcann, who has a
docuscnt I told hin ha could offer.

DR. P&SCaUlOfs Mr. President, I have handed the Docui^nt
Brack No. 6U during the recess to the Prosecutor and explained its
contents to hia by the use of an interpreter. It is dated 30 Juno 191*7 •
It will bo ^arkod Exhibit No. 65 and I aa handing it to the Tribunal.

THE PRESIDENT* This docxnont will bo recoivcd in ovidonco by
tho Tribunal.

DR.' FRC6CKHANN: Thank you. Your tenor.

THE PRESIDENTi Are ttero any furtlior documents ready to bo
offered? I understand that tte document books of tho dofoniant !*ug-
owoky and defendant Schrocdcr will bo reedy by tccorrow Doming rrhon
they can be offered. I don't knew if they aro ready now.

!H. HARDYi Other than the docuuonts for irugovsky end
Schrocdox*, do any ether defense counsel have docunonts to offer? Are
those the last docioonts? Tho rfcltz docxrsints havo boon cocplotod,

Your Honor, Dr. i/illio ccaplotod that tho othor day. Roo. has boon
conploted.

I think thon. Your Honor, tho only docuruntary ovidonco no havo
to rocoivo r*rT is tho docuuontary ovidonco of Ifrugowsky and Schroodor
ard tho one otter rebuttal docuaont book of tho Prosecution.

THE PRESIDENT: That is ay -understanding. This supplemental
document book Ho. 3 for Rose has boon offered, has it not?

HARDY: That has been offerod, yes.

THE PRESIDENT: I thought so. Tho offering of your document
book will not censure noro than ono half day?

!3. HARDY: Much loss than that. Your Honor, I think I can put
it in in fifteen or twenty oinute-s if Dr. Gawlik docs not have too aany
objections•

TTC PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal will bo in recess until 9:30
o'clock toenrroK uoming.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until 3 July 191*7 at 0930 hours.)

10671


Court I

3 Jul 47-K-2-l-E3<-*eehan (Haaler)


Official Transcript of the Anerican Military
Tribunal In the natter of the United States
of Anerlca against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Huemberg, Geroany, on
3 July 1947, 09®, Justice Beals prosidixg.


THE MARSHAL: Persons in the courtrooo vill please find their eoats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tribunal

I is now in session. God savo the United States of Anerlca and this

honorable Tribunal. There will be order in the court.

THE PRESIDES!: Mr. Marshal, hare yoi ascertained if the defendants

are all present in court?

I

THE MARSHAL: Kay it please Tour Honor, all the defendants are
present in the court.


THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary General vill^note for tho record the
prosence of all the defendants in court.

Counsel for the defendant Krug ova icy nay proceed.

3t. 7LIMNIHG (Counsel for defendant Krugovsky): Mr. President, lot
no at first suboit Supplement 2 to ny docuaent, which is Just being
handed over in ths English languago. This is tho copy without a cover,

Tho first document, Tour Honor, will be Mrugovsky Ho. 103, which I
offer as Exhibit Bo. 97. It is an affidavit signed by Ur. Koch from
tho fira of hadaus and deals with the lncondlary barb affair.

The next docuaent will be Mrugowsky Ho. 104. This is an affidavit—

THE FRESHEST: Just a noaent, cainsel, not quite so fast, we want
to note these exhibit nuabers on our docuaents.

IB. -LHOdW: The first one was Docuaent So. 103, Exhibit Ho. 97.

THE PRESIDES!: All right, doctor.

IR. JTIMHIHG: The second docuaent, Tour Honor, will be KrugOwBky

an affidavit signed by Profoesor
Koch Institute in Berlin and deals
were sent away.

Mrugowsky Ko. 105 and has already
co-defendant Professor Hose. I
exhibit nuabor in order to


10672


Court I

3 Jul 47-H-2-2-ZEX-Meehan (Banler)

includo It vlth ay ova notorial.

PRESIDENT: Veil, you can give It your own exhibit nunber, but
give ua a note as to the nuabefj

IS. YL3C4IS0! Teej Your Ho dor, Krugov* ty So. 105 vill beccee
Hrugovsky 1.4:1 bit Noi 96.

TKZ PRESIDENT: Couneel, can you give ue the nuabcr of the exhibit
of Bote for thle ease docuoent?

IE. 7LEMMTO: I shall be able to tell the Tribunal the nucber aftor
recess. At the accent I aa not able to do that.

THE PRESIDES?: Yery veil. Doctor.

IE. 7LE»4<I5G: The next docuaent. Your Honor, Is Hrugovsky No. 106
and vill bccceo Hrugovsky Exhibit So. 100. It Is an affidavit signed by
Profoasor Moyer Atich. He Is a university orofoasor and one of tho
best knovn philosophers vc have in Geraaiqr. At tho aonont ho is tho
loading representative In Gercany of HoiIsa, tho founder of vhich vns
7iold Marshal Souts. This Ideology has boon fought by National Socialists
during tho Natl reglao. This Professor Moyor Ablch knovs Hrugovsky for
nany yoars and knovs that Hrugovsky vao a follovor of Kolisa. Ho also
spooks of Hrugovsky's personality.

Tho next docuaont is Hrugovsky No. 107. I offer this docuoont ao
Hrugovsky No. 101. It Is an affidavit signed by tho Eapo Arthur Dictzsch
froo Block 46 in Buchenvald. Diettsch speaks in detail about the
quostion vhother Ding's diary vas only sccethlr^ vhich vas roconstructod
or tether It ves the original diary.

TEE PRESIDENT: Veil, counsel when you spook of tho Ding diary as
being reconstructed, Just vhat do you soan? Do you neon that it has
been altorod or do you neon it is not a dolly diary, but vrltton ud at
odd tines by Ding? Do you consider that the docuncnt has been forged
by alterations!

IE. ILBCJISG: I neintain, Mr. President, that tho authentic diery
hes been burnod. Diettsch confirns that fact expressly. Diotzsch vas
present vhon Ding burnod the authentic diary in a stove in Block 46. I

10673


Court So. 1

3 Jul 47--2-3-EHfc-#eehan (Baler)


salntain that the diary which Kogon-

PSISIDEST: I understand, Doctor. I Just went to know whr.t you
=eaa by the uao of the word "reconstruction".

*®. HARDY: Your Honor, I question the edsissibility of the affidavit
of the witness Dletssch. It nay be true fern and It ney conply with the
rulos of the Tribunal 100 percont, but Dletssch was hero; defense counsol
announced they were going to call hi a as a witness so the prosecution
could ezanlno hla. The Tribunal expected hia as a witness and wanted to
Interrogate his and they found out Dletssch did not have the lnfornetlon
they desired, so Dr. Plenalng says ho did not want to call Dletssch.

Sow he cooes up with an affidavit of Dletssch without tho right of tho
prosecution to tross-exnolne. I don't think It Is adnisslble, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDEST: The objeotlon Is overruled. Tho docuaent win ho
adult ted. Counsol for tho prosocutlon nay sake an nrgunent that night
tend to losson the weight to be glvon to the affidavit, showing thoeo
factors, but the docunont will be adalttod.

DH. TISXAUR: In that connection, Hr. President, let no say nt
that tlao when Dletssch was present hero, I infornod tho Tribunal that
I did not Intend to call hln Into the witnoss stand and thereby dolay
the Trllunal, becauso tho points about >Alch I wantod his testimony
wore not kn^wn to Dletssch and that in particular tho chain of cconand.

The prosecution said at that tine-

THE PRESIDES?: Well, counsel, the objection of the prosocutlon has

•*

beon overruled and tho docunont will bo adaitted.


1067b


Court I

3 Jul 47-4<-3-l-£HX-Prineau (Baaler)


IE. 7L22MJC: The ue*t docunent, Your Eonor», will be Docunent
l-lrugovaky Ho. 108. This will be Exhibit Mrugowsky 102. This docure-it
contains an affidavit signed by Dr. Erwin Schilling. Schilling vaB the
chief of Department 16 ever since 1944 where he acted aa a hygiene
Referent. Ee therefore knows about the authority and the significance of
the hygiene Referent at Department 16. Ee also knows about Ellenbeck's
activity, who Is repeatedly sectioned in Ding's diary and who thero nro-
duced blood serus.

The next will be the affidavit by Ruoff. Docusent Ho. 109, Exhibit
Mrugowsky 103. Ruoff was the chief of the SS operation office under
Juettner. I beg your pardon - he was not the chief but the IA, which
aeans that he was ssrely in the position where he had to deal with all
questions of organisation, questions of operation and Questions of
administration, and he testifies about tho possibility of double subordi¬
nation as we naintain was the caso with Ding in Buchoznmld.

The next docuoent will be Mrugowsky 110, Exhibit Mrugowsky 104. This
is an affidavit signed by Dr. Adolf Murthus. Murthus was one of the
closest collaborators of Mrugowsky. He participated in the cold noetlng
at Huornborg and in a discussion regarding Ruthenol, whoro also represon-

i

tatlves of I.G. Farben, Weber and Kohlaann were prosont. free Septonbor
1943 until September 1944, that is, during the tino botween Mrugowsky and
Schilling, ho was the chief of the Department 16 and, thoroforo, can toll
froo his own knowledge about the relationships of command there.

The noxt document. Your Honors, will be Mrugowsky 112, which I offer
as Urugowsky Exhibit 105. It contains an extract froa the fifth lettor
of Hippocrates which soae time ago I put to the expert, Dr. Ivy.

The noxt document, Your Honors, will be Mrugowsky Ho. 113. This
will becooe nrugowsky Exhibit 106. It is on affidavit of Professor Dr.
Killian, the ordinarius for surgery at Glotterbad near Freiburg, Broisgau,
at the sanatorium there. He has special exporienco in the field of gas
gangrene and talks about the Fraenkel toxoids.

Mrugowsky Ho. 114 will become Exhibit Mrugowsky Exhibit 107. This is


10675


Ccurt I

3 Jul 47-M-3-2-£EK-Prla«au (Easier)


an affidavit by Dr. Konrad Morgan, who ves active in Sic hen void in his
capacity as an SS investigating judge. The prosecution has sutcittcd a
suaber of documents originating froea hie. Dr. Morgen creaks about the
nanner in whi<& prisoners were selected, whom he had observed carefully,
and he is the only ono who free his own knowledge can testify about tho
chain of c o m m and at Block 46. On top of the second page of tho documont
he states - this is the first line of the second page - I Quote:

"To start with, it seemed essential to obtain full knowledge of the
facts. In order to clear up these crinos I had repeated talks with Dr.
Ding. On this occasion Ding showed ae a paper signed by Grawitz and by
which ho, Ding, was ordored to conduct thceo oxperiaonts. Ding said,

'Tou can sou that I've bo^n very careful. I've thought all the time that
ono day one of you jurists will poko his nose into this business, so I
lnsistod on having the ordor in writing.'”

Turthor down in the document he says that ho was ordored to go to
Or'.witx at tho ond of theso experiments in ordor to report to him and
that Growltz on that occasion had told him that Ding was his man and that
ho would rogrot it very much if Ding was in any way incriminated by
Morgon's investigations.

Ho talks in great detail about the aannor of soloction of prisoners
and also about logon's personality. On pago 8 of this affidavit he is
speaking about tho special ezperiaonts on four persons mentioned in
Ding's diary. Ding in this connection also mentions Dr. Morgen and Dr.
Morgen tostifios that Dr. Ding's descriptions about this experiment woro
wrong. Ho. in turn, describe*-tho details of thoso oxuorlaonts.

Tho next document is an affidavit signed by Udo von Voyrsch, Docuoont
Krugovsky Ho. 116. It is on page 59 of the English document book. Tho
affidavit is signed by Udo von Voyrsch, which will bocaae Mrugovsky's
Exhibit 108. Voyrsch is the man upon whoso reouost the incendiary hcobs
wore made with tho drug E-17. Eo speaks about the origination of these
experiments in detail.

The next document I do not want to submit. It is Document Mrugowsky

10676


Court I

3 Jill 4?-M-3-3-i2X-?rinoau (Easier)


So. 116. It is an excerpt free the newspaper "The Stars and Stripes".

It bos no certification and I an sure that the prosecution would ob'ect
to the adnisslon of the docunont.

I now pass over to Mrugowsky Docuaent Bo. 117, which is an affidavit
signod by Dr. Scharlau. This will becone Mrugowsky Ho. 109. Dr. Scharlau
was one of the closest collaborators of Mrugowsty. Originally, I intondod
to call hin hero as a witness but I have not done so becruse Mr. Hardy,

*.en I suggested to call hin on the witness stand, had stated that ha would
not cross-oxaalne hin and, therefore, in ordor to save tine I aorely nn
sutaltting his affidavit. He speaks about the creation of tho hygione
institute, about the nanner in which tho hygiene institute worked, about
tho official trips on which he accoapanlod Mrugowsky. He is tho can who
travelled with Mrugowsky during the winter 1941-1942. This is during
tho period wfcon the so-often-contloned conforonco on 29 Deconber 1941
allogodly took place, which is the first entry in Ding's diary. Ho also
travelled with Mrugowsky the suener of 1942. That is fron June until tho
last third of August. This U tho tloe t*ien tho sulfonanido oxporinonts
took placo. His teetiaony shows that evon during this tine Mrugowsky
vr.s not in Berlin. m

Tho noxt will be Docunent Mrugowsky So. 120 whloh will becoce
Mrugowsky Exhibit 110. It Is signed by Dr. Hans-Dieter Ellonbeck, also
a nor.bor of tho Hygiene Institute. He is nentloned In Ding's diary in
connection with the blood seruc and reconvalescent eerun and ho nakes
etntenants with reference to those. In addition to that, he carriod out
a nunber of hourishoent experinents in Buchenwald.

The noxt decunent will be the affidavit ty Proeidont Hobort Eockor,
which will boccoe Mrugowsky So. 131, Xxhibit 111. Hockcr was the
presiding officer at the Belch Ministry of Justice. Ho talks about tho
canpotonce and the duties of an execution physician. 'This le relevant
in connection with the aconltin poison bullets.


10677


3 Jul-II-SS-c-l-Cook flat. Ramlcr)
Court Bo. I.


I further submit affidavit of tte defendant Hrugowsky hixas-.1T,
which is 1 Irugowsky 12L, and will bcccce Ixugowsky Exhibit. 112. :Irugov-
sky her. da fines his attitude towards tte docur^nts submitted after te
left tte witness standi It particularly deals with the documents sub¬
mitted during examination of tbo co-dcf-idants Rose and Poppondick.

Vfhon the first of those documents was submitted I objected to their
adaiscion because Ixugowolcy would not bo able to dofirv- his attitudo
towards them. Tho Tribunal than said I would bo able to call him to
the witness stand at a lator date. I waited until all tho material was
presented and than did not ask to havo him recalled to tte witnoss stand.
Instec.d I asked him to write an affidavit wterein ho defines his attitudo
toward a number of ttesc docua.nts put in by thu Prosecution after ho
luft tho witness stand and here te mentioned -

IS. AUI: 1 oust objoct to tho introduction of this affidavit.

•

This affidavit deals with natters that :*osccution introduced in evid¬
ence during cross examination of Krugowsky. I asked hin specifically
questions concoming thaso natters and he doniod qy quostions and
answered in the nogatfVj to my questions end in as much ns I did not
wish to introduce such docur^nta at that tiix» 1 didn't inpoach his
credibility as 1 did with tho otter docuaonts, hut in this particular
instinco I saved tte docuaonts to use on Hose's cross examination and

one in Foopundick's cross examination and they are a.roly rebuttal
•

docuaonts refuting tho testimny of Dr. iirugowsky and I gave hin
ample opportunity to tell this Tribunal about any connection ho had
with tlx- Robert :ioch Institute and Rose and I gave him ample opportunity
to do that cn cross examination and te didn't do it and it completely
refutes his testimony.

Dit. 7IZMHING: Hr. President, in this connection, lot re say
that Ilrugowsky had no opportunity to reply to these docu.ajnts submitted,
in ftjpp-.adick's, Rosa's and tte otter co -defendant's cross examinations
that took placo after his otfn examination. In Dr. Rose's examination,
for instance, tho documents Exhibits h$l artl U92 were submitted, ono is

10676


3 Jul-I^D-c^-Cook (Int. ?.-=I,r)
Court So.


a letter by Rose to Krugowsky and tit. other is a letter fror IS-ugonsky
to Ro3-» The Prosecution could Just as veil havo offered those two
documents when rrugowsicy hineolf was examined. Then he would havo
been atlo to reply to those documents and would havo bo.n able to ox-
pl'rin those litters origins tod and what the individual points con¬
tained therein naan. When Kr. Kaixfcr maintains now that ho already
asked iru^ovsky on the witness steal about tho contents of these let¬
ters, it is not correct. Krugovsky, 0 f course, was not in a position
to defino his attitude towards tho subjects eontainod in the letter in¬
asmuch as they were not submitted in cvide re u.

It is important to reply to th; vrrious subjects and quotations
contained in tho docuixmts.

TKd HCSUGrTi Do I undorstand, counsel, this is the last
affidavit which you w.re submitting, the only othor affidavit?

Dk. FIECEIGi I have two core docuujnts, hr. Prosidont. Ono
has boon cortifiod, It is a copy containing an extract free tho D!T
trial and deals with execution orders from Himler and has tho number
1751 K>. I have handed this doevnont to tho Goneral Secretary for tho
purpose of certification. Fron the General Secretary it wont to tho
language division and has not cone back. And tho last docunont is an
affidavit by Itranx. Kranx was approved to no months ago ns a vitnoso
but I only saw him a few days ago. Two days after his*arrival I asJwd
hin to prepare the affidavit which has not yet cone back fron tho
translating division. Those are tho only two docisxnta which I wish
to sulx-.it.

'Zi, liARDY: This extract fro a tho E7 noed not bu sent to tho
Translation Division.

TIE HllSIDZhTt I did not undorstand counsol to say that. I
understood counsel to say it had be-n sent to tho Secretary Genural.

3. KA.TDY: And then to the translation division aft-rvards.
That is completely unnecessary.

DR. FI/DKDfGi Only tho affidavit by Kranz will have to be


10679


3 Jul—I.-3-CooI: (Int. Rarlcr)
Court Ko. I.


translated. I could only g-t this affidavit at tta end last wc-k be¬
cause tie Witness only appeared then.

' ZSCSIDJiMFr lirugowsky affidavit 12!;, the affidavit of tho
defendant .rugowsky will bo aefaitted in ovidcncc, and tie objection
of Prosecution is overruled.

OK. ri ir2U ?K: It is Hrugowsky 12U, lour Honor. How docuner.t
1751 ? S, regulations regarding executions, will tec one J^ugorrslry Ex¬
hibit 113.

?H3 rRSSIIEOTi I don't know who tier we have a copy of that or
not, counsel.

Oil. FL’Ml'Gr I den't think tie Tribunal has a copy. I only
received tho certification for that docuneut yost-rd'y and I haven't
yet xvcoivad qy copy. However, tfcurv nust b. tie original document
froe tho 232T trial.

* —

iJi. HARDYi If Dr. Fanning could giv- us tie page mrabor of
tie LT record, I suppose that would bo the first thing to logically
chock and refer us to whatever page of tie Zu r-cord it is on and
what dnto and th.n it isn't reccssary to sufcnit n translation of it.

D?.. ?UXOi I will be able to ascertain that during tie rocoss.

Tie next docuaont, Your Honor, will bo tie affidavit by limns,
which will b. ixu^ovsky document No. 126, exhibit lllj.

T!LI HL'JSmZNT: Counsel, the translation of the document has
not yet boon received. I don't know whon it will be ready. Havo you
tie original affidavit in (kra n?

DR. TVjI IH3: Th. original is her., yur. I handed tho original
to the Secretary Goreral. It has bo-n siisaittod for translation.

'AHDY: Tie docuacnt is cloarly adnissiblo. Your Honor.

Tier- is no question of that. It is a A*osccutlon docunont admitted
b.fore the BS, which Dr. FL. nln g has subaittod to tho tr r nslation
division, for translation, which -3 actually unnocossary.

T.IL I-RISIDSIiTi I understood counsel is not speaking aoout
another docuaont, an affidavit which was prepared ho re rocorrtly.


10630


3 Jfcl-?:-?3-i'4^£ock (Int. Healer)
Court Ho. I.


IS. HARDY: H-U, I haven't this other ckr curio-nt yet. Your
fiorvor to see what it is. I can't get a page nunber on it and I can't
get a translation. I don't know what ho is referring to and I want
to g_t that infomation. It scores to ao ho could give no soac infor¬
mation so that I could find it in the record.

TT- -P-ISIDZ.-T: Counsel stat.d h- would give the pego of tho
English translation, of the English docurvonts at the coming recosa.

He didn't seta to have it non. Cf cours-, a curtifiod copy of tho
reerd before tho QfT is clearly adaissiblo. Couns.l is new spanking,
as I understand hi:i, abort another document, about an affidavit which
ho had recently procured.

DR. PL5IE*it Yes, 2 received this on thj 25th of June and I

i#

hove, haxxLd it tho san> day to th_ translating division. 2 think I
will have it very shortly and I will see to it nysolf.

IS. HARDY: Key I sc^ tho original, ploaso?

THU PRjyDEhT: Florae sutrait tho original of this affidavit
to tfu counsel for the Prosecution.

D . FLMlfci Kranz ras Ifrugorrsky'n collaba-ator in the Hygiene
Institute and talks about a nunbor of natters in that connection.

IS. HARDY: I uorely askod hi* when counsel subnitted it to
the. translation division.

TTf* rRESIDU.T: When did couns.l sv.lnit that docmcnt for
translation?

DR. FISICCt I ea Just b^ing told that tho affidavit v/as triton
down or. th_- 25th of Jurv, and w.s sont down to the language division on
th: saaa dry but only yeSterd-y the nineogrr.pliod copy cane back to us,
so that it was only translated yesterday.

!?.. IARDY: Tho translation division has no record of it coning
dov.n on this date. I won't objccl to tho aibisslbility. It is in ;,ood
for- but c-ain I wish an English translation of it at some tire.

THJ 7?J2.IDEIfr: After tho recess we will endeavor to find out
when the -iv'lish translation will b- available. T*q will pass that

lOoCl


3 Jul-iWS-b-5-Coo*/: (Lit. =tr-i.r)

Court Ho* I.

natter far the pro sunt.

D3» FLS£UC: Then there are excerpts freu the record of the
rohl trial which are before the Tricanal. These will be in Urugorsky's
supplemental volume Ho. 3. I have these documents hero, the certified
copies. I think they were before the Tribunal yesterday and one such
copy 'rill be handed over as fcrugovsky -Inhibit Ho. 115. All of these
documents ore excerpts fron the records of tho Pohl trial. Therof re,
it is not necessary to hand then to the translating division so that
they can be handed over to the Tribunal in the English language. I
shall giro it only one Exhibit ninbor, ovon though those oxeorpts aro
all fron different days.

TI£ PEBIDUHrt All that is necossary on these documents is
a certificate froa tho Socretary Goncral of tho LIT that they are
correct copies of avidenco taken in tho rbhl trial.

DR. FlZffK}: This cortif icate-is ready, Hr. h-osidont.

TTC SCSTDZXTi I would assuTJO that tho cortificato will bo
pro fared vory soon. It needs a cocparison of tho docunonts. That is
all.

D.i. FLIZDCi The certificate is boforc you. I havo already
handud it to tho Secrotary Gonor.il in writing.

THE HCSHJStffi Thon it las boon cortifiod?

D?.. FLSIWG: les. Your Honor.

THE WSID-OTt Will you hand tho certification to tho Tribunal?

(Tho Socrotary doeo so.)


106C2


? July 47-:4-.J>5-l-C-ros8-(Raaalor)
court i

TH£ ?R£SIDZ?'T: fcrugovsfcy Exhibit No. 115, certified
copy of tho records In '-be pohl trial. Is adalttod In
evidence.

DR. FL2MINQ: This, your Honor, concludes ay aubnlsalon
of evidence on behalf of the defendant .Irugowshy.

.iR. H.&CY: Your Honor, I aoroly want to stato that
Proseoutlon Rebuttal Doounent 3ooks have boon filed with
the Dofenao Counsel Infornatlon Center And they nay secure
then there to be uaod later on today..

THa ?RJdID-£.’T: Defense counsel having heard the announ-
‘oeaent of Proseoutlon that Proseoutlon Doounent 5oofc of
Rebuttal Doouaents has been filed with the Secretary General
and is available to the counsel of defense. Those doounents
will be offered later today.

The Tribunal would inquire whether translation of tho
ichroodor doounents has been reoolved by Dr. Horx, counsel
for Schroedor.

DR. ...iRX: Dr. Horx, oounsel for the defondant Schroeder.
Gentleaon of the .rlbunal I have not yet reoolvod these
doouments In translation.

T.U . RJSIDiUT: I understand that th>y nr* translated
and will be available within a very few monento if they
ore not already prepor-d.

DR. Jf.tR.;: Very 'fell, your Honor.

T.i& .R_3TD£HT: .»ny other docucents to be offored by
defense counsel?

There being none th. Tribunal will proceed. Tho Tribunal
Is advised that the Sohroedor doouaents are now being
assembled in the office of the decretory General. Tho
Tribunal will be In recess for a few noaents until tho
doouaents are available.


10633


July 47-:.—-iK-?-l-kochnn-( VonSchon)
Court 1.


TH£ x-uiH3rf.iL: The Tribunal is ignln In session.

THi PHESIDZNT: I understand that the Sohroedor documents
h.ve boon dollvorod. Counsel for Schroeder may proceed.

DH. (Counsel for Professor Doctor Schroeder.)

Your Honors, I begin with the submission of ay documents
for Profossor Dr. 3chroodor. The first document, which I
have to offer, la Schroodor document Ho. 28 to which I give
exhibit Ho. 20. This is an opinion on the defendant Sohroed-
ir oy Prelate Dr. Kreutz, apostolic protonotary at Freiburg/
3reisgau. The Tribunal will remember that I intended to
submit this doounent, but It was not certified at that time.
The oerfioation has now been obtained. I ash that this
document be admitted as inhibit Ho. 20.

The next document is Sohroedor Ho. 29. *hls la an
affidavit by Professor Dr. ‘..'arx ..eyor of the University
Clinic for oar, nose and throat diseases at the Unlvorelty
of Teheran, dated 28 April 19V7. Profossor Keyer sent this
statement quite spontaneously and unsolicited, whon he
learned from the press that Professor Schroeder was a
defendant in the Helical trial In Nurnberg. I shoul like
to read somo passages from this affidavit. This Is paragraph
2 : •

“In 1922 or 192* I made the acquaintance of Dr. Oskar
Schroeder by virtue of the fact that he v* s ordered as
a medical officer to report for special training to the
ear - nose and throat (larynx) clinic of Wuerzburg
University, where I then held the position of a first
assistant to and deputy of the doctor. Prof. Paul rfar.asse.

Our common work continued until 1925 or 1926; I do not rem-
emoer exactly which year it was after the lapse of so much
cine. After Herr Schroeder left Yuerzburg, our friendship


1063b


* July ■i7-H-AX-?-3-MeeharH'(VonS c hon)

Court 1

continued unonanged until 19*5 and even beyond this when I
had to leave Germany on account of the racial laws."
v»nd the first sentence of the next paragraph:

■£ven in 19*9, during my wife's visit to relatives In
Germany In the course of which she made many bad experiences
with so-called former friends, Herr Schroeder and his wife
tried to show their old friendship In every possible way."

Then I shall read all of the next paragraph because I
think it is o spool ally striking:

"Naturally, the basis of every friendship la personal
sympathy, besides this, however, respect of oaoh other'o
personality must also be proeent, In order to ensure a
friendship of long standing and It -/as Just this respect
of Horr dohroudor's personality, which I possessed to tho
highest degree. For his professional as woll as his human
qualities, he always appeared to me a man as ho should bo
but whom I net only on rare occasions. Of an Irreproachable
personal lncegrity in his private as well as his profes¬
sional conduct, ho was already at that time not only woll
qualified as a physician, but moreover, showed a gonulno
concern for his siok and was over ready to extend his help
to the very poor. His fjollng of comradshlp toward his
colleagues was beyond doubt And he not every ono half way
In the same comradely and open manner, regardloss of
racial and class prejudices with the result that he was
hold In high esteem at the clinic those In high and
low places, young *nd old, Christians or Jews. I know that
-rof essor Heilman, who Immigrated to Palestine (Haifa,
Kadassah-Kospltal) would gladly corroborate my statement."

I skip the next two paragraphs and I shall read from tfcj


second paragraph from tho end;

10665


« July 47 -h-AX- 7-.^-Keehar.*t Vongbhon)

Court I

"Already At that tine It was not quite safe for a man,
even In a high official position, to profess his friendship
to a non-Aryan or oven to further his cause in any way.

But this did not disturb Herr Sohrooder, who at that time
was an assistant to the Chief of the Hodlal Services of the
Relohawehr. He proposed to his chief, Generaloborsartt
(Lioutonant Oonorol ( Medical service) Professor Dr. Waldmano,
to entrust me with the drawing up of a questionnaire concer¬
ning a certain throat disease, which at that time suddenly
and frequently struck the Rolohswofar; ho presented me to his
chlof and I was given this assignment, which, howover, duo
to my departiro from Germany, was loft unfinished, If I
rocolluot corrootly."

This affidavit of Professor Moyor of Teheran Is a good
plcturo of Profossor Schroedor's character as a human bolng,
as a doctor and as an officer of the modlcal corps. I offer
thlo document as Sxhlblt No. 21.


10636


3 July-it-FL-S-l-Priaeau (Int. von Schon)

Court Mo. I, Casa I

DB. !’iSZ: Tho next document is Schrocdcr Ko. 30. This is an effi¬
de vit by Professor Dr. Roosslv, ordincry professor of tho Cr.ivorsity of
Berlin, director of tho University Charito' Hospital of 2 :iay 1947. It
describes the nature of the research assignments end also gives n picture
of how tho sodlcri inspectoretc dealt with these research assignments.

It also discusses tho financial aspect, lorover, it gives a briof state¬
ment as to Schroeder's ar.d Becker Fro^eng's personality. I will assiyi
Exhibit nurnbor 22 to this document.

TOS PH2SID- T: Counsel, is that uarked Exhibit 21 or 22? 22 is
correct?

DR. ?'jMUC: 22 —22. Tho nuxt document is 31. This is an affidavit
of Dr. nod. Kabil Frit* Boeder in Goettingen 9 May 1947. It also coals
with tho roaocrch assignments and research work nr;d it prosonts a >ic-
turo of how this matter was handled. It also comments on tho rc so arch
subaidios. I offer this docucent as i&hibit 23.

Tho next document is Document No. 32 which will be Exhibit 24. This
is an affidavit of Professor Franx Vollhardt of Frankfort on tho !toin and
Dr. Edgar Horornn.

THE PRESIDENT: Apparently, counsel, wo have not yot rocoivod that
document in English.

DP., I'-ARX: I -n sorry, Mr. President. I didn't understand you. Doos
tho Tribunal have the translation of this document?

THE PRESIDENT: No, wo have not.

I '

m. HARJI: Your Hcnor, this is in a propur form, However, it is
an affidavit of Dr. Franx Vollhardt who appeared hero ns a nitnoss. I
worvdor want is the purpose of introducing this in be; a If of the defendant
Schroodor.

DR. UiRX: As counsel for Sc breeder and Bv.ckor-Frcyscng, I intend to
prove by submitting this document hon the opinion of Professor Schrocdcr
was formed and what material was available for him to tea. an opinion
cn these questions cn. This is necessary because the prosecution has -x-


10687


3 July-U-FL-S->- Prircau (Ir.t. von Schon)

Court Mo. I, Case I

pressed cortain doubts as to whether tho material which Profossor Voil¬
hardt had was really in order. Therefore, I ahould liko to road tho ii>-
portant passages free this affidavit.

If.. HARDY: Your Honor, prosecution submits that Professor Voilhardt
testified horo r.t great length about his own experiments and he. gavo
expert opinion concerning the aatorial he had in the Boiglbocck ur.po-
riaents even though he was not ww.-to of the fact that sane of tho fi¬
gures had been altered and I could sou no further re-son of an affidavit
concerning this natter. The whole testimony of Voilhardt come up, tho
whole proposition in its entirety.

DR. IttflXs I an afraid I was not able to understand tho translation.
Thorc oust bo ooaothing wrong with ny oar phones. May I ask you to ro-
poat it, Ur. Hardy?

If. HARDY: I to rely stated that I don't soo tho purpose of an affi¬
davit inasmuch as —

THE INTERR'cZTCR: Just a minute.

MR. HARDY: I state that I don't soo the purpose of this affidavit
inasmuch as tho witness Voilhardt appoarod hero and was examined exten¬
sively by dofonso counsel. There is no necessity for further testimony.

He has testified as to tho experiments at Dachau and his knowlcdgo of tho
reports and records and further testimony would bo merely accuniiuiativo.

THE PHESIDa;T: Do I understand counsel to .say that this oxhibit was
offored on behalf of defendant Bockor-Frcysung.

!f • HARDY: And Schrocdur.

ER. IlAIiX: Primarily for Professor Schrovdcr but also for Becker
Freysong becauso it d-als with the same subject; but if there arc mis¬
givings against' that I shall offer it only for Professor Schroedcr. It
b.longs in tho Schroedcr document book.

If. HARDY: I object to tho admission of it, your Honor.

DR. IIA2&: lour Honors, this is not testimony of Profossor Voilhardt.
This is clarification end e xplanation of what material Professor Voilhardt,
* 10688


3 July-ii-FL-3-3-Prl«cau (Ir.t. vco Schon)

Court Ko. I, Case I

htd available and whet preparations he had .redo by hie nodical associr.to
Dr. h'ensarr. and what ce to rial was available to this Dr. Hermann. If
the prosecution says that they have no objection cgr.inst tho opinion of
Professor Vollhordt being built on adequate foundation, thji this docu¬
ment is perhaps not iaportant. If that is not tho ease, howover, thon
in tho intoroBts of an orderly conduct of ay dofonsc I consider it no-
coasary to offer this docent.

THE PRESIDJLT: Has counsel lx.cn infor-xxl when tho English trans¬
lation of this document will probably bo ready?

E«. .JKZ: Hr, President, I w.s inforoed by Contain Rico that this
translation was being prepared end that it would be finished very soon.
It would porhepa be advisable to wit until the translation is here.

THE PRSSID3.T: Before passing on the objection of counsol for pro¬
secution tho Tribuncl should bu advised as to the stctumjnts mado in
tho affidavit.

Ml. HARDY: Your Honor, I don't need to see tho English translation.

I con fcoadily see thore, troa looking ot tho Gorman md tho few words
I knm In Gorman that this document boro is just what I uxplninod to tho
Tribunal that it is, end I object to it. If the Tribunal wishes to rulo
in it's favor, ho nay put it in in this fora.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Hardy, that is not very much help to us, tho

fact that with your kncwludgo of the Gorsan Language it appears to be not

•

in good fam. '..'c haven't hod tho advantage of even seeing tho German.

UP.. HARDY: I didn't say it wasn't in good fora. I stato it is im¬
material and tho evidence has been hoard from the witness on tho stand
» o

and I don't see further reason for an affidavit of the witnoss that has

appeared before this Tribunal.

DR. HARZ: iiay I add scaothing?

THE HlESIEerr: From the information given to counsel for defendant
Schrooder it would seem probable that the. affidavits would to available
before very long.


10689


3 Ju ly-M-FL-8-ir-Prijeau (Int. von Schon)
Court No. I, Case I


DR. IARX: Yos, Ur. President.

IE. HARDY: If we are going to wait for the translation, I will
withdraw my objection and let it be afcitted.

TH2 PRESIDENT: In view of the withdrawal of the objection of coun¬
sel for prosecution, the affidavit will be admitted and received in
evidence as Schroeder Exhibit 24.

DR. :iARX: Schroeder Exhibit 24. The next document is Document Ho. 33
which will be Exhib it So. 25. This is a report by Dr. Ued. Homann about
the experiments performed by Professor Vollhaidt in his own clinic in
Frankfort on the Liin. There were four doctors and one senior .nedical
student who subjected themselves to thtse experiments. Tho Tribunal will
remember that the defense was asked to submit this report to tho Tribu¬
nal. I oust assura that this has not been translated yet.


10690


3 Ju ly-U-FL-9-l-Love (Ir.t. von Sc ton)

Court Ko. I, Case I

2 should like to read some pages free this report, only a few sentences
which the interpreters will be able to translate: Sunnary Report about
Seawater Sr.^eriner.ts at the .fcdical University Clinic at Frankfurt on
the Itoin. "The seawater experiment, 500 cc. of seawater daily and
1,600 calories daily, *os carried out carefully with regular urine and
bleed chocks. The experimental subjects: 4 doctors and 1 medical stu¬
dent continued to work in their laboratories froa 8:00 in the morning
until 19CO hours in the evening and later." Then on page 2, the beading
Subjective Findings: "During the first two days of the experiment psy¬
chic changes wore not observed with the exception of thirst which
slowly increased. On the third day the individuals, according to on their
tamerasent, varied in thoir conduct. Vitality and depression were con¬
trasted. Some were talkative, while othero withdrew since it was un¬
pleasant to them to talk. On the fourth day these symptoms could be
osooclolly oasily soen." Then tho next paragraph: "During tho night from
tho fourth to tie fifth day sleep was interrupted by vivid dreams. Sato
people indicated thoir dreams by crios and rostless movements. On tho
fifth day tliere nos a certain exhaustion »dth all tho subjects. Move¬
ments wore alow because of tho dryness of the mucous ncabrar.os; only
very little was spoken. 3ut also tho thought process was somewhat slowod
down and concentrating ability was consequently reduced. The fifth ex¬
perimental subject ended th- experi-wnt after 6 x 24 hours. In this caso
there was general fatigue; thirst had not increased to any considerable
extant but was very urp'.o? v .'t ard monopolized the thoughts. During tho
whole course of tho experiment there was not tho slightest sign of any
psychotic changes. Ir. tho casws of all experimental subjects, after
'irinkir.g a slight amount of fluid, two cups of tea, there was iauediato
feeling of well-being. The average loss of weight was approximately one
kilogram daily. Alter two days this was compensated for apain. Thera wore
no after cffocts. Efficiency maained unchanged.

THE PLic-IDJIT: H*s counsel for tho prosecution examined the form


10691


3 July-Sf-FL-?- 2 -Lovo (Int. von Schon)
Court Ko. I, Case I


of this affidavit? Tho journal is not in tho English language.

*. HARDY: Ho objection to it.

TK2 PRESHSKT: That is Schroedor Exhibit Ko. 33.

W. HARDY: Exhibit No. 25.

Dfi. UARX: Tho next document and tho last document which 1 have to
offer is docuaent 34. This is an affidavit of the Chief Nurse Karin
Hupportz, Berlin-Nicolaasee. During the course of examination of Profes¬
sor Haagen it was alleged or rather the pros.cution expressed the pos¬
sibility that on the 25th of Hay, 1944, Haagen together with Profossor
Schrocder wont to .atzwoiler bccauso tho docuaor.t said that Professor

Haagen togohtor with S. Mow, with this affidavit of Chief Nuroo Hupportz

• •

I want to provo tliat Profeasor Schroedor on tho 25th of liny, 1944, could
not have possibly boon in Natzwoilor. Tho affidavit of tho l.’urso Hupportz
reads:

• •

It is vory brief, Ur. President, and I should like permission to

road it:

"Number6, 30 Juno 1947. Affidavit. I, Chiof Nurse Karin Hupportz
havo been warned that 1 will be subject to punishment if I enke a falso
affidavit. I aa informed that thia affidavit is intended to bo usod as
evidence boforo A crican Military Tribunal 1 in Numborg. I con tostify
with certainty that Professor Schroedor, on the 23th of May 1944, camo
in from Strasbourg, arrived in the Svoning, at 8:CO at Karlsruho and
left again for Berlin on the ?5th of .Cay 1944 in the evening. In tho
aoantimo ho stayed in tn s- of iy sister Mrs. He 11a Kux in Karls-
ruho, Folkustrasse 1; now Uoitkestrass 27. I can rua-rubor this fact so
difinitely because the reasons for his interrupting the trip was a birth¬
day celebration in my family which was on the 24th of May. Professor
Schrocder continued his trip to Berlin, on the 25th of May 1944 in tho
evening in the sleeper. Uy sister and I took him to the train.

Chief I.ursc Karin Hupportz, siip'.od by myself, because the signaturo
was given beioro a.. I ask that this document be adaitted as Exhibit No. 26.


10692


3 July-:s-FI/-9-3-Love (Int. von Schon)
Court No. I, Case I


182 ^E^T: Has prosecution rained the fora of this document?

!*. HARDY: Yea.

TH2 raZSIDI.Vr: Let tto document bo admitted.

u?.. AIL.: Hr. President, I have completed the documents which I
had to offor for Schroodor.

THZ IESSIDS.Yf: I enquired a short time ago if any other dofonso
counsel had any document to offer and there .as none then. Are ttoro any
now? Apparently then, are none. I would aak counsel for defendant l*u-
gwtaky if to has received a certified copy of the record of trial in tno
Pohl case? I understood that tod not boon received.

DR. PLasm-G: Hr. President, I gave this certified copy of tho pro-
codings of tho Pohl case to tho Secretary General.

TH2 PRSSEDE.!?: It has not yet boon re turned. That documont was re¬
ceived before with the proper cortificato, certificate of tho extract of
tho testimony before tho International Military Tribunal and it has not
boun rocoivod. Is that correct, counsel?

HARDY: Your Honor, defense counsel, in that particular document,
wasn't Introducing an extract of tho International Uilitary Tribunal, but
introducing a document used bofore tho D!T, as a do orient oertifiod by
Hr. Vorwork, Chiof of the Docunont Center. Uy suggestion was .iwroly that
in lieu of sending to the Translation Section he could have taken the re¬
cord of tho L.T and save the translation proper.

THE PRESIDENT: I understood counsel but that document has not been re¬
turned to counsel in any fora.

I®. I asked for th. r-cord at one tiau but can't ruoeobor

at the aaaent through what channels I received it from in tho aimeograph-
i ng section. Then I took out the pages which sure important for ay case
and I crossed out the contents that did not interest ao in ordor to oaku
the work of the Tribunal easier and I put ttxsa oages into the document
book and gave it to the defense center asking for a certification and tho
certification is in the hands of tto Tribunal.


10693


3 Ju1t-U-FI/-9— U -Love (Int. von Schon)

Court No. I, Case I

THS PB28HEKT: Is tho certification in order?

JR. HARDY: As I stated, th> document is an original document and
certified by tho Clerk in charge of the document center for LiT end
tho only xroblua now is tho translation of that document and Dr. Plco-
aing has mnt tho document of four pages to the Translation Division to
be translated and as I explained it was unnecessary because tho trans¬
lation already exists from the EfT records and he could got tho pago that
■as introduced bo fore the IlfT and insort that end wo would have tho
translation*

THS PRESIDENT: The original document of the certification for tho
SooroCWy of tho E T is now on file and translation can bo fumishud Iran
ono source or another in duo time. I understand then there arc no furthor
natters for do/onse to be brought to tho attention of tho Tribunal?
Counsel for dofondant Karl Brandt is not prosent. I wonder if his docu-
nontntion is complete?

DR. FRITZ: Jtr. President, Dr. Sorvetius is in his office. I sou him
a little while ago.

1R. PR£$IDffl.7: kill you bo kind ono ugh, counsel, to call him and
ask him if ttoro is anything ho would like to call to tho attention of
tho Tribunal.

!R. HARDY: Yes, immediately.

THS PRSSIDSirT: I requested do fens o counsel to ad v iso mo if any de¬
fense counsol :»s further documents and receiving no anoser I assume there
aro none.

DR. VCR'.SRK: llr . President, I an empowered in the nano of Dr. Scr-
vatiuo for tho defendant Brandt to my there are no aoa documents to
be offered in this case;

THS RlSSID.g-'T: Very well, couns-1. Nothing further to bo offered
by any defense couna. 1 , the prosecution any proceed.

MR. HARDY: The prosecution is prepared to proceed if tho defense
counsel got the rebuttal books.

10694


3 July-«-FL-9-5-Lovt (Int. von Scbon)

Court Ko. I, Case I

IH2 ?R3SID5 ? .T: H-'vc defense counsel the Er^llsh rebuttal documont
books? If not will the defense advise the Tribunal. Arc books available
to each dofonso coir.se 1 ?

!£. HARDY! This is proaocution document Book Ho. 19 which is tho
socond rebuttal document book, ho turn to page 1 which la document 654-PS
which will be offered es Prosecution Exhibit No. 562. This docuacnt,

70 ur Honors, contains a discussion with the Reichfuohrcr SS Hiamlor and
his fiold hcadquortors in the prosenco of otato Socrctnry Dr. Rothcnbcr-
ger SS Grupponfuohror and SS-Oberstumbannfuchrcr Bender. This documont
shows the connections tween tho Reichfuchrer-SS and Ministry of Justico;
thoro is a discussion fc.Uch enlightens us on tho connection botwuon
thoso organisations aovi proposals and regulations concerning a legal
status ard tho trcefer.nt of Poles and Russians particularly.

Tho noxt document, Your Honors, is document NG-715 which is thu on-
tiro document book Ho. 2 which waa usod in tho Juatico caao, which aro
extracts from th% Justice cose containing laws and docrooa imps sod by
Go many in tho occupied territories, I have not given Gorman cooios of
this to Dofonsu counsel inasmuch as Germn copies wore never prepared or
introduced in tho Justico matter.


Court 1, Cas— 1

3 July^-lO-l-ASG-Lov- (Von Schon)

Tho Roichagcsottblatt is official lnw of Germany am is avail¬
able in ovury G-racn Library and the OCC Ubr-.ry. The extracts and
induXui are available to defense counsel anj they can look up im¬
portant sections. Those ere surely made available to tho Tribunal
to determine what laws governed in Germany during their occupation
and particularly the status of inmates of concentration caj^s. Tho
Tribunal should be interested in knewring Just what laws will bo ap¬
plicable to tho Russians, Polos, Cshcchoslav.akLans, and Hungarians
and tho prupose of these documents is to show the Tribunal what laws
thoy wore aubjoctod to and in what manner they could bo duly in-
car c orated in concentration oaapa, etc. I think ay colleaguo Dr.
Soldi has an objection.

DR. SEIDL: Mr. President, I object to the admission of tho
document which is M3 715. This is nothing but an index of a docu¬
ment book in the Lawyer's case in one of those Tribunals. If one
looks at this index which merely contains headings of laws ono sous
that document M3 715, which is oallod a document, is really tho con¬
stitution, tho so-called Wulmr Constitution of the Guraan Reich.
Apparently this was offered in the Justice case. I am of the opin¬
ion that an index of a document book which gives only tho headir^s
of documents cannot bo offers as evidence in another trial since
it has no probative value. I therefor- take the position that this
document can not be admitted in evidence.

m HARD!: And for tho convenience of the court.

Th’2 PRESIDENT: Counsel, the document consists of approximately
- p-gua, and seems to me more than an irdox. But in any event tho
document is probable adaissable for the Tribunal for its us- but
it appears to noro than an index.

IS HAROT: The situation is that I bar- not supplied G-man

copies inasmuch as the Reichsg-sotzbLatt is the official law in

3-many 3nd 1 supplied thua with an index sc they could check the

refor-nce and thoy have the r-f-r-nc- of each English extract bobore

10696


Court 1, Case 1

3 Jul7-4!-lC-2-A~G-Love (Von Schon)


rou.

Cfi. Flim*C: Ur. President, you Just said the docuaent had
sore than 60 pages and was aore than an Index. I believe that is
a aistako.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel Just explained that. Counsel for the
prosecution explained that he had furnished German counsel with an
index of the laws which are printed in our English docuaent book .
Canaan counsel then by the use of the index nay easily find in the
Library here in the Palace of Justice the laws which are referred
to in the index. Objection is over-ruled. Docucent is roceivod in
evidence.

UR HARDY: This document is NO 715, offered as Prosecution
Qchibit 563. Tho next two documents are transcripts of interrog¬
ations of the defendant Hovcn which wero done by aysoIf which I
promised on this occaesioo- I will havo to wait until dofeneo
counsel puts on his oar phones so he will hoar ay presentation bo-
fore ho onters his objection. Those two docunonts aro tho trans¬
cripts of the Interrogation of tho defendant Horen which I promiaod
to introduce in rebuttal inasmuch as I used then in tho courao of
ay cross-axaalnation of tho defendant Hovcn. Iho dofendant Hovun
at that tine substantially substantiated this interrogation with
his affirmative answors to ay questions concerning tho interrog¬
ations. I submit them now to shew tho Tribunal that thoso answers
coincide with the affidavit which was executed by tho d of end ant
Hovcn and that when tho defendant Hovcn was executing said affi¬
davit ho had amplo opportunity to r^ad it; in faco thoso inter¬
rogations will indicato to tho Tribunal that I road to him passago
for passage right straight through tho affidavits; they wero re¬
turned on thv. next day, which was the second document and had him
sign it after reading it again and having a draft up of the first
day corroctod by him, and a final copy brought back tho r.cxt day.

3t signed it and then at the sane time also nade corructiona and


10697


3 July-*f-lQ-3-AEG-Lovc (Von Schon)

initialed each page. All theso incidents are outlined in this in¬
terrogation and will substantiate tho affidavit at issue Here. I
submit theso documents No. 4068 and No. 40 j 9 as Prosecution Exhibits
564 and 565 respectively.

DR. GA'./UK: Ur. President, I object. First of all for a formal
reason, because tho documents were not submitted 24 hours beforehand
according to the ruling of tho Tribunal. Jfl vUw of tho groat longth
of those two documents it is not possible for at to examine than
carefully in the short time. I just got thus a few minutes ago and
it is impossible to find out whothur thoy arc in ordur. Tho Prose¬
cution had those documents since last October. Since January I havo
bcun objecting to the affidavit because Dr. Hoven docs not under¬
stand English and I said I objected to the affidavit for that roason.
Tho Frosocution could havo offered theso docuncnts earlier. In any
caso thoy could havo given mu the Goraan translation yesterday so I
could examine it. In this short time, those few mlnutos, I am in
no position to examine tho documents and aako objections. Further¬
more, there is no indication that they are complete records. If
those records are offered then I dumand a coopluto record of all
interrogations of Dr. Hoven be offered in cvidcnco. I should liko
to remark that so far I havo not scon tho original at all. I must
assume that tho prosecution is offering theso documents of the
last day just in order to prevent ay making objoction.

HR. HARDT: No, Tour Honor, tho Prosecution is only Introducing
then to authenticate the affidavit and innarsuch as I havo hoard tho
re-corks of dofenac counsel, ho then has no further objection to the
affidavit which 1s executed by Hoven and admitted into evidence and
the- Tribunal doesn't deem it necesaary to certify to the fact that
Koven doesn't understand English; that is not the purpose to put
them in* tho only purpose is to show the Tribunal that the defend¬
ant was fully aware of the English language and understood what I
talked about during the interrogation and defense counsel's 24 hour

* • 10693


Jourt 1 , Case 1

3 July-M- 10-4-AEG-Lovo (Von Schon)

ruling applicable at this tine ia true, but certainly I have waived
the 24 hour rule for the past four days b. cause I haven't suen scoo
of the documents of defenao counsel yet.

THE FRZSIDZKT: Objoction by counsel for Hovcn is over-ruled
and the documents aro received in evidence, if the certificate la
In proper form.

IK. HARDY: Your Honor will find tho curtlficato on the last
pago of each interrogation.

MR. GA'fLIK: Lr. President, I should like to call the attention
of tho Tribunal to several pages in this document, should I do that
now or aftor tho prosocution is finished?

MR. HARDY: That can bo done in the argunont. Your Honor*

THE PRESIDENT: That would bo a matter for counsel to bring
forth in his argument. If ho desires to bring any argument in his
briof or in oral argument ho say call attention to those documents.

HR HARDY: Uay it ploaso Your Honor, during tho course of tho
cross-examination of tho witness Horn, who appeared hero in bohalf
of tho defendant Hovun, I askod him certain questions concerning
tho corruptness of tho defendant Hovcn. Horn at that time said
dofondant Hovcn was not corrupt, etc, I believe tho Tribunal will
recall his testimony. Portunatloy, a few days ago in axaainilg my
filos I ran across an affidavit of Horn which was taken in 1945,
ia&jdiatcly after tho liberation of tho Buchonwald concentration
cimp. This is document No. 4051 which 1 offer as Prose-cution Ex¬
hibit Ho. 566 to rebut the testimony of the witness Horn on the
witness stand in that this document which is an affidavit by the
witness Hom of the 24 of April 1945, ho states in tho fourth para¬
graph—

THE PRESIDENT: Hom was a defense witness?

MR. HARDY: Yes sir.


10699


3.» ,1 JTUO.


Ol-it-ibrt.


Court Jo. 1

3 Jul 47-*-U-l-SB<-Haloy (Ton Schon)


1 1 rt*ir,


TEi PaiSXZUTt U that the ease Horn ae vea a defenae witneaa?

KH. EAIDT: Tea.

r£t PHISIDEiT: I notice in the index the affidavit la dated 1946.

• HiEST: The lata ehould be changed to 1946, Tour Honor, in the
index.

Vhereia he atatea in the paragraph beglnnlx* "Ae a aurgeon he case to
Duchenwald— 1 * which la a little above the Biddle of the flrat page. He
atatea within that paragraph, and I ouotei "At that tlae Dr. Eoven.wae
regarded aa a great aurderer of prlaoaera, but I waa taken out of the
quarry by hla and put into the hoepltal aa a eick. He Bade thia concea-
alon to the governing prieonora clique. Why? He waa very corruot and
the prlaonera knew It. They corrupted hla In every poaeible Banner; fur¬
niture, underwear, food." Then the affidavit contlnuee. We offer that
la refcittal to the witneaa Horn'a teatlnory,

THI PHXSIISJT: We will hear frc« ccunael for defendant Hoven, If
he eo dealrea.

KH. HAIDTi And the original affidavit haa a picture of the witneaa
Horn on It taken at the tlae of the execution of the affidavit, which
Tour {fanor can aae la the eaae witneaa aa anoeared bofore thia Tribunal.

Thia affidavit, the tranalation la eworn to, executed and aworn to
at Duchenwald, Vainar, Cernany, the 34th day of April 1946, by Bayaoad
Glvena, Lt. Col., O.S. Aray.

®. 3AVLIX: Mr. Preeident, I object to thia affidavit. Thia la not
the original affidavit. It la a tranalation aa I aee here.

KH. HARDT: That la right, Tair Honor. It la a tranalation.

IS. GAVLII: It la tranelated fron Ger*»n Into Ingllah. In ey
Geraan docuaent bock there le a notation which I do not find In the
Ingllah. In the Geraan docuaent book lt Baya, the nota of the trana-
lator, "The above tranalation waa prepared fron an original written in
poor Ingllah. So reeponalbility taken for interpretation." The trana-
lation froa the original text which Korn gave — Horn gave tho affidavit
la Geraan and it waa tracalated into Ingllah, and according to the trana-


10700


: .-V? 31M’.

-M-VA lift •'


Court lo. 1

3 Jul 47_M-ll-2-£EM-Maloy (Ton Schon)


.n ^

iAH JW

pa? os

3AS .»

..xaiflf
aI»To&
—Me*: edatf

[ Juttiv IW»I

«■ I*i>-ta&tT
Id *f <ttmop
b ?f<# <7» n*>Ie
■VMPilut erW

ittem

! IttluSm o:
3a .? 1HT

d

HaH .c: ,

u ;/ a» a-.. «t
• •

10 lorGK uc Y
rsti oitfr
lUwwcfeOC /4
J leaner!©

wac .«

Xaai^lio nr
KaH .W

P?A0 ..n


ll .rinliwi
0(1*' ,T^7ai
*’•=-' t VIA !0<NT


later 1 • oota here the tfanalation n> to poor that this translator
refused to taka any responsibility* I oust a ay I wondered very such at
sot finding this notation on ycxir Xngllsfa doetieent hock, Mr. President.

I an tharafora of the opinion that this affidavit has no probative value
at all, and we can't tall vhat Hern Actually said.

MH. HARETi This docuaent Is a translation of the original German
docuaent dona by the Var Crlaes Group. They kept the original Geraan and
•oat us the translation. It is svorn to - the translation - and Is signed
with the oath of the translator when It was taken. As far as the note of
the translator In this department that Is siaply for defense counsel. If
wo didn't have that note, wc wouldn't have noticed that It wasn't the
original. It wasn't the original Geraan, Tour Honor; that Is the puroose
of It.

IF. OAMLIX: Mr. President, the affidavit doos not indicate that
this American officer ms competent to take an oath.

MR. HARUTi Ho Is a lieutenant colonel In the United States Aray,

Tour Honor, Raymond Givens, the Investigating officer that Investigated
Buchenwald and took these depositions from all the Inmates.

THI PRiSIEEJJTi I do not find the note reforrod to by counsel for
dofondant Hoven concerning the translation.

HR, HARDT: That note. Tour Honor, is put on in order to have the
document book complete. This Xtgllah translation was originally trans¬
lated back into Geraan for defense counsel's document book. The people
who translated that hack into German made a note because It wasn't up
to the standard they usually jwt out translations, and they vented It
understood that they were not responsible for this translation made in
1945. That note on the German translation they node was out there for
defense counsel.

IE. OAVLIX: Could that be repeated! I don't understand it. The
notation reads as follows, Mr. President. It le In my document book,


tage 50, the translator'e note: "The above translation wee prer>ared from
an original written In poor icglleh. Bo responsibility taken for inter-

10701


Court So. 1

3 Jul 4?-h-U-3-EHM-kaloy (Yon Schon)


pretations." Then the initials "G.G."

•n?.. HARDY: The initial* "G.G." rofer to George C. Grant on the
certificate of translation and were wit on in this deoftrtr.er.t downstairs.

TKL PRESIDES!: The Tribunal understand*. I an not sure the
defendant Hoven doe*. Would you please sake the explanation again,
counsel, for the defense?

•iH. HARDY: I as showing you thi* docuaent In English, which show*
in English the translator of the docuoent does not went to be responsible
for this English, that ho did not translate it and it was in poor'English
and that accounts for the translation bolxv: »■ it is.

I an sure Dr. Pelcknann has sonething to say in this sattor. I wish
he would cose and address the Court and v« could clarify the nattor
iaaodiately.

DR. GA"LIK: hr. President, Horn sade this etatosont in Oeroan and
what you havo before you is not the original. Tho original was in Gornan.
It was translated into English, and froa this statesont of this tranolntor
hero I sea that it is poor English and that this translator doos not want
to taJco tho responsibility for the interpretation, and thoro is not proof
that what you havo in English, Mr. President, is actually a truo transla-
tion of what Horn said. The prosecution should offer the original text,
but that don't giro us a translation which a translator horc says is poor.
You don't hove Horn's statesont. hr. President.

THE PHESimJT: Vas there any original toxt of this affidavit in
Gercan, counsel?

HR. HARDY: I haven't seen It. I understand that this translation
vbo sent to ae certified by the Var Crises Investigating Teas. They aont
u* a bunch of natcrial they secured when investigating the cacp. Thoy
keen tho original Gcrnan with their reports ani I ioagine it is on file
in Washington, B.C. It would bo ispocsible for no to find it. This is
e translation duly certified by an officer of the U.S. Arsy. It is not
for the translator here to be responsible for it. Tho lieutenant colonel
said he is responsible for it and hae sworn hin in for the translation.


10702


Court So. 1

3 Jul 47-K-ll-4-!»t-*aioy (Von Schon)


THL PHRSDRST: The document will be received in evidence. The
ratter referred to by couneel refers to the probative value to be given
to the docuaent, not to the document itself. Counsol is at liberty to
call attention to this docuaent in his brief on his argunent. The
Tribunal will consider then and give to the docuaent such trobative valuo
as it deess it's entitled to have.

It will bo received in ovidcnce Docuaent K0-4051 as Prosecution
i-xhibit 666.

*• GAM IK: Mr. President, I an asking this roaark bo out in tho
Inglish docuaent book, too.

MR. HARDT: It is not a part of tho Lnglish docuaent.

PSXSmrr: It is not a part of the lnglish docuaent. Tho
Tribunal has ruled. That lr tho end of this natter.


10703


3 July 47_ v -rjC_l2_!_C-r03B (~0a S&ocn)
Court I


M3. HARD!: Tour Honor, the next document is HC.3060 which
Is offered es Prosecution Exhibit 567. The last exhibit, the
affidavit of Horn, was Prosecution Exhibit 566. Tour Honor, if you
will turn to page 116 of your Document Book you will find a certifi¬
cate here from Councillor of the District Court wherein tho witneso
Hcnnecko was tried and sentenced to doath. A n d these photos, as
atatod in the affidavit, arc photos which wore found according to
the hichborg case among the possessions of Dr. Kennocko. They ero
in tho envelope, tho original photos, and they are narked "criminal
photos, C onccn tration C s -p Buchcnwald, 25 Hpvcmbor 1941*.

These photos have been inscribed on tho reverse sido obviously
by Dr. Mennecko. Dr. Mcnnockc adaitted. thio at his trial. On thono
photos, as well as the original onv. lopo are inscribed ''criminal
photos, Concentration Crop Buchonwald, 25 Hovoeber to 5 Decomber 1941.*
They wero produced in court in Dr. Konnocko'e case which is callod
tho 1-ichborg caoe. According to Kenrocko's statements during his
cacc tho persons shown arc inmates of tho concentration camp for
whom he wao making out registration forms. According to his state¬
ments in the same trial tho dato of the cnvolopo is tho dnto of ono
of his visits to 3 U chonwold for the purposo of aakir^ out thooo re¬
gistration forms. They pro signod and notarized in duo fora.

T 0 u win note that tho next page of this document glvoo tho
nanos of particular porsons and there arc tho translation of tho
Inscribed words on tho back of each picturo; "hordod immense amounts
of food and what charges arc against them."

Also in the Document 3060, you will note throughout that
race defilement, anti—German agitation, Dpstor Jews, etc., aro
aontioned. If your Honor should care to see theso photos I will
pass them up to you.

7E1 PHISHAiT: The Tribunal win examine the photographs.

MH. HASUT: Then there is a description of the photos and the
Councillor of the Court's affidavit attachod to them.


10704.


3 July 47-J'-J’jC-i?_2-C-To*a (Von Schocn)
Court I


?hl» lint that is attached to the Councillor's affidavit
consists of 0 pages end gives 63 name* with detail, and corresponds
to the 63 lncloacd photoa which according to doruaonte in the Lich-
horg ea.se were found among the possessions of Dr. Hennocko.

Thcoe details given in the affidavit and the enclosed trans¬
lation in your Eoncr's ^ocuscnt Book axe copied froo the inscriptions
on tho hack of the original photographs. T 0 u will netc the nationali¬
ties of sosi of the particular sub<octs, there is one an attornoy
froa Prague, and several others.

?hi FRLSIEL. ft Tho exhibit will be roccivod in evidence as
Prosecution Exhibit 567.

JVEGi SLBailCj Mr. Hardy, say I inquire whother or not thoeo
exhibits 3060 and 2*36 arc to be offered as Prosecution Rebuttal
Exhibits 567 and 560.

MS. "IRDTt I a b going to give 2436 nuabor 568 as tho docu¬
ment which runs with the ot v cr document actually. I as turning to
that now, your Honor. This is docuaent Ho. 2*36 which is fou"d on
pago 130 of your Honor's Document Book. I will aark it ns inhibit 568.
^his is an extract froa the H c nnockc trial and is duly cortiflod by
tho Dpndgcrichtorat and the contonts aro obvious - I won't bother to
road thus, they verify the photographs which arc introduced In tho
other document.

How, if your Honors pltaso, 1 have in the last page of this
docuaent book a loose docuaent. As you have that? Tour Honor, this
won't bo offered as Prosecution i-xhibit. "his is really an addition
to Boiglobocck Lxhibit 34 which arc the charts. *c find on tho b»ck
of chart 1-29 soae. words writ ton in C-oraan language in the hand¬
writing of tho defendant which I think are worthy of translation to
be colled to the attention of the Tribunal. On the back of chart
*o. A_29 there arc German words theroin. Tou will notice on line 19
there has been ar erasure and this erasure, beginring on line 19 one
inch froa the left sargir. and extends three and three charters inches.


10705


3 July 4?-*-riC.i2_3_C-ro3B fron Scfaon)
Coart I


In line 2* there vpb alsc an erasure beginning l£" froa the loft
aargin and extending 3". And it appears.

■^HF PHESII2AT: I note counsel for the defendant Bciglbocck
i* not present.

KR. HARDY: Coanael for the defendant Belglboeck ia boing
represented by Dr. Hoffmann vho veo appointed deputy for Stcinbr.uor
in the absoncc of Stcinbaucr.

T» PHI SI BUT: Very woll, ve will note that Hoffman represents

3oiglbocck.

MB. HAHDI: Lino 19 which was erased vea sommulcnco. Tho
crpsuro in line 34 cannot bo read. It is lmposolbli to diagnoso
vhrt it io. I want to introduco this translation of this particular
graph for the Tribunal which is contained here and marked translation
of Bciglbocck Document inhibit 24, transcription of the long hand
notes on the back of chart A 29 and tho symptoms of tho subject nro
notod thoroln and in the places wherr the oraauros were dono wo have
blank linos.

7-1 PFISn": I notice your document which you refer to is
34, not 2 ‘.

M?., RAP.DY: 34 is what I said, your Honor.

THJ FRlSlIfcaT: I understood you 24.

MH. HARDY: Your Honor, also attached to this as part of
Exhibit 7 /, is restoration of the original stenographic notco on
tho bade of page C_33. You win recall Prosocution presented you
with a translation of the notes, and this is the restoration given
by Bciglbocck when on cross examination. *or the convenience of tho
Tribunal wo now offer restoration of t*-e stenographic notes ac they
appoard' after alteration.

IB. KCXi’tAio: (Counsel for tho defendant Bciglbocck): Hr.
President, I should merely like to reserve tho right to ecc tho
original of A 29 so that tho defendant Belglboeck can coamcnt in
his closing triof on this affidavit in connection with what Proso-


10706


3 July 47-K_FjC*i2_4-GrO«8 (Ton Schon)

Court I

cation hr 3 ncv mid,

XH. EAHDY: I explained to defense counsel that he could havo
n representative of the Secretary C-encml's office appear with him in
an interrogation and the docnacr.t could he presented to Beiglboock at
any tiae he requests the use of then.

7E P2ISHE.T: That procedure will ho followed.

MB. HARTT Yi If your Honor pleases, I hare ono.

TEI FHlSIDioT: Counsol, it soess that this document should
he identified in sox* way. *hilc it nay not he properly an exhibit
I think bettor way is to nark it as an exhibit and then it will
haro a status as a oupplta^nt —

HP., HA?IK: I can very conricntly nark it Prosecution Exhibit

569.

TS. FRiSIDL/T: That is hotter way. Then it is fornally part
of the record and can ho referred to.

HB. HARDY: Your Honor, I hart ono last document that I will
dlotrihuto at this tins. Sorry, your Honor, X will have to ask you
to recess until 1:30. The Geroan copies seen to to oonfused. Thoy
havo loft a copy of the Oorsan out which I shall refer to. I will
havo to check on it.

,r HX PR13IDEKT: V cry woll, the Tribunal win now ho in
recess until 1:30 o'clock.


10707


3 July4?-rt-»X-l-l-?rlneau*-(Ranlor)
COURT I


AFTERNOON SESSION.

(Thu ho.orIng ruoonvonod at 10 hou re, * July 1947)

THE H^RSHAL: Thu Tribunal Is again In sosslon.
kR. H«RD!T: Hay It please the Tribunal, In connection
with thla next documont I have to offer, I had thu English
— or thu Curaan translation — into the Corman —

THE PRESIDENT: There Is soao confusion on the oar

phonos, tfolt until —. The oonfuslon has subsided. Counsel
may prooood.


Ha. RrtRDY: If your Honore please, in connootlon with
Chl. nuxt doouaunt, I havu had it trmslatud. Tho translat¬
ion Is buforu you of thu Cure m original documunt. I wish
to lntroduou thu photostntlo ooplos I hnvu huro. Thu stun-
011 wis out and, apparuntly, onu pago of thu stunoll has
buon rumovud from thu Ourmsny ooplos whloh Is thu pagu I
vish to lntroduou so X hnvu huro thruu or four photostatlo
ooplos of thu original uxblblt In ordur. Oofundant Hovun
has onu photo.t.tlo oopy. Hu may havu anothur If hu -Ishos.
Thun I havu two photostntlo ooplus of thu Carman whloh oan
bo u.ud by thu oourt lnturprutors. Howuvur, I do not Intund
to road thu dooumunt In Its untiruty. if thoy wish to usu
thorn thoy may If thoy so wish and roturn thorn to thu
Suorut.ary Ounural for tho Tribunal's of floe ooplos.


Tnls document now, your Honors, 1s NO-2146 which I offer
as Prosecution Exhibit No. 570. I an only referring to that
portion of .the document which Is datod 20 August 1942 which

the deaths of political Russians. This
on It whloh la tho Initial "H"
to be thd Initial of the defen-
refers to the reports of deaths
states that It nay affect the


10708


» July 47-H- ,V<-1*- 2-?rl me au- (Rami or)

COURT I

saving of paper if the death reports on tha political Russians
wore dropped, and I merely Introduce this to show tho pos¬
ition of the defendant Hoven In connection with the death
reports Issued from the camp and the fact ho didn't consider
It laportant enough to record theso oases of death so that
they alght save paper.

THJ PRJ3IDE.J7: What page of the documents?

••iR. H*RDY: You will find it on page 1 of the English,
your Jtonors, at tho top and It will be on page 2 of tho
photostat.

THE PRESIDENT: .*11 right.

HR. HRRDY: Your Honors, alaeographod ooples of this
•ire being aide In German and will bo distributed later.

That closes the presentation unless—

DR. w^PfLIK: Mr. President, I have an objeotlon to make
to this document. This doouaent does not constitute Just one
doouaent. ihere is a nuobor of documents whloh do not at all
belong to one another. I nan to draw the attention of tho
Tribunal to page 1 and pago .2. Thore you find tho date of
the year oaittod.

nR. H.wRDY: You may note, your Honor, that I am only
Introducing tho one letter that is a part of this ontlro
document. Counsel may strlice out the rest of the dooumont If
he wishes. I am only Introducing the lottor of 20 viugust 1942
concerning doaths of political Russians whloh boars Hovon'B
Initials. Tho rest may be disregarded or he may use them as
p-trt of the uocuaont arguing It is his brief If he wishes.

I am only Introducing one portion of tho document.

THE PRESIDENT: The date of that letter, you say, Is
.uigust 1942? The date Is omitted froa tho English copy.


10709


3 July 47-^ J :-l--'^-?rlmuau--(Remlor)

COURT I

MR. HrtROT: ae date of tho letter on the Gorman Is 1942,
your Honors.

THE PRESIDENT: Did I understand you to 3ay that this
lottor boars somewhere the Initial "H"?

MR. HARDY: Pardon, 3lr?

THJ PRESIDENT: Did I understand that this lottor bears
somewhere the Initial "H■?

AR. H^RDY; Yes, the original document — I will pass
It up to your Honors If you wish to aoe It. That will bo
the second document on th :t page, the oooond pago, your
Honors, right in front of you now. That document there you
vro looking at now has the initial "H".

DR. G.JfLIX: hr. Prosldont —

THE PRESIDE*!: No signature or Initial Is shown on tho
English transorlpt.

HR. HARDY: Tho English transcript says " signature
illegible." Unless tho translator was familiar with tho
case, they wouldn't know what initial "H" moans, your Honors,
and I am calling that to your attention.

DR. G.^/LIK: I also ask to draw the attention of tho
Tribunal to tho fact that, according to proof, there was
also a camp physician with tho none of Hovor, H 0 V S R .

MR. HiRDY: That la in January 194"*. The prosecution
doesn't dispute any of thoso things. Ho may call that to
tho attention of the Tribunal in his brief. Tho document
la not objectionable. It Is a Gorman document and bears tho
Initial of Hoven and It is material In this case. The only
oojootlon ho nay have — ho did not got it in 24. hours time
and I will ask him to givo us a roprlovo Tor not giving the
24 hours notico.

THR PRESIDENT: The 24 hours' notice has boon quite

107J0


* July 47-<r-AX-1 ^ 4-?rl me au-( Hornier)

COURT I

gonex*filly disregarded by the Tribunal for both the defense
and oroseoutlon in the last two or throe days.

DR. G.*WLi:<: I am not objecting to that, Mr. President.

:ir. President, if the prosecutor only submits a seoond page,

I will submit the first page of this document as Hovon Mo. 21

HR. HARDY: I submit, your Honors, that I havo introduced
tho entire doouaent but I only want to call your attention to
page 1 of tho doouaent which has Hovon's initial. He may c^l
your attention to thd entire document.

TH3 ?R£3ID2<1T: T^o entire document is admitted In evidence,
counsel, as Prosecution Exhibit No. 570. Counsel for defense

may use the document in anyway ho doslros. It is all in

•

evldonoo.

DR. C.u.'LIX: Hr. President, It was an orror on my part
but-do let me draw tho attention of the Tribunal to page s of
the £ngllsh text. There you find an onolosure “November 1944“
whloh not at all belongs to It booause in Novombor 1944 tho
dofondant Hovon was already in prison. How oould there bo
and enclosure datod Novombor 1944 to a lottor dated 1942. Tho
othor enclosures coao from Department D III at Oranlenburg.

They do not belong to this document olthor. Those are Just
a numbor of documents which have boon attached to a lottor
of Hovon ©mpletoly at random.

HR. H.kRDY: .iny eootlons he feels not pertinent he may
remove. Prosooutlon has no objection. 1& are morely rolaying
this lottor with Hovon's initials.

TH2 PRESIDENT: .Jiy portions of the document which are
Immaterial will be disregarded by the Tribunal.


10711


3 July-A-FL-lA-l-!»cchan (Int. Raalcr)
Court No. I, Case I


t


THa PRESIDE:?: Yesterday, couna;! for defendant Sievors offered
an affidavit of tho defendant Sievers. The Tribunal sustained an objec¬
tion on the art of the Prosecution to the admission of that affidavit.
If counsel for dofendant Sievers wishes to reoffer the document in evi¬
dence, the Tribunal wiU rescind its ruling ar.d adoit the affidavit in
evidence and give it en exhibit niefcor in accordance with the ooouenco
of the affidavits a\ the port of the defendant Sievers.

DR. './iXSGLKBSR: (Counsel for defendant Sievers) Mr. President, at
the moment I do not have Ux document before it. With the o emission of
tto President, I shall get it lasediatoly end offer it to tho Tribunal.

TCo PRS3IJ JiT: The Tribunal admits the document in evidence. Tho
uxhibit number nay be ad&.d to the document and tho Prosecution will bo
.riven a copy -,1th tho exhibit number. The document any be filed with tto
Secretary general as admitted in ovid-nco with Sievora' appropriate ex¬
hibit number.

DR. oI£0$ftBSt: Thank you. Your Honor.

MR. HARDY: It is my understanding, Your Honor, the Tribunnl will
adjourn until ' ednesdoy to hoar the logoi arguments on the conspiracy
charge.

THE PRESIDENT: Tb, session on tfddncsday will be a combine*’ session
of all Tribunals. It Is rot a part of the trial of Tribunal No. 1. The
Tribunal will convene ift tack of this court room on next 'ednesdoy, July
9th to hear arguments on the legal grounds presented with demurrers to
the charge of conspiracy ns on net contained in tho indictment. Tho
session will convene ..ednesdoy morning at 9:30 o'clock.

1ft. HARDY: ’..ill ell the defendants be pr-sont at that time?

THE PHESIDii'T: Tho defendants will not be present. It is merely a
legal arguaont and th- d-fer.aunts in oil the trials could not bo present
in court as it is not n matter of submitting evidence, but arguing o
pure question of law. The presence of the defendants in tho court is un¬
necessary, according to the ruling of tit Tribunal.


10712


3 July-A-FL-lA-2-l!cehan- (Int. Rosier)

Court No. I, Ccee I

i®. HARDY: Then the Tribunal will again convene on tho Uth of July?

THE FBESDEKT: The Tribunal will then convent* at 9:30 o'clock on
tr* aorning o: July li,th to hear the arguments of counsol in accordanco
with the prcceduro to bo followed with arguments for tho prosecution and
defense. hen counsel fer the defendants fr.vo determined how long thoy
will take for tnoir arguments, if thoy will take tho matter up with mo
sometime next wee.'; and I will be glad to hear from them.

ER. SA'-TeS: !Ir. President, before tho Tribunal adjourns, I should
like to make an application to you on behalf of defense counsel. Tomorrow
we shall not be able to &lk to our clients because it is a Holiday, Sa¬
turday tho prison downstairs is closed for defense counsel and that also
applies to Sunday. A number ol the defense counsel have expressod tho
wish that before the conclusion in submitting of their closing briofs
and pleas, they would once sore like to discuss a nunfcor of essential
points wit:-, their clients.

Ve would be grateful to you, Hr. President, if you could soo to it
that defense counsel could got into contact with tho defendants of thi3
trial - thio trial only - either tetter ran .-.orning or Saturday morning
in order to enable us to conclude our closing briofs and final pleas and
in order that thorc be no <tolay.

THE PRESIDE! Ts I shall tnko that matter up with the prison -.uthori-
ties and arrange for sooe tiae, uitber tomorrew or Saturday, any reasona¬
ble time that counsel desires, for consultation with their clients as
requested.

Eft. SAUTJT.: Perhaps on Saturday corning or Saturday afternoon. TJiere
will probably be soo. difficulties tomorrow.

THE PRESIDE.T: If Dr. Sauter and mother counsel will como to my
office when the Tribunal is in recess, we shall discuss the matter and
I shall take It up *.;ith the prison authorities with tho request of tho
Tribunal that they grant the request to permit such consultations as de¬
sired.


10713


3 Julp-A-PL-IA-3-lfcchcn (Int. R-nlcr)

Cotirt So. I, Ccsc I

*• SA^TaRt Thank yai very ouch, Ur. President.

Lit. ?zu::c'jja (Council for defendant Schaofor.) I should one moro
lik^ to tuziad you of an application, which I already put to you sorctimo
ago. I h-.Vv t,ie courage, as well os the aedesty, to declare the following
quite openly. It is rvither the inefficiency of tho Prosecution nor the
oldU of.the defense counsel, but tho setter of a Just matter, which vdth
overwhelming lo;,ic dcornds that thL dufondant Schaefor be disaissed nwi
he be rol,p&_d froa prison.

I have fully understood the precaution tr-ken by the Tribunal in not
complying tilth ay application in that regard in ay opening statement. It
was still before the admission of evidence on behalf of tho de/onse. Even
they v-ry submission of evidence or. tho part of tho Prosecution sham
that the defendant cannot be guilty but there was still then the possibi¬
lity that in the submission of evidence on behalf of the dofonso ior the
cfcixr cc-doferdrntc, he could be incriminated. Perhaps even his uxnainction
or cross-ex-mination could incriminate him, oven ttat could happen. I also
urderstand why thu High Tribunal has postponed ay renewed application at
the ond of Schaefer'a examination until tho erd of tho entiro submission
of evidence. Tiv.orotically, thiro could still have appeared incriminating
evidence against tho defendant Schaofor. Ho witnessed this until tho very
ond. The gypsies appeared with considerable surprises of various nature,
but the Longer the submission of uvidenco of th, sea-water case, after
Schaefer's cxn.Anation Lasted, tho more it became obvious that Schaofor
had nothing at -.11 to do with it. His nr as vv.s not even mentioned, but
with one single exception. Tho expert. Professor Ivy, mentioned his nemo
ropeatedly, rfcicys lauding hia and giving him credit. Ho or^hasized par¬
ticularly Schaefer's rejection of the 3orka a;thod, his rojoction of tho
cxperinont3 with that nethod ard his reasons for it had boon tho only pro¬
per thing to do.

•it* fool tho only correct thing and even without closing briefs or
without pleas, it has become clear already today, Schaefer is not guilty.


1071A


3 July-A-FL-H-A-lfcciian (Int. Raoler)

Court Ho; I, Ceou I •

I even maintain that no reasonable suspicion of teving ccsoittod a crime
h".a ever existed. For «eny months ho fans beep robbed of his personal
liberty, which he thought he hod regained when the American troops oc¬
cupied Germany.

I csk tho High Tribunal to sot an example with this case of Schaofcr
by recognising tho unconditional liberty of every individual, e-vory Gor¬
man, especially after these periods of war, which have confused theso
concepts and which confusion still lasts until today.

Tho regulations of procedure of tho Military Tribunal gives you.

Your Honors, tho fom-.l authorisation to comply with ay application. Even
if you cannot givo a final decision now, please decide upon tho combin¬
ation of his i-nrisonant, We are still seven weeks away frora the handing
down of tho Jix5*ncnt. During this timo Schaefer will still be robbed of
his most valuable freedom. It is a demand mado by Justice that you ducido
the following .natter and render Justice. Thero is no suspicion at this
tim., there is no danger that the defendant will try to oscapo, thero
Is no danger tbr t he will in any way camouflage his nets or destroy
evidential material or tbr.t t* will try to influence witnesses, there¬
fore, Seine for should be released free prison.

THE PRESIDE IT: The Tribunal has hoard the application of counsel
fer Dofundent Schaefer, which is a motion for the ditmissal of the chse,
at thw conclusion of -11 the uvid*xice, this motion as those previously
cade on behalf of tho Defendant Schaefer, will be taken under advisement
by the Tribunal.

Is there my further matter to be called to the attention of tho
Tribunal?

The Tribunal then declares the evidence closed and tfx Tribunal
>•111 be in r-c-.ss until Ifonday morning, July Uth at 9:30 o'clock -:hon
the arguments of counsel for the prosecution “rd the defense nill bo


heard


10715


3 July-A-FL-14-5-iioGhan (Int. Radar)

Court Ko. I, Case I

'ARSHAL: The Tribunal will bo in recess until Uond-.y norning.
July 14th at 9:30 o'clock.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 14 July, at 0930 hours.)


10716


*


ITtl

9 July-M-FI^2-l-Gross (Ini. Frank)

MILITARY raBLr ALS I, II, III, IV & V
JOINT SZSSIOli


Official transcript of a joint
session of Military Tribunals
I, II, III, IV & V, sitting on
banc at .«umberg, Germany, on
9 July 194.7, at 0930, Justice
Beals, oresiding.


THE :£ARSHAL: The Judges of ,'tilitary Tribunals I, II, III, IV & V.

Military Tribunals I, II, III, IV * V sitting cn banc are hot in
session.

God save tho United States of America and these Honorable Tribunals.

There nill be order in the court.

0

JUXS XALS: This joint session of Military Tribunals I, II, III,

IV & V sitting er. banc has been called to hear arguments on the part of
the defendants non on trial before Tribunals I, II 6 III in support of
nation made by counsel of such deiendants directed against the charge in
the indictment proper, to which the defoi/lants referred that are on trial,
charging the defondants with conspiracy, committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity is separate substantive crimes and arguments of tho Pro¬
secution on the sar-e suojeot matter.

This on banc session of the Tribunals at ova named was not called
primarily under Jlilitary Tribunal II as aceudod by Military Goverrvmnt
Ordnance 11, amendod by Military Government Ordnance 7, ammendnent bear¬
ing the date 7 February 194.7, there being at this timo no inconsistent
by any Tribunals.

This session has been called to afford counsel for Prosecution and


defendants new on trial before the Tribunals above referred to have on
opportunity to -resent to the Judges of the Tribunal atovo enumerated


the question above roferred to and to afford tho Judges
opportunity to near the arguments of counsel

is allowed one hour to present his ar^n-nents.
argument ar.d the counsel chosen to represent

I 01 I u ti)


V f—


9 July-lf-FL-2-2-Grcss (Int. Frank)

1CLITAEY IRIIEHALS I, II, III, IV & V
JOINT SS3SIOK

the defendants say divide his ti-e, that one hour, between the opening
and dosing as he sees fit.

The Tribunals will new hear counsel for the defense.

CARL HAUSd., on behaLf of tho dofanse,

Uay I presently apologize. I am afraid during the night I affcctod
a swelling og ay cheek but it doesn't impede ay speech. It just looks
ugly. Kowevor, thoro is an old writing ir. the Bible which says, "On tic
part of tho body whore you have sinned worst you ero being punished." And
thero you arc.

In Cass I, HI.

THE PRESIDIM: Ccuns- 1, will you please, t or the record, st.ito your
name as ropresorting defense counsel in this arguaont.

CARL KAIKS2L: Attorney Carl Haonsd, speaking on behalf of tho do-
fonse counsols.

In Cass I, II 4 IV, oil tho defendants are charged with a jointly
plaming tho ccruaisaior. of war crises and crinos against humanity.

In its opening speech in Case III cn 5 Karch 19A7, page 3 of the
opening statc.X)nt, the Prosecution brought out that part of its evi¬
dence referred to 'recoding events which ned occurred in l‘;39, beforo
the outbreak of the war. It thus wishes to stow, it said, that tho de¬
fendants ware conspirators in a plot to ccrjnit criuos which wero carried
out after tl* outbreak of the war. There it read; and I quote: "But nono
of these acts '0 being brought under indictment as an independent crLne."

The proocsal was made to declare tho indictment insufficient for
legal reawr.s, in so far as it charges tho defendants with the joint plan,
with the conspiracy, for commission of -.<ar crim-s and crises against iiu-
xar.ity, alone and as special points of tho indicts>:nt, outside of other
circumstances of tho case resulting froc Law Bo. 10 and international as
well as German criminal law.

A plenary session of Military Tribunals I, 31, III, IV 4 V was or-

10 1IL, ( 2 )


9 July-M-FL~2-5~Gross (Int. Frank)


MILITARY TS3BWUSS I, II, III, IV & V
JOINT SESSION'


durcd, before the decision could be cached about the proposal in Caso III.

View point of the Defense

I. The Law to be applied.

1. Control Council Law Ko. 10.

In Case III, the Prosecution declared (pag- 84 of tho German re¬
cords): "TImsc proceedings arc based on Control Council Law Ho. 10.”

According to its preamble, Law Ko. 10 was decreed, In order to
"carry into effect the regulations of tho L’oscow Declaration of 30 Oc¬
tober 1943 and of the London Agreesw.nt of 8 August 1945, as wo 11 as the
basic law issued in connection therewith:

a. and "in jrdor to create a uniform legal basis in Germany which
will make possible the criminal prosecution of war criminals, aid otlx»r
offenders of this nature, exempting those who are being judged by tho
International Military Tribunal.”

The Hoscyn Declaration of 30 October 1943 nontioned in the preamble
of tho Low, states, in tho passage touching upon our question:

"Thoso German officers and men and noob^rs of tho Nazi party who
havo boon responsible for, or have taken a consenting oart in the above
atrocities, assacros and executions, will be sent back to tho countries
in which their abcrinablo deeds were done in order that they may bo
Judged and punished according to tho laws of these liberated countries
and of tho froo governments which will bo creatod therein, without ;>ro-
Judice of the case of tho oa>cr criminals, whose offenses havo no parti¬
cular geographical localization and who will be- punished by tho joint
decision of tho Gcvomur.ts of the Allies."

At tho Yalta Conference which took place or. 11 February 1945,

Messrs. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin declared their "unbending
will-punish all war crises in a Just and speedy manner.”

This resolution was confirmed by Stalin, Truman and Attlee at tho

1071 fel 3 )


9 J’iI>-!t-n^2-i-Cross (li.- • Fr^nk)


WLITAf.Y iSIBCSAIS I, II, III, IV & V
JOHT SSSSIDS*

?otstJ-*a Confor-nce of 2 August 1945, On 7 Juno 1945 Judge Robert H. Jack¬
al, appointed Chief cf Counsel for thu prosecution of liar crlnes eub-
al.t-4 to the Allied Govern*; nts a plan for the practical cxocution of
the Y-lta r.solution, on the basis of which the London declaration of
8 August !?' f has signed. This Lender. Agror.t and the "Cherter of
tr*. International Military Tribuna l«attacb.d to it is thu basic law,
which, according -o the prwaafcl. of the Lew of tfao Control Council,

Ko. 10 is to bo giv-n effect together with that In*.

The London A^vc^nt of 8 August 1945 declares that th- four powers
who :£d sieved it, "r.ct in the interest of nil thj United Nations."

It contains the invitation for Joining tho oact which was follo.ed b-
19 nations. It vac, therefore, the intontion of thu four groat victorious m
nations, to act for the calamity of t:e notions in its ontir , i. u .
to take an "Ua versa! International La*" as a basic.

One of t'.x. .xn who, before the announcement of th. London Agrco-iont
had negotiated there and had an influence on its femulation, is tho
Ruasiar. .’rotussor A. Trainir., aoabor of the *'occcm Institute of Legal
Science. In 1944, ho wrote a book which was pubUshod, under tho titlo
"The Criminal Responsibility of the Hitler!toe", at tho Logr.l PubUshing
House NXU, USSR, ?.’oscow 1944. In his stated rrts about tbo ICT aid In-
turnettonol Ire* ir. volusv. 41 of the African Journal cf International
Ltw, Quincy ri.ht, on page 41, <fcscribos the influ-nco which the Russian
legal scholar ftvinln has had on th- terminology of the Charter. Tho
wording of Article II, figure 2 in which a high political, civil or mi¬
litary ooslcion or one in financial, industrial or economical life is
mentioned as a particular fora of participation, obviously goes back to
Trainin, bbcrufto, in his book, too, he saint ins the opinion tint not only
the .'.-cbero oi the Arced Foro-s and cf the gov-maent, but also tho ca-
pitr.lists arxi Industrie lists arc burdened with a special responsibility.

Train!n, tor:over, enphasiz-s -xprtssly, "The main probl-a in to- field

lalidh) '

Mi


9 July-lf-FL-2-5-Gross (Lit. Frank)

1CLITARY 5 Z 3 TALS I, XX, Ill, IV & V
JDI!T SSSSlii:


of punishability ia the problem of suilt. Her. is no criminal respon¬
sibility vi.hout .juilt,"

This sor.tonco conforms with the reason for the ILT Jsdg-.ont in Cbnp-
tc 9: "It 5 s ono of the most important principles that guilt, it-xtor
ponrl law, nuat bo personal guilt and that iass punishment is to bo
avoided."

I do not mart to examine ir. detail to what extent Trainin's thoughts
ore crystallised out ir. La* 10. For the subject at tend it is aorcly
important that in Trainix.'s works tbo Anglo-Saron conspiracy is not to
be found as an independent crime and that ho did not incorporate it
into tbo text of the charter.


1 oWs)


9 J 11 I 7 -tf-FLr-2-5-C*ro3 s (Int. Frank)


MILITARY IEI*i r AIo I, II, HI, IV i V

JOI’T ssssioj:


of punishability la the problem of guilt. T. or. is no criminal respon¬
sibility without guilt."

This sentence confoma with the reason for the U£T Judgment in Chnp-
te- 9: "It if ace of the seat ioportcr.t principles that guilt, under
ponel law, nuat bo personal guilt and that xass punishment i 3 to bo
avoided."

I do not aoct to exrjeir.e ir. detail to what extent Trainin '8 thoughts
ore crystallized out in La* 10. For the subject at tend it ia mo roly
important that in Trainin's works the Anglo-Saxon conspiracy la not to
be found aa rr. ir.dorv. r.djnt crime end that ho did not incorporate it
into the to;:* of tho charter.


/oWs;


Joint Session


9 July 47 - U-3-1-AEG-Lieehan (Frank)

b) The text of the conspiracy provisions of Law Mo. 10i

War crimes ir. the narrower sense of the word and crises against hu¬
manity, which alone arc the subject of our discussion, since no indict¬
ment was made brought against the crime against peace (planning, prepar¬
ation, initiation or waging a war of agression), are dofinod in Article
II under figure 1. 2ven a superficial cooparison of this regulation with
article 6 of the character shows that the text of Law 10 bases on that of
the statute, but that its specifications were enlarged.

For our subject whether conspiracy as coaaon planning for the accom¬
plishment of war crimes and criaos against humanity is punishable, the
above-mentioned differences of the texts are of no importance, for which
reason no cooparison is necessary. Such a comparison of texts is tiring
if brought forth in such a presentation; it is easier to make it right
away, on hand of the texts presented. It is, horror, important for our
problem that neither the charter nor Law 10 in the figuros 1-b and c
mentioned spook of ccooor. planning as s punishsble separato crimo, whorc-
as bsth laws have in cocoon that in thoir respective figure a, dealing
with tho c rimes against poaco, participation in a common plan or conspir¬
acy Tor the accomplishment of one of the listed crimes against tho peace,

is expressly declared punishable.

With regard to both laws, we can state that by especially emphasiz¬
ing coceon planning or ccoaon conspiracy the wording of figuro (a) on
tho one page, is clearly set off in the text from the figures (b) and

(c).

Correspondingly the I.K.T. took the viewpoint not to follow the
indictment, ~-hich included war crimes and crimes against humanity, into
the facts of-conspiracy, but wanted to consider as conspiracy only the
ccroon plan for the preparation of wars of aggression. In this tho 1-U.T.
had to deal with a regulation taken over into law 10 and following the
above mentioned figure (c) of the charter. According to this regulation
leaders, organizers, etc., who have taken part in the conception or ac-

\onUf,)


Joint Session


9 July 47 .SG-Leehan (Prank)

complisbcent of cocoon planning, should be responsible for all actions
committed by any persona in the process of carrying out such a plan.

The I.M.T. is of the opinion that tnis regulation refers only to the
according to figure (a), punishable conspiracy for wars of aggression
and that it defines this conspiracy in detail. In the view of the
I.U.T. these words do not add any new special crime of conspiracy refer¬
ring to war crimes or crises against huaanity to the crimes already list¬
ed.

c) Forms of complicity in Law 10.

Whereas in Article II the criminal facts are defined in subpara¬
graph 1 , the forms of complicity, which are possible in these crimes,
are stated in subparagraph 2; in subparagraph 3 possible punishments aro
fixod.

In subparagraph 2, the following classos of persons aro disting¬
uished:

a) the lain Culprit,

b) the Accomplice, instigator or abettor,

c) he, who "took a consenting part",

d) "or was connected with plans or enterprises involving its co:>-

nission",

e) and f) are of no interest in this connoctior.

Now the attempt has been made, to use the above quoted wording of
subparagraph d), to reinterpret in a roundabout way conspiracy as a
special criminal action, into the facts of crimes, as defined in subpara¬
graph 1; but conspiracy had quite obviously deliberately been omitted tnere
in subparagraphs (b) and (c).

Against this the following reasons must be stated:

(a) The systo-. of Law No. 10 makes it clear beyond doubt, that
the facts of crimes are exhaustively defined in subparagraph
1 , whereas in subparagraph 2 only the forms of complicity in
these crimes are defined.

(b) In Article II, subparagraph (1-a) the English text defines par-

/ oTfcfc)


JOIIJT SESSION

> July ;.7-:i-3-3-*KWSsebsa (Frank) (DJG)


ticipation in a coc o on plan or conspiracy with the words:
"participation in a coaacn plan or conspiracy". This, then, is
the leial definition of conspiracy in tho legislative work cf
the Charter and also of Lew Ho. 10. But in the seso subpara¬
graph ( 1 -e) we have a few lines before:

"planning, preparation, initiation or waging a war".

In subparsgraph (2-d) no mention is aado of “participation
in a coxwn plan", but a coexist ely different terminology is
used, when it is seid: "was connected 1 with plans or enter¬
prises". Here, then, only planning as such is aentionod, and
as a feru cf participation in the proceeding subparagraphs
(a) to (c). Furtr.er.xrc, it aight appear to be of import¬
ance, th t the French translation cf /.rt. 6 of the Chartor,
has rendered "conspiracy" in subparagraph U toy »cc;>plot
pour hat cc.aneturo 1 * unquel ccnque dcs crimes...", where* s
Ifw He. 10, ixt. U, 2-d has been rsndorcd hy a "participo
a des plena on a dea enterprises".

(c) No mettor, whether the interpretation of the I.JI.T. oust.bo
prejucicirl for tho interpretation oi Law He. 10, Art. 2,
which in its wording, as far as it io essential fer our
question, closely folic s the Charter, this interpretation
aay iu eny case servo ns o nodel.

2 .

The .od sting Law besido Law No. 10,
especially Order No. 7.

In the Anglo Soxcn sphere of law, Cc;acn Lew exists b«3ide the
statute L:w. The question, which hes not yot been investigated, presents
Itsvlf, whether on the one hand Control Council Law Nc. 10, togoth-r :rith
the Charter end the Statements cf the Alliod Statesmen decs net render
Conspiracy punishable regarding war crimws and crimes - grins t huarnity,
but whether an American Jfilitary Tribunal aigfat on the othj- hand recog¬
nise this fact es a basis for a d^aar.d fer punishment in virtue of

I cDib(e)


Joint Session.

9 July 4? -M-3-4-AX-Meehan (Frank)


Aaerican Coanoa Lav.

American Coaeon Law is to bo adainistcr«d without hesitation also
in Geraany by Aaerican Military Tribunals, as far as the defendants are
aeobers of the Aaerican Occupation Force. But for the defendants in these
trials Aaerican Cccoon Law docs r.ot apply.

a) After the surrender of the Geraan Armed Forces in May, 1945,
the four victor nations, to be quite clear: the four big victor nations,
by no neans ono only, took over, "the 3uprocc authority with respect to
Germany."

(Stateacnt of the Department of State, the Axis in Dofoat, page 63.)

According to Explanations in the Aaerican Journal of International
Law, voluce 41, page 56, this declaration io distinct free the concept
Annexation, as defined in International La.;, in two points: First of all
the fact, that several states took over Authority in Germany, and further¬
more by the fact, that an annexation of Gornany was expressly rejected.

The Kumbcrg Judgment says in its Chapter "the Law of tho Statute",
in tho second paragraph:

"The Statuto was drafted inoxercise of the supreme legislative
powers of thoao states, to whoa the Gur.nan Reich had surrendered uncon¬
ditionally, and tho undoubted right of those countries to issue laws for
the occupied territories, has been recognised by the civilised world.

The Statute is r.o arbitrary exercise of power on the victor nations, but
is in the opinion »f the Tribunal, as ..-ill still bo shown, the expression
of International Law existing at the time of the creation of tho Statute;
insofar the Statute itself is a contribution to International Law".

It is not possible sioply to argue: The Nurnberg Military Tribunals
are American Military Tribunals; war is still on, tho Aaerican Aroy is
lr. occupiod territory, therefore, the American Lilitarv Tribunal has to
administer Aaerican Law, including Cocoon La:;." For us, however, in
this place, "special circuoatancos prevail" because the Tribunals, who
adninistcr the law, ar_ special Tribunals, the character of which I shall


Joint Session

5 Julr -? -4£-3-5-A£G-k'cchan (Freak)


still amply discuss under C.

..s I intend to introduce no core of the extraordinarily difficult
questions of Law, which will still have to be decided in the trials, I
do not want to expr.ss an opinion, whether we are still at war, or
"hither *u are already living in a sort of peace, or in a warlike peace
or a pacified war of a special kind. The Honburg Professor of Inter¬
national Low, Dr. Rudolf Laun, has characterised tn» situation with the
formula: "In Germny at the cement we have the Law of war without war¬
fare". (The Hague Rules for Load Warfare, Hamburg 1946, page 59).

In the opinion of the American Hans Kels-n (quoted in American
Journal of International Law, Volume 41, page 51) the Suprmue Authority
in Gorsr.ny was taken over by the victor nations, but their exercise of
powers .... io porrlooi'.'lw under international law, limited only by the
rules of the law of nations".

To sake it easier to follow the further course of xay arguments, I
at once want to -ephnsize horo, that the only deduction I want to make
from these quotations, is, that tho former occuping powers are bound by
the rul.e of the Law of nations in the exorcise of their power. I do
not want to discuss here, what rulea of International Law these are.

Jtor, do I want to go into th- legal question for or against sa.ie of my
colleagues, ".Author we still cr. in a State of War or vhethor there is no
nor. war ir. Germany, which m-ans, that there nr- no nor- belligerent pow-
ors either, and that above all Germany is no more a belligerent pewfor,
or whether there is still war in the absence of a formal conclusion of
peace. To ^npnaslte this -x,;russly once mo re . 1 do not ent-r into tho
question, whether a dobulL.tlc (destruction by uar) with all its conseq¬
uences and with Germany's destruction as a subject of the Law of Nations
has occured, —xl chat rights the Germans still possess at least in the
fora of "Coutumes d- la guerro", which all human beings in tho Coocmnity
of International Law can never be derived of.

itvd?°)


9 kloy (lets: Frank 4 Oiborall)

Joint Session

Tho essential point for co is the fact that the occupation of
Germany raa carried out together by the four victorious powers, who
according to the Berlin declaration have confirmed again and again
that Germany is to be neither annexed nor divided up but on the con¬
trary to be kintalned as an entity of vhich the political fora is to
oe doterained. Consequently, Germany is subject to the united occupa¬
tion powers as represented in the control council, but not to the
Russian, the English, the French, the American law as such. Tho in¬
dividual occupying power did not transfer the law of its own country
attgehed to its banners into this country. It has rather become an
occupied country for which all the four occurring powers together claim,
within tho bou: ds of international rules and regulations, the right of
legislation in order to carry out the actual occupation. This right,
however, oust first be established by the occupation powers and must
not - in case it is not completely established - bo supplemented by tho
law of the land of one of the four occupation powers, neither by an
anplifying interpretation of Law 10 nor by a ono-sidod change of this
Control Council Low by order of one of tho occupation powers, unless
it be that tho four victorious powers have Jointly and explicitly
delegated such a right to one in their group.

The preamble of Law No. 10 expressly states that a unifora
logal besis must be created, which oxprosses clearly the intent of the
law thai one of the four occupying powers, or. her part, should amond
the ctxsBon legal principles.

For the sake of completion I consider it ay duty to discuss in
this connection Decree No. 7, which I will discuss once again in Sec¬
tion C. In the official gazette of the American Military Government
this decree has been officially designated for the American zone ns such
and was published 18 October 19h6, but not in the other occupation zones.
According to its title the decree deals only with tho "constitution and
compoterce of certain military courts." It does not deal with material
criminal law nor with modern criminal la.:, it does not deal with a

\tni'o(n)


9 Jur.-lfr->3-U-2-Haloy (Into. Frank £ Uiberali)
Joint Session*


fur.daeental change of la* No. 10 iosiad by the Control Council within
the Halts of ita authority. In this decree it is stated that "the
special military courts have the authority to punish persons" "who are
accused of a punishable act designated as crime in Article II of the
Control Council Lair No. 10 including conspiracies to cogr.it any such
-rices." To Dention conspiracy in this text can be interpreted by the
professional Jurist, who knows international law, only in such a way
that the courts are to have the authority for the charges cited in law
No. 10 Including not in addition to — the conspiracy charges. This,
naturally, is the case only insofar as Law So. 10 definos csinos and a
punishable conspiracy which it doss in Article II, paragraph 1-a, whore
it deals with the conspiracy for ti»e preparation of aggressive wars.

It is Ir^ossible, however, to parcoiro in t.i*s dooreo - valid only for
the American occupation -ono - a fundamental alteration of law Ho. 10
and a change of its definition of punishable crices. This would indued
lead to the introduction into tho Arorican xono of a rar crlmo concojt
which is coapletoly different from that in tho other zonos. The inter¬
national relations between tho four victorious powers would thoroby bo
changod by the unilateral action of oib of the four powers. Tho legal
redress of the victorious powers «zong each ot'.vr as provided in Articlo
IV of Law No. 10 would be affected. A defendant handed over to tho
Aoorican occupation power by another power for punishrent accox-ding to
this articlo would not be punished according to Law No. 10, but accord¬
ing to an amendment which altors this law in a most essential point.
Indirectly, by way of a seemingly insignificant procedural regulation
the material criminal law itself mould bo rendered more stringent.

This moans that an inner-Arwrican legal institution - by violating the
principle "Nullua crimen sine lego" to oo discussed in the next chapter -
would be made into an institution binding undor international law, which
is legally unjustifiable, because this procedural regulation lacks re¬
cognition by International


9 Jci>-lME~u-3-»*l©y (Ixits: Frank "iborall)
Joint Session.


n.

"Nullum crinen sino lege."

1/31 ce offer reasons for my proposition that the Nuernberg
Military Courts cannot refer to American Ccnson Law as a base for
tteir claim for punishment on account of conspiracy with regard to
war crimes and crimes against huaonity, not even based on Decree No. 7,

I want to boss ny contention on sovoral other aspects.

Uo have to admit and wo can do so without hesitation, that in¬
ternational norms have not been laid down with the exactness demanded
by tho continental jurist of his codified laws. But ono thing we can
and must demand of International litw ns veil} a clear separation bet¬
ween what is doeir-d and what has boon ostablishod as law. It must bo
said once that legal fooling does not exist at all. There is only a
legal consciousness, a eonao of law md this sons- of lar is subjoot to
human mental procossos and oust bo so err ."ted sharply from instinctive
fouling. Tho fueling by which a judge nay bo moved may bo eager* con-
tompt, love for humanity, fouling of responsibility, voico of Ms con¬
sole i*:o. But with ru^ard to tho basis of this fooling he oust hoar,
sno and dccido with a clear, critical mind. I hive glv-n roasons for
thoco pro.ositions in detail in my book about •'The Essence of Focliugs"
(published 1916). "Only by way of rational deliberations docs ono ar¬
rive at a correct application of a caaplox of norms, ostablisncd as
law by tin intellect." (p.152) There I have also quoted Pascal:

"Throe degrees of Latitude knock over t:t whole jurisprudence." (sen¬
ses, por, 319).

Itoro than thru-, degrees of latit’ide lio botwocn the continent
and America.

I can refer to ono of the ruco^niz-d texts about conspiracy, to
Francis 5. 3ayr-»s essay in tho Harvard !nw Review, Volumo 35, where on
page U27, to says about conspiracy: "It is utterly unknown to thO
Roman Law, it is not found in modern Continental cedes, few continental

lawyers over hoard of it. It is a fortunate, circimstcncu that it is not

tel


9 Jurv-y-4'B-L-u—Ll~-loy (Ints. Frank >. Gib^rail)
Joint Session.


encrusted so deep in our Jurisprudence by past decisions of our courts
that aro ablo to slough it off cltogethsr."

Thj jriroiple of "Nullra Cri ax Sino Lege" is callod a general
principle cf Justice (Chap. 5, par. 6) in tho first place, by tho Judg-
aent of the I.L.T. If one wants to apply this jwinclplo to tho Kurn-
b*.rg procecdijigs and if one wants to giro it a living sense, then it
canno* possibly bo enough to state* that scsao’rhero in this world some¬
thing wns pronounced punishable, end thoreforo later on act could bo
punished according to that in a totally different part of tho world.

I wish to point out hero that in this place I only intend to
rofor to substantive law, not to questions of legal procedure, not tho
question of tho competency of toe Military Tribunals, and ospocicliy
not to tho quoation whether they rre also content to Judgo acta caa-
nittod b-foro fchi ovents took place that led to the occupation. Even
if one anat-ors all these questions in the affirmative - and I must nsk
that it should not b«. concluded frc« th?s that I do - ono has not ea¬
rn ittod that a til it or^* Tribunal night bo coopotcnt to Judgo any foroign
national who comos into their var.uo according to tho substantive penal
law valid in his own country.

I do not wish to treat this group of questions in greater do-
tail booaueo it rill have to bo dealt with b> 8uvar.il of my colJonguos
in connection with thoir own, special cas^o. I hero only state tlict
tho victorious pouars have, based upon thoir rights as occupying
powers, created n legislation in which they hr.vu excluded unmistakably
and indisputably the .o s wfdBfr to apply any national law valid in t!w
ono or tho otter of the victorious coj: tries, vhich would violate the
principle nuiluc cri&jn sino iog^, referred to earlier. This principle
has solemnly been confirmed for Gormany by the Military Gov. rrrx-nt law
No. 1, Article IV, No. 7. According to this, "an accusation can only
bo brought, if tho Act has expressively been declared punishable by a
law valid at tho tiro when the Act was co^nittod."

I ho Atari can Ccaaon Las was not valid hero before- the beginning

/w* M


9 Jul-!S-i2-h-5-Ifciloy (Ir.ts: Frank & Uibarall)

Joint Session.

of the American occupation of Germany. Consequently, even a purely
American Military Tribunal could not apply it retrospectively.

I portoodly quite understand the sound legal idee that con-
spi-acy should bo c punishable offense.

I should like to ask tbt High Tribunal to consider tho critical
ooBBonts of Francis B. Sayre, Professor of Lew at the Harvard Low
School about criminal conspiracy. I shall take tho liberty to submit
excorpts fro* his rerk in thi Harvard Lav .“tvio- , Volvsao 35, together
with othor litoratur.:, which I could only new ,-rocuro free abroad. Ho
berates conspiracy as a doctriiu so vagix, in its outlines and uncertain
in its fundamental nature.

1-hyba it will happen, and I Cortninly hopo so, that no aro
going to lonrn n lot froa An rioan, and that .to get a lot of ^cod free
thoro, but up to new "conspiracy* has not yot bean Imported. Ttoroiro
still international c-istocas barriers against such an importation, evon
an international ban an imports.

H. Don..adieu de Vabrcc, Judge at tho International Military
Tribunal has given a lecture about the Huemfcorg Trials in Ifcrch of
this ’-ear before the Association dos Studos Internationales and tho
Etudes Cririnologiques. In this lecture he said about conspiracy:

"The wide conception of the"ccnplot" or conspiracy is peculiar to
British Lae." Ho adds: "The danger of such incriminations is that tho
door is opened to arbitrariness. Tho accusation of conspiracy is indeed
a weapon proforroi by tyrants. Man Hitler wanted to strike at his
political opponents, he accused thex of having conspired against him."

foe will have to a (halt in agreement with the highly esteeccd
caster of law, Professor Donnedieu de Vabres that in these sentences no
acknowledgement of "conspiracy" as an institution of international law
is contained, but thit these words from such a prominent xin deny the
effective validity of such a legal principle in international law.


,oWl5)


9 Jul-ifr-JB-ii-o-Laloy (Ints: Fran* • Cibersll)

Joint Session.

HI.

■Conspiracy* in Continental lair.

The Prosecution has repeatedly referred to the Hague Land TTar
Convention.

The Rngua Land Yfar Convention has been published i;. tho Gorman
Reich law Gasette, in its fora of 1907. It was signed, apart from otliers,
by th' United States, France, Great Britain and also Germany. Not only
scholars of interactional Inn, but also decisive courts of justice have
recently frequently discussed the question whether tho Hague Convention
is to be regarded as the fundamental law for occupied Germany. Tho
Superior Court of Zurioh in its decision of 1 Doconbor 19L5, found
(fbgo 86 of the Schwuixoriacho Juristomoitung 19U6) that tho Hague
convention is still valid today for tho rotations botwoen occupied Gor-
nany and Swittorlnnd. It states in its oo-ontinl pirtsi

■The scioaco of international Law ossontially distinguishes bot-
waon two stages of conquesti Tho warlike occupation (Occupation do
Gunrrc, Occupo io Eollioa Transitoria) end tho Annoction (Strupp ibid.,
Page 135 and 297; von Kildkirch, Intamntionil Law 1926 P.351* end 116 ;
Sauserhall, Occupation do Guerro ot los Droits frivos, in tho Syrian
ALmanoc for Intornctiorvi Law, 19U-', P. 60 ; According to Snuacr-Hall,
the primary Stage of 'invasion' is included which is, however, subjoct
to r.o other Rules than the Occupation, Sea Pngo 60 , Note 1.) It is
clear that during tho occupation thL treaties concluded by tho occupied
stato still roar.in in force, but that, on tho other hand, as a result
of Onnection, conquert of Territory, tho Lntirnational Treaties of the

anneotod stato bocono void bccauso ono of the contracting partios has

%

ceas_-d to exist.

A) When investigating tho question whether wa have ar. annotation,
the r^uisits of such an annexation nust first bo clarified. First of
all it is necessary that the territory to bo annexed bo caaplotely oc¬
cupied *ri that any resistance of the opponent or his illy bo completely

extinct, (Sauser-iiallibid P. 61/62; von Wnldkirch IBID F. 116; Strupp P.


I


9 Jul-lHe-<;-7-liiloy (Ints: Frink i O^borall)

Joint Sassion.

135) this pr ~-roquishas bean fulfilled in regard to Germany, nt
least since Japan's capitulation.

This hone rer does not constitute an annection in itself but
only provides the pre-requisits for it. As a result of statenants in
literature of international law, it can not bo doubted that this mist
bo coupled with tho will for annexation, which generally must find ex¬
pression in an outright declaration of annexation.

Tho occupying pesters have not expressod tho will, so far, to
retain tho occupied torritory, to rule it permanently with the oxcoption
of some border provinces. They oxhibit no inclination to transform tho
body of Goraany into English, French, A nor icon or Russian territory.

Their administrative policy points in an entirely different direction.

B) If no annexation exists, then the .-resent state of affairs
can only be one of warlike occupation, ov»*n if actually tho act of de¬
bellation has already takon placu Therefore only this question still
exists, shettor nevertheless, tho International Treaties with Germany
have becoco void, because, unliko a normal warlike occupation, Germany
has lost her govomrunt and thus here charact.r as a state as a subject
of International Law.

It is true that tho Docnitz Govornacnt eurrondorod uncondition-

*

ally and w~s domoted because of icprlsonoont. The occupying powers do
not intend hixrovur, to deprive Germany of its Statehood boor use of
this, but they Lorcly wanted to remove 'nor ^ovemnent. That was tho
main objoctivu of tho entire war. As far .as possible therefore, they
havo again admitted German gev^nnonts and expressed by this that they
do not consider German state authority as oxtinct.

Scoj of thj scholars of international law, such as Professor
Sauser-Hall of Genova, find that in Gur-any wu have a sort of trusteeship
occupation. This relation of trustee also finds expression in an English
proclamation. I shall take the liberty to suixait the dotailod arguments
of Dr. Sauscr-Hall together with cements of Dr. Ernst Sfchneeborgcr,
Washington. I jhould like to make the request hire already that tho

izni<e( 17 )


9 JuI-4M'3-i.-3-}fcloy (Xntss Prank ^ Bibsrcll)
. Joint Session.


High Tribunal accept the statesjnts of several colleagues especially
in this connection, which statements shalT arrive at the latest during
the roxt trro vaoks.

According to article 1*3 of tho Land War Convention, the lo^al
powers of th- occupant shall bo executed with regard to the law of tho
land as far ns there is no cospoiling obstacle*

Law iheb-r 10 deals in cno placo with tho national law of tho
land. It says in article II, 1, c, rt tho end, "Regardless nhothor
they violato the nation -1 law of the country in which tho act has boon
ccaaittud."


l*Vb(ic)


JOIST S2SSI0S

Military Tribunal* 1.2.3X & 5.

9 July-K-3iC->-l—Perrin (Int. Uiberall)

This half-sentence follows;the regulation* concerning erices
egainat humanity. Pros the punctuation of the Germnn text it i*
not quite clear whether the half sentence quoted refer* only to
the persecution for political, racial or religious reason*, sihco
o seat-colon is put in front of the word "persecution*, or whether
the emancipation froo the lrv of the country i* rlso to refer to
the previously mentioned "crimes against huaaniry." Seal-colons
have their destiny, as we know from the history of the origin of
punctuation of the charter used by the IHT. But this problem is
not to be discussed within our Halted question since Paragraph
c does not contain Conspiracy as rn independent crime. Wo only
have to decide, whether this emancipation from " the national low
of the country" scans a principal breach with the above-mentioned
principle from sub-parngrnph U 3 of the Hague Convention. Such a
principle breach rnd thus alteration of the oxloting International
Law can not be seen in the above qaoted final regulation of sub-
paragraph c. According to the meaning nnd, above nil, conoidering
the semi—colon contained in the Oermm text. It Is only of import¬
ance for such regulations of national law, which render puniohablo
acts which at the same time constitute persecutions on political,
racial or religious grounds, not liablo to punishment or subject
to pa pnnesty out of political, racial or religious prejudices.
Such national laws covering political, racial or religious per--
secutions should not be considered under sub-paragraph c, not,
because - in the sense of the Hague Convention about Land Yrr-
fare - they are nptionrl laws, not bccwjsc they are "national
law* of the occupied country, but rather because they are a wrong
according to International Law. which originated in the liberntod
country by reason of o legislation machinery which in the meantime
has cone to a standstill.

P»rpgreph 4} of the Hague Convention would enable the American

/e-lifeC 19 )


jo is: sissies

Military Tribunals 1, 2,},U, A 5.

9 July-fc-3£->-2-Ferrl= (int. Uiberall)

Military Tribunals to base their verdict upon Conspiracy as a pa
punishable offen* in the case of war crines against humanity,
if Semen lav had known this crine previous to the occupation.

It is one of the first rules of evidence all over the world
that a fact which seees indisputable to all need not be proven..
There will hardly be one among the high judges of the Court who
has net so far a German Juriet who would call conspiracy to commit
war crines and crines against hunanity a. recognized crime in German
Penal Law. But we also have tried an extension of the circle of
those participating in a crine and responsibility for n efine
beyond participation in the narrower sense in our Penal Law. With
us the conception of the conplot and of the gang have arisen as a
scientific doctrine without general recognition or even goneral
legal realisation.

According to German legal theory the gang io conetlluted by an
agreement to conait a aeries of undefined offences. The conception
of the gang consciously avoids an individualisation of crines. It
is a- crime in itself, even without the plannod crico being execut¬
ed later. It is an Independent crino apart fros the offftnee
possibly being executed later by the gang and resenbles the *nglo-
Saxon conspiracy like one ess the other, as for as an American
egg can resemble a continental one, like the egg of an ostrich
resembles the egg of a lapwing. The ostrich lays his giant egg
freely into the landscape; the lapwing egg can only be hatched
in a carefully guarded nest. The continental conception of a gang
can only exist if it is surrounded by a ■ nest" of positive
rules and if it is clearly defined wfcrt is to be protected by
the law (Rechtsgut) against the gang. According to continental
codes the war crimes and crimes against humanity listed in sub¬
paragraph b and c of II, 1 of the law Fo. 10, do not belong as
such to these rights to be protected (Sechtsguetern) . A gang can
be punished only as far as the German renal Code provides for

I *0'b (io)


joxjT ssssicr

Military Tribunals 1 , 2 . 5 ,!* A 5.

9 July-fc-B&^->Perrln (Xnt. Uiberall)

punisfcnent in the cate of murder according to paragraph Ugb if
•the crime of nurder has been agreed upon with another person."

In order to be compete I should like to deal briefly with the
qiestion whether it could be reasoned that conspiracy to commit
war crises and crises against honanity would be punishable, if
one of the defendants has cocmitted such n Crime in an occupied
country, where this is a punishable offense. Vo are here dealing
with International Law and hare to consider questions which become
apparent for any Jurist when the conceptions of territory principle
personality principle, distance principle are nentioned.

It is easier to ask this question than to answer it. and it is
easier to answer it than to prore the answer right. I dare to
answer , in accordance with Sayre whoa I hrve Just qioted, that
no continental lav, that is, no law valid in any country occupiod
by 0erneny during the war, including the Sorth const of Africa,
know* the consplrrcy to coanlt war crimes and crises against
huoenity as n punishable offense. I shall bring furthor proof
in written submissions.

B. Tho Special Position of tho Buernberg Hilitrry Tribunals.

I hitherto expounded on toe assumption that the High Courto
bsforo which it it ay privilege to speak are American Military
Tribunnls and not perhaps soaething else. I should not be so
bold os to breach thle subject, were it not for regulation nunber
7 of the American Military Government, designating tho appointed
Kuernberg Law Courts in their heeding ns •Certain Military
Tribunals" and in article II as Certain Tribunals to be known
ae ■Military Tribunals.■

These "Military Tribunals" of a special kind have been in seosion
since proceedings were concluded in IKI, they are located in the
ease roons and run along lines of similar rules and regulations,
with the remarkable difference however, that ^.American citizens
alone and not nenbers of other victorious nations as well function

/o


JOIST S5SSXC5

KlUtwy Tribunals 1,2,3,U. A 5 .

9 w’ul7-ii-3ft-5-^errin (lat. Ulbefall)

M Judgss. These are, however, not Acerloan officer*, but article
II of the nbove-soatloned regulation states expressly that "all
soabers atd deputising aeabers nust be Jurists who here been
rdsutted to the highest courts of the United States, that Is,
the territories or the District of Coluabla, or the Suprene Court
of the United States, for a alninuc of 5 years." There follows
free this appolntaeot of qualified personnel for these courts
that special knowledge la the highest questions of right and
kucanlty vas to be sad* condition la the case of these Judjes,
not however military rank.

The prosecution concluded Its opening statement on 6 March 19^7 In
Cnse III as follow*: "Thus the true cacalag of these proceeding#
exceeds by fer the nere question of the guilt or innocence of the de¬
fendant. T hea* proceedings turn to the ethical conception of the
civilised world and lspose on the peoples of the world ths obligation
to accent as a standard the corse which are applied here. This court,
although lnt<rnrtionally cospoeed. Is an A&ericrs court. Obligations
resulting fron these proceedings are thus prrticuJrrly binding for ths
United Staton.■

V itbout wiohlng to be accused by the gentlecen of the proeecutlon
of foisting their word In their couth, I should yet like to sosewhet
reverse the last but one sentence: I wish that I b* permitted to sry:
Although this Is an American court, it was composed on international
lines. It was cooposed on international lines, that Is, it was givon
international trs<a. To all Intents end puxposcs these tasks should
have been tacked by a court cocposed of interactional senbere, ns the
I.M.T. Mb now experience It also la other cases, as In politics on a.
lar^e ns well ns on a s=ali scale, that powerful Aaerlcrn, the United
Stntee of America. have to step in where the representatives of the
Old ¥ orld fail for whatever reason. Eere in these High Court#, the
United States of Azerica have undertaken to fulfill such obligations
as are the duties of the entire zenSdnd.


JOIST SS5SI05

Military Tribunals 1, 2. 3. A 5.

9 July'IM S 9 * E wln (Int. Wb.rail)

■The United States cannot escape the challenge of this responsibility*
vere the >«rds of the counsel of the prosecution; further, on page 109 ot
the Oercan record of 5 Kerch of Crse III. *In Suernberg we can only out
a fraction of this into practice. let, Cuernberg oust becone the synbol—
not one of revenge and snug cosplacency, but one of^psnce and understand¬
ing asong the peoples of the nations.*

? hese are noble and beautiful words, yet they indicate beyond a
doubt that the law on which sentences shall be passed be international
law, e law uniting all nations *d placing all nations and Its neabers
under obligations, and not for Instance Anglo-Saxon national law. T hose
proceedings turn to the ettileal conception of the civilised world and io-
posee on the people# of the world the obligation to accept the nores
recognised here re a stand, are the words of the prosecutor. JThese
noras, however, can only be taken as n etandard, if they can be proved
either in accordance with international law or by virtue of the internal
national legislation in the crlninal law of all nations, above nil those
whose aeabers will be affected by the sentence. A# the author# and sic-
nrtorlee of lav Co. 10 and the London Charter classify conspiracy for
aggressive warfare ee definitely punishable, but esit to threaten with
puniehrent in the case of conspiracy concerning war crlnes rnd crines
rpK net hmanity, they hereby lndlcrte their definite Intention to punish
conspiracy as an Independent crlninal offence only in the first case,
ncaely as preparatory to aggressive varfnrr. This intention, ns it is
so clearly defined, can only be sodlfled ag-in by a counon notion of
that legislative body which proclaimed the legislative verk of the Char¬
ter aa well as of Lew Bo. 10 rnd Law So. 1.

As a young law student, X wee introduced to the fundamentals of in¬
ternational law by the old Profoss-r Mesterkanp In Marburg. Professor
tfesterknsp used to ask the ciindldates during exasinntion, "What was the
Srttle of Eoenigsgrr.st? In noa-Oeman historical science, the Brttle
of Koenigsgrretr Is generally referred to ee the Battle of Sadova, which


JOirc 838SIQI

mitrry Tribble 1, 2, 3, h, L 5.

9 Juiy-:i-5:-:-£-6-rtrrin (Lit. Oibomll)

ir. 1966 decided tho war between Prussia and Austria. At the tino
both states belonged to the Federation of Geroar. Stater, whose nki-tocrs
had obligated thcssolves net to to war with or.eh other without
previous appeal to the Federal Cornell. That learned non expected
nnnfer tc his question: "The Battle of Kocnigsgraots was an ia-
possibility according to International Law." If tho long siroo do-
cc’Sed profossor waro to appear onco nor- in jy droass tonight — I
assuao you all know the droaas about tho oxasinationo which still
frighten us now and then, after wo fiavo long since groin out of tho
stage of oxminatione — and if ho nero to ask no what constituted an
abourdity according to international law, than I should ansiwjr: "Tho
conviction of tnaso defendants b-causo of an independent conspiracy in
connection with ousters af warfare or huaanity."

It is true I do have to r<tait that absurditios of International
Lr.r ondo.avor, with particularly stubborn porslstonco, to bccono real¬
ities. I :r.’3t also adr.it that possibilities of International Lav* ox-
hibit .a alaUnrl? groat weakness of realisation. But dospito tho
nurorour skeptical statoser.t s th't .on does not grow nt-ru intelligent,

I still b-liovc th. t at least socotixsos, if not always, coco suddoa
progress la yot to be achieved and th't hmanlty docs learn sonothing
new. I my quotj onco aero a pass.ago frea th: opening statcuont of tho
prosecution of IL-rch 5, 19U7i "Koornb-rg is .a oynbol, that is, it is to
bocooo a syabol. At this tire it is still a task, a demnd, a hope of
the thole word."

StaflkoapoarJf* Hanlat says: ■The world 1 s cut of Joint."

F-aalot — and that is a foot frequently overlooked — was a
Jurist. Ho studied law at Wittanbsrg. His nothjr requests his T'itton-
b-rg fcllow-studor.ts Rosenkronta and Gusldanstern to cheer hia up; that
attempt fails. K-aslot continues: "Shane and sorrow that I had to
restore- the world." Haslet did not desire to sssuno tho task of re¬
storing tho world that had broker. pieces. Like cost of his colleagues

(»)


JDIWT S~SSI.K

Military Tribunals 1, 2, 3, h, & 5.

9 July->:-8i-5-7-?crrin (Int. Uibarnll)


had toe many misgivings. 3ut we, the Jurists of today, arc not
■ported this task. Tf« hava to accept the heritage of H-mlet. Tho
theologians, wt» up to the 13th century had tho responsibility of
maintaining world order, no longer ccsr.and tho loyalty of all humanity.

Up to tho loth century the world was considered as Ged's creation,

.,von for th: scientists. S-'sod on tho principle of the legality of
divine right cf princes it was possible to restore tho world fox* another
century in 1915 ”t tho Congress of Vienna. Since then, hewover, scionco
rules) it bases its theses eer-ly cn tho or.pcriencos of this world, no
other ties boyeid our world are left. This spirit of ecienc- togotter
with Haja — thj substance — has begotten that isiruly giant of modern
tochniquo, an infant that knows no limit and that will burst tho globo
itself: into pieces if we fail to find restraining norms within Inter¬
national Law, tho law of humanity. Muornborg is tho gate to this now
pnriod of Law. Tho quostion before this high Tribunal as it stands
todry — and tlwro will be now problems in days to ccoo — is whether
it is necessary to restore the world with Ar^lo-Arorican legal concept
of conspiracy in regard to war crises and crimes against humanity or
whether it is possible to succeed without it. Above I compared tho
conspiracy to ra egg. It was r.ot, to uso tho tores of the proverb,
my intention of laying a cuckoo's ogg in tho Laps of tho High Tribunal.

I rnthcr tond^.- tlxe hopx. that in the hands of tho Judges tho ogg will
b. converted into the ogg cf Celurbus.

GEh' .'UL TATLCRi Tju r Honors: Tho Jurisdictional quostion sot
down for argument today before tho full bench of Judges ia presently
involved in three of tha eases pending bof jo tho Tribunals — Case Ho.
1 , the *fcdic~l Case, Coso He. 3, Justice, and Caoo No. L, T<VHA.

Tho conspiracy courts in Cases 1, 3 and h aro wry similar in
their theory and structure; in each case. Count 1 of tho indictment is
entitled "Tho Cctjon Design or Conspiracy", and tho design <r conspiracy
charged in each ease is a desiyi or conspiracy to commit *-t criuos and
crir.os against humanity sot forth in subsequent counts of the so iiadict-

/©l/fc ( 25 )


JOD.T session

KUitrj; Tribune la 1, 2, 3, U, & 5.

9 Juiy-h-3K-5-£-?crrin (Int. Uiburall)


aenta. In all three cists, therefore, tho indie taints charge that tho
conapixr.ci-3 nero conztnated end resulted in the coaaission of tho
substnntivo crius of the- subatantivo cri-x-s set forth in subsequent
counts*

Tho cniy difference botwocn the conspiracy counts in tho so
thre, ensos is that the count in Case No. 1 is coincident in tiao with
tho substantive counts, that is, tho conspiracy count and tho substantive
counts, alilcc, cover only the period of actual hostilities from Septem¬
ber 1939 to toy 19U5. whoroas tho conspiracy counts in cases 3 and U
cover tho ontiro life of the Third Soich froa January 1933 to l!ay 19U5.

Honcvjr, tho subst-ntivc couits in eases 3 and U are confined
to th: war poried, frc= Scptcihcr 1939 to l.ry 19U5* The conspiracy
count has been oxtonded bock to 1933 in these two eases bocauso, tho
prcsocution charges, tho substantive crices charges to have been coaoit-
tod during thj war arose out d and wore the direct result of certain
acts of tho defendants ccsrlttcd *t *n oarlior date. Thus, in Crso !fo.

3 , it is charged that tho Judicial .nchincry of Ocrunny was distorted
in such a niniv-r as to utnke possible, and directly cause, tho substantive
crlres cccwittod during tho war. Likowiso, in Case No. h, much of tho
organisation of tho 1SVHA was established yrior to the war, end tliis
organization carried out tho substantive criawis — nurdors and othor
atrocitios — wliich are charged as having boon corr&ttcd during tho war.
No such problem is rais-d in Cr.t-o Ho# !•


/WO f *)


JCI5T SISSIOS

S v'ul 47-#-5-l-S0i-=eard (Trank'


Z should like to approach the Jurisdictional ouestlon which is
icing prgued today by a few general observations about the concept of
conspiracy. It is a venerable as veil as an ancient concept in the Juris¬
prudence of ingland and the United Stetes, and finds its roots in
English cocsoc lev. Ike Anglo-Savon concept of conepiracy has been
developed end refined - and perhaps over-refined - in a nultitude of
Judicial decisions stretching over soveral centuries. Legal concepts,
analagous to that of conspiracy, are by no seens unknown in continental
lav, tut it is true that these concepts have not been as vidoly accented
or as fully developed in continental Jurisprudence, and sone continental
lawyers tend to look upon the concept of conspiracy with ease ceasure of
suspicion snd disapproval. The reasons for this are not far to seek, and
these reasons, I think, will help to lllusinate tho rathor dlvorgent
points of viev which are being expressed in this courtroon today.

Tho classical definition of conspiracy at English cosaon la” is that
it is a confederation to offoct an unlawful object, or to effect a lawful
object by unlovful Deans *lthln the scope of this definition, conspiracy
is vory little nore than an elaboration of the law of attospts, In coses
whore the conspiracy ves unsuccessful in attaining Its object, or of the
law of principals and accotsorlos and accomplices, if tho conspiracy suc-
ceedsd in attaining an unlawful object. Within this sphere, tho low of
conspirecy is really Just another eanifostetion of tho very familiar
or obi era in all legal oysters of hov closely or in what way an individual
suet be eonnocted with a crine in order to attribute to him, in a Judicial
sense, guilt. To be sure, difficult euostlons often arise in this, as in
all other fields of lev. 5ut the fiold itself is not nore controversial
than cany others.

However, over the course of years there have occurred, both in English
eoccon lav and in the continental law, a amber of efforts to aooly the
doctrine of conspiracy to acts which. If ccsxiitted by a single person,
would not have been indictable or, in a Judicial eenso, unlawful. It v^c
argued in these cases that, although tho object of the conspiracy sight

/o-J/fc (27 )


•JOIST SZSSICE

9 Jul 4? -n-6-2 -2EX-? eard (Frank)

be lawful, and Indeed the neans thesselves lawful if used by a single
person, non*theless the policy of the law forbade the reaching of the
atteepted object by neans of a confederation. To be euro, in nost such
cases where the doctrine of conspiracy was held to apply, there was
eaae eleoect either of deceotioc or of force, or threat of force, in
the aeans ueea by the conspiratore. Eovewer, it becace apparent that
such extensions of the lav of conspiracy, unless confined within narrow
bounds end within the bounde of vcll-establiehed and well-known prior
adjudications, tended to bring crininal law into a v«gu« and dangerous
field where no nan, acting in conceit with othere, could bd sure whether
hie actions nigr.t not subeecueatly be held to be criainal by virtue of
the aero fact of confederation, ever, thcaigh the sear.e used and the
objoct lteelf would have been lawful had ha pursued then by hioaolf.

It is this tendency in the law of conspiracy which, I as sure, has oro-
volcod fears and dcubts both anong continental Juriete and anong dietln-
guiehed oxnoncr.te of Anglo-Saxon coca on law, such as Vfcarton, which I
havo road, and the article by Sayer referred to by I>r. Haoneel, which I
have not road.

It is lsportant to ooint out. therefore, that none of these ouos-
tlonablo and perhaps dangerous develo^sente of the law of conspiracy
are in any way involved under tho London Charter or under Law Ko. 10, or
in orvy of tho three cates cefcro these tribunals in which this Juris¬
dictional Question is raised. Eaither one, neithor tho London Chartor
nor those indictcents, seeks to lncoso crininal liability for conspiring
in pursuit of a lawful objective. On the contrary, the conspiracies
involved in those cases are conspiracies to coaait acte veil-established
as crises at international law, under the specific language of the
London Charter end Law Ho. 10 and. in noet cases, under the penal law
oyatocB of all civilised countries. Therefore, the importance of the
concept of conspiracy in the caees before these tribunals relates only
to the necessary degree of the defendants' connection with acts which
wore, in fact, cocnitted and which were clearly crises, in order to

(»)


JOIST SISSIC5

S Jul 47--5-3-IEv-£trd (Frank)


establish the defendants' guilty participation in those crises. Viewed
in this light, I think: it will be clear that nary Of the aversions and
doubts which course) for the defense haws cast upon the basic notion of
conspiracy, and which indeed sight hare ease point if ve were soeklng
here to apply the doctrine of conspiracy to acts and objectives lawful in
themselves, in fact have little weight since we seek here to apply the
doctrine of conspiracy only in its sore Halted end classical neanlng.

In dealing with the doctrine of conspiracy today, therefore, wo
are dealing only with the cuestion of vh t degree of connection with an
act, acknovledgedly crisiaal, a defendant eust bo shown to have had in
order to attribute to hi* guilt. In this field Anglo-Saxon Jurisprudence
usoe the toraieolc©r of principals and accessories, accoeollcce and con¬
federates, conspiracies and atteapts. In other Judicial syatons these
words and other words axe used. Thore are soeo differences of importance
between the various Judicial systess, but the basic purpose of those con¬
cepts, such as accessories, accomplices, conspirators, etc., is cocmon
to all systess. That ourooao is to insure that the men, who in the
United States vo would call tho •trigger man", is not the only men *fco
can be hold Judicially ar.sv«rable, if othor persons -ere substantially
connected with the coecisalon of tho crime.

I think It vculd be uecloea and inappropriate today to labor tho
distinctions and subtleties which have been woven around the concocts of
accessory and eccosolico and conspirator, etc. in Anglo-Saxon law. In
•ono cases these distinctions arc very refined and surely thore is such
ovor-lapping between the concept of conspiratorial guilt and tho guilt
of a confederation of orincloals and accessories. Vith all deference to
tho learned Judges who hove decided cases in this field, and to tho text
writers who hove commented on those decisions, I do not think that those
refinements and distinctions have often been very clear to these
distinguished jurists themselves.

Today it is much aoro important, I think, to keep cleerly in miad
that ve are applying international penal law, and that ve should not

ttn'hfa)


join sissies

S Jul 47-K-6-4-IHM-1 card

approach these Questions solely froa the standpoint of any single judicial
systca. International lav has, In recent decades, aade substantial
strides In the devalopcent of substantive international crises, and this
devolqpoeat has flovered into such attempts at partial eodifientior. as
the Segue and Geneva conventions, the London Charter, Lav JTo. 10, and the
aorc recent resolution of the United Nations vith respect to tho crime of
genocide. But while these substantive crises are now acknowledged end
accoptod as such in international lew, we cuit recogniie that international
tribunals vested with jurisdiction to punish such crises are relatively
new, Consoouontly, in aporoeehlng tnc Question of »du-t decree of connec¬
tion with thoso crlcos aust be established in order to attribute guilt to
a dofondant, va aust not beeoao snr.eshod in the intricacies of tho
Aaorloan or anglish lav of principals and accessories, or of conspiracy,
or lndoed in the roflneacnts or peculiar prcjudleos of any single Judicial
systea. International law, with respoct to thoso cucstlons, aust bo
derived and uppllod froa a varioty of sources and legal systoas, including
both civil and cannon lav. And tho notion of consulrrcy, if sensibly and
fairly confined, is, we subait, a usoful body of doctrine to draw upon.

So nuch by way of general background to the observations which I
will now direct aorc precisely to tho narrow aucctlcn for docitlon today.
Wo arc confronted by a aucstlon cf tho proper construction of Control
Council Law Ho. 10, end the central and critical Question of construction
b—s boon sharply oaphasirtd by defonse counsel. Both in the London
Charter end Lev Kc. 10 the definition of criacs egainst peace cmrossly
includes tho clause "participation in a cocaon plan or conspiracy for the
ecconplishacnt of criacs against peace". The parallel definitions of war
cri .cs and crlcos against huaenity do not Include this clause. Does it
fellow that a conspiracy to coar.it crises egainst peace spy be charged
under Control Council Law So. 10, but that a conspiracy to ccemlt war
crises end crises agalnpt hucanity nay not? Tho prosecution respectfully
submits that it does not follow and in support of this view we advert to
the substantive content of the- three types of criae in Question.

/o-^ 30 )


JOIST SISSIC3

9 Jul 47-#-5-5-SE4-r.ard


Lot ut look first at the definitions of war criaes and crisec
■gainst humanity in the London Charter and in Law So. 10. They ore all
nets of violonce o r of plunder. Thoy ero ell acts which contravene, in
the language of the Ergue Conrantions, "the nrinciples of the law of
nations, as they result froa tho usages established anong civilised
cooplcs, free the laws of h u aan lty, and the dictates of tho oublic con¬
science. ■ Host, if not all, of then axe unlawful under tho internal
penal laws of all civilised states. Indeed, the law of *«r crises is,
fUndacentally, an attenot to define the circumstances under which a state
of belligerent hostilities nakos lawful acts which would otherwiao bo
clearly unla-ful. If, under the lews end eustoes of var, tho crotectivo
cover of belligerency does not apply to these acts, they becoae nurdors
or robberies or cayheris or other fssiliar crises, comnonly regarded as
such under the laws of all nations. Crises against hunanlty are also
acts of this type, often coaaitted under tho color of so-called "law" or
w ith executive or administrative toleronco of or oncouragwacnt by a
dictatorial or oppressive govorncont. Both in the case of war crises
and crinos against hunanlty, the acts thoraelvos are surder, torture,
ensltwsont, race, plunder, destruction, devastation, ote.

Undor both definitions, therefore, the acts with which we nro
dealing are well-rccogni*cd crises which cccuirc an international asooct
because of the cricuastancos under which they are coaaitted. It is
“ull-sottlcd, end *«, thick this is an inmortrnt oolnt, that a conspiracy
to co-_dt felonies of these tyooe is an indictable offense at conn on law,
and regcrdloss of whether a ay statute expressly so provides. This has
boon settled in e multitude of English and Anerlean decisions over a
miaber of years. It was, undoubtedly, for this reason that tho draftenon
of the London Charter and Control Council Law Ho. 10 sew no need to
include an express reference to conspiracy in the definition of war
crir.es and crinos against hunanlty, any core than they felt it necessary
to make cxnresE reference to tho liability of accessories and accocplicoo
or to the lew of attempts. All these things adhere to such crioes auto-

/oW»)


joist szssicg

9 Jul 47-*-6-6-IHM-5card


setlcally.

Vhy then did the draftsmen of tho London Charter sake specific
rcfercnco to "cooron plan or conspiracy" in tho definition of crinca
against peace? Clearly, ve submit, this vt* dose out of abundance cf
caution teeeuao of certein differences between the nature of crinos
againat peace on the one hand and var crimes and cri-»a egair.st humanity
on tho other hand. To be aure, aa the London Charter and Law So. 10 both
rtccr^i-' and «e the Internet local Military Tribunal hea held, tho acta
of planning and vaglng aggressive vara had cone to be regard'd ei ciininal
under international lav aor.e years orior to the outbreak of tho aocond
World Uar. But the criuo cf planning and waging an agrreasivo vor 18, in
oany roepocta, peculiarly an international lav crino, and particularly
aubjoc*. to international Jurisdiction. The acto condemned '•c criainal
in tho definition of crl-.os against porco arc not acta which are joclnrod
to bv orinlnal under the Internal T- ral low of ucat atr.ter. Fai th- r.uoro,
vhilo vtr crimes and crises against hu-unity can cortr.lnly bv com.tted
V a singlo in dividual, it ia hard to think of any one car rs coaattting
tho cri-c of “ngittc an aggressive var aa a aolo venture. It la

9 0 *

peculiarly a crime brought about by tho confederation or cooeoiracy of a
number of con acting oursuant to vall-lold olcns. It natures over a
long period of tine, end many stooi are involvod in ita consume t Ion.

Tho intor-rol.-tiona betvoon tho confodcratea or conspirators are likely
to be oxtronoly coaollooted end far-fixing. For all these rcaaora, r.nd
particularly bccouac planning an Degressive w*r Is not, like murder, a
standard felony to which tho orthodox paraphernalia of doctrlno os to the
liability of pccocplicea automatically applies, tho draftsmen of the
London Charter and Lew So. 10 included an emroas reference to conspiracy
in thv definition of crimes against poace.

I think it ia ouitc cloar that it nover occurred to the franere of
the London Charter that, by including a reference to conspiracy vith
resocct to crises against peace, they '-ould thereby raise the indication
that conspiracy was excluded in tho field of var crlnes and Crimea against

/«W *)


joist assies
9 Jul 4Y-ii-o—7-ZEX-5eer d


torjilty. If any such doubts do trite, undoubtedly they were set at
raft V the paragraph vfclch icnedia-ely fcllove these definitions In
Uo London Charter end vklch states that:

'•Loaders, organisers, instigators, and accomplices participating
in the forauiation or execution of e common plan or cor-scirecy
to connit any of the foregoing crimes are responsible for all
acts porforccd by any persons in the execution of such oian. ,,


Cortaialy, too, it nover occurred to those who drafted the lndict-
cent before the International Military Tribunal that the London Chartor


f >3) I


9 July-M-FL-V-l-BioLsi
JODtT SSSSIOir


did ret co«£rohcnd a conspiracy to coamit war crimes end crimes a gainst
boaanity. Indeed, the whole structure of tho indictment in the intoma-
Uor.r.l trial makes it clear that tho chief prosecutors of the four na¬
tions laid sroa* stress upon the concept of conspiracy as reaching out to
include rU t. c a ri.no e charged in tho icdictaer.t. Tho first paragraph un-
dur Count one of the irdictacnt before tho International Military Trlbu-
rnl antes this abundantly clear, and the snmt epooars in many otter pin-
cos throughout. Mr. Justico Jackson, who was tho sigmtery on bohnlf of
the United States to both tho London Charter rnd tte indictoont, stated
in opening tho ease befero tte International Military Tribunal.

"It is cy purpose to open tte ease, particularly under Count
&*•- of tte Indietmor.t, a. - to deal with tte earner olnn or
conspiracy to achiove erxia possible only by resort to cri-rcn
against peace, war cri^a, and criaos against humanity."

Furttermor-, I .-.-4 sur« that it nevor occurred to the Alliod Control
Council wbur. It coopted tew ffc>. 10 in Dcc*r\ber 1945, during tho procco-
dirga before tho International Military Tribunal, that by following tho
Language of tho Lerdon Charter they hod excluded from tte scope of Leu
ho. 10 conspiracies to coaait war erLsos and crites against humanity.

And finally^ a= : *r cs I aa aware, such an idea never oc sirred to any
of the defense counsel during tte entire course of the international trial.
Ko such contention was -vor aide on be hr. If of any of tte dofendnnts and,
as a result, there nr.s nuver any rrga-xnt upon, or thought given, to
such a question during the international trial.

Th- International JUlitary Tribunal, (dn-v-r, cast to n different con¬
clusion, and held that tte Lord: 11 Charter "does not define as a separate
criae any co.. piracy -xcept the ore to coir it acts of nggresaivo nr.:'."

As to this, tho .’rendition has two ccnoonts to ark,..

Firstly, nay did the International Military Tribunal roach this con¬
clusion? I think the r-cson was cn underlying hostility, particularly on
tte pert of tha continental sxaburs of the court, to the concept of cons-

/«»7/G 0 *)


9 Juiy-*t-FL-7-2-3ioisi
JOIST SESSION


piracy as such. Since the conclusion of th. intorr.r.tiannl trial, the
'LitLv'uichec ftcoch ember d the Tribunal, Profeascur Donnodiou do Ve—
bres "3 oat forth ir. a lecture certain of his views about tho Judgment
of tho Inter rj \ional Lilitary Tribunal, in the course of which ho er.do
certain significant cm-is upon the doctrine of conspiracy sooj of
which are quo tod by Dr. nemsel and so®, of which la riposted h.r. not?.
Dr. Haonowl atatedi

"Thu general notice of conspiracy in peculiar to British la:.

Tho indictment includes in this tern tho on tire Hitlerian en¬
terprise leading to the seizure of poi.'or and to aggressive
war."

"Tho dnn$ir of such incriminations is to open tho door to des¬
potic;. Tho charge o.' cor.ep'rncy is thu favorito weapon of
tyranny. .’hen Hitler wanted to put down hie political ad-
vorsarios, h. accused then of having plotted against hln."

I hardly think that any statement could illustrate bottor that dis¬
trust of tho conc.pt of conspiracy which I mentioned earlier. As I tried
to villain at that point, this distrust iu*.s arisen chiefly out of of forts
to stretch the law of conspiracy to cover nets, otherwise legal, which
arc said to bocoee illcg*l by virtuo of th, r-re fret of confcdoration.
And, as I also pointed out, no such efforts to uxtcnJ tho doctrine of
conspiracy arc involved in tho London Charter or Law Ko. 10 or tho eases
before these Tribunals. A din-wtrically opposite ccunent on the judgment
of tha International Military tribunal has ruCjitly bour. nrdc by tho
distinguished African statesman and jurist 15-. Henry L. Stinson, who
has said, in c roc.r.t article on ioroizn affairs:

"If th.ro is c weakness in the Tribunal's findings, I boliovo

it lios in its very limited construction of the legal con-

I

cept of conspiracy. That only eight of the 22 defendants
should have been found guilty or. tho count of conspiracy
to cOKdt.thu various crises imrolv.d in the indictment scons

&)


9 J a 3y-St-FIr-?-3-Bio Isi
JOH~ &LSSIOX


to ae surprising. I beLieve that tba Tribunal would have
bwun ’ratified in c broader construction of the leu of
conspiracy."


In s: art, vo subnit thet the Interactional Jlilitcry Tribunal ox-
cludod conspiracies to coeoit wer criaos and crises against luisr.nit-
froa tho scope of tho Charter because of a nis taker. and misapplied sus¬
picion of the Ti.-.olo concept of conspiracy on the part of semo in-nbors of
the International kill tar y Tribunal, which load tho Tribunal to disposo
of c contentious point of no groat ispcrtance to tho outcome of tho
proceedings, by tc!dng tho ensy^wey out.

0

Secondly# t -° prosecution respectfully submits thnt tto decision of
the International .(ilit- ry Trtbur.-l was clearly wrong, -»nd overlooked tho
express Langucso of the Chartor. Tho Tribunal did, indood, quoto the fi¬
nal preragraph of Article 6 of thu Chrrtor, which states that:

"Lenders, erganiwers, instigators, and accospliocs partici¬
pating in the formulation or cxocution of a ccrmon plan or
conspiracy to cortait any ol thu foregoing crises axv respon¬
sible r or all acts perforcud by any porsor.s in cxocution of
such pirn."


But with rofcrcncc to this paragraph, the H.T statod that:

"In tho ooinlon of tho Tr' amal, those word3 do not add a nt*
ar.d Bw.rcrr.tc crime to thosw clreodT listed. Tho words arc de¬
signed to establish tfr. n-sronsibility of p-rsons participa¬
ting in a cccnoc plan. The Tribunal will therefore- disregard
tfc- ch-rges ir. Count One.and will cor.sidwr only the com¬
mon plcn to -<rop-.ro, initiate, and rage rggrcs&ivo war.*


This conclusion, wo subait, is -n entirely uiw-rr-ntcd intuiprct-tion
of this paragraph of th- Charter. True it is, that this language of tho
Charter is d-si:red "to establish th; respo n sibi lit y of persons parti-

/O' 7. C- C 36 )


9 July-!*-Fl-~W.-3iolsi
XIKT SiSSIOI.


Clpcting in a common plan.* Bit a cami plan to do whet? In the exact
l-zjguage of tfc- Charter, a cceoon plan "to cocci t any of tho foregoing
crl*-s." Vo doubt tret anything could oc very auch clearer. And while,
to lx our,, t docialone of the International liilitary Tribunals on

point a of 1 sr* arc entitled to tho utaoat consideration end doforcnco.
Ordnance lo. 7, under wnich these Tribunals ere constituted, does not
jr’x tho decisions of the International Military Tribunal on points of
law binding.

Vo subnit, tnoroforw, fch t tta decision of the International !iili-

tary Tribunal ir. this respect is urong, cad thefc those Tribunals should

•

roach a contrary result under Control Council Law No.10. To be sure,
tho paragraph which loilows definition of crises in Law No. 10 is
different iron tho p-rograph which follows the definitions of crimes
in the London Agrouxr.t. Paragraph 2 of Law No. 10, ierxdictoly follou-
lng tho de/irltior.s, reads as follows:

"Arc xrsen without regard to nationality or tho capacity in
which l-o acted, la deevd to hawe ccrr.ittod c crimo as do-
finod in n rr.raph 1 of this Article, if he was (c) a prin¬
cipal or (b) was on accessory to tho coecieiibn of any such
crlic or ordered or nbett-d the uao pr (c) took o consent!:*
p*rt therein or (d) was connected with pirns or enterprises
involving its corxiisoion or (e) was r member of my organi-
zation or group connect . with the ccsaission of any such
crime or —"

(f) is a clause -Idch I shall not ru'd bec'uac it relates to crimes
ayinat peace. Thin prragr*ph does not -oploy tho word "conspiracy" or
thE p hr a so "coaaon plan." 9ut its p«irpose Is fundamentally tho some as
that of too para mpfc similarly placed ir. the London Agrxacnt, and is
spoiled out in muen greater detail in Law Ko. 10. That purpose, nbixi-
dcotly reflected in .all modern systas of crlaLarl Law, is to recogrdco
the criuLvl liability of those who are substantially connected rifch

; o"7/c- ( 37 ) ^


9 July-:«-fL-7-5-5iolai
JOIST SdSSIOK

the cauls-ion of a crime, even though the final criminal act is per¬
formed 07 az-iocfto els.. As Mr. Justice Jackson stated in his opening

.-.iirusfl before tho International Military Tribunals

r 2 vvTT >7 in the courts of countries associated in this pro-
s-cotion, - 10 c are convict-d fer acts which they did rot per-
sonclly caaoit but for which they ere held responsible fco-
ccuso of aciab-rahip in illegal cosbirctior.s or plans or cons¬
piracies."

Indeed, tho »:opo o! paregre p 2 of Article II of Control Council Law
So. 10 which I teve Just quoted, is, wo believe, broader than that of
tho doctrine of conspiracy, and in this connection, I refer particu¬
larly to clauses (c) through (f) of thj paragraph. This is not tho
proper occasion to undertake on exhaustive analysis of the scojx of tho
paragraph in epM* tiers, but I think it is quite clear ttet it is roro
than broad enough to comprehend tho original liabilities which are held
to attach to thoso uho enter into a crinia -1 conspiracy.

Furthermore, the prosecution submits that the Charter aid Lew No. 10
both should bo construed ns cooprohonding conspiracies to cconit war
crimes end crises egainst humanity, ovx if these oorngraphs following
the definitions of crimes, which we hr.vo been discussing, had been
omitted fro. the Charter and Law No. 10 . Surely it is not, and never has
been, f.M law that the ocnal conseqts-nces deriving from tho commission
of international lew cria.s c-n be visited only upon the singlu indi¬
vidual who pulls the trigger or turns on tho gas. 1 aa sure ttet oven
counsel fer tho dofonse would rot suggest such c preposterous conclu¬
sion, which would rob international po.rtl lew of all its sunning .and
substance In implying international pcrrl Law, Just as in applying do-
aertic penal 1 -w, we oust determine the substantial degree, or quality
of participation in cricks upon the basis of which a fair Judgaent of
guilt mst be rendered. And in making tl.ese it terminations u/.dor in-

'wu&l ... .


9 Jul7-.*-fIX7-i-=icisi
J3IKT S338X0H


throat ianel La, it is surely not only appropriate but wise to drew
upon such weH-esteDlished bodies of legal doctrine in highly dovolopod
systeas .8 viill cssist us in arriving at 2 result which cocanonds
it»~!f to our sense of Justice. The International Military Tribunal did
not find tint ny considerations of general jurisprudence stood in tho
"V of applying the doctrine of conspiracy in tbo case of crises gainst
por.ee, eltnough indeed, it applied that doctrir/ so narrowly as to
arouse criticise rather than approval froa so distinguished rr.d fair
aindod a Jurist as Sir. St las on;'and 1 eight point out that auch of Dr.
HMRStl'a argument res bo*n directed against the concept of conspiracy
in general and would apply equally to a conspiracy to coaoit crinos
against poaco.

4 s oarlior precedents, oirlier than that of the HIT, rpoliwd in
tho case of war orlaes, ttx prosecution eight auntion tho opinion of tho
reviewing authority rendered in Mar'h 1?’.6 in United States /- T7ciss and
others, uho xm tried and convioUd for atrocities at thj Dachau con¬
centration i*ip. Trls opinion contains a retner lengthy discussion of
tho application of the doctrine of conspiracy to - I quote - "war crincs
carxlttod by the concert, conspiracy, or conaor. design of ano or .wo
Individ jtI s.■ - end of quotation - The Dachau opinion quotes fron tho
opinion of thj British reviewing authorities in the earlier Bolson con¬
centration ce.jp ccao, in which the 45 accused were charged with being
"togotb-r concur.)-d as pnrtloc to the ill troatauit of....Allied ratio¬
nal* ", and ir. which the British authorities reviewing the conviction
stated:

"The accused rxrc net eh-rgod with individual nurd-rs,

0

though attty euch were proved. Cn the charges as fraoed,

the ease id* the prosecution against an individual ac—

*

c-jscd nr .3 established on c* tbo court was satisfied .that
bo or sac was c amiber of the staff of tho canp, and that
his or !ur acts proved to bo such as identified hin or

/c7/t» (39)

« I •

■-- _ _ ■_


9 Juljrwif-FL-7-7-3icl8i
jDUtT s&sa:”


or --P citi. the system of ill treatment, assuming that the
ays'—m uas established, of which there was indeed no question."

In suainry, the prosecution emphasizes that it is misleading to
consider this ques ion in terms of abettor conspiracy constitutes e
•separate" _* substantive crime at internetior.-.l lew. Conspiracy, to
achieve an unlawful obj.ctivo or to use unlawful .x-ns to attain an ob¬
jective is not, properly speaking, a separate subeoquent crlx at ell,
on 7 more than I ving an accessory or an accomplice is a crime; it is an
adjunct of the cvi.o; and the question tore is tto test of the dogrcc of
connection with erLoo r^co sorry to establish guilt. Only in those rare
esses where English and American courts have attached criminal guilt to
rets oc.&aittod in confederation which would not hove boer. illegal if
committed sin: ly cm conspiracy be properly spoken of as a "separato"
crime at all. And with such cases, the prosecution emphasizes,wo aro not
bore concerned In the slightest degree.


/(TVo/ m )


9 JOly-SWF-a-l-Beclols (Xnt. Fr?nk)

JOIST SSSSICa

It is Iit rtant, also, v> bear In mind that neither the Iondon
Charter nor Law *To. 10 purparts t" bo a conplote, or cron a nearly
c'•epicto codification of international pcn*l law. Surely no nno would
have nttonptod V> do this In s'* narrow a c-«pase. Cfcc dofiptlon of
wr erifiss, f'-r oxaeplo, ran: te us for a fullor exposition to "tho lawo
or oustono of war*, and if wo look for these in tho Hague Conventions,
wo find that hero too tho contracting pnrtirs rccopiizc tho IncoBolotenooo
of tho Ratuo inventions as a codification of the laws of war, and in
turn renit us to "tho principles of the law of nations Particularly
in respect to the nocostary degree of connection with n crlnc, tho
provisions of tho London Shorter and Law Fo. 10 nro illustrative rathor
than cxhaustlvo atcrots at statutory definition. Foithcr of then, for
oxaeplo; ashes nonti'-n '■f attempts, yet it surely was not the inten¬
tion in oithor case t~ olirlnatc atteopts fro-, international penal
low. Let us suy osc, for cxieplo, that an Aoorican or British or
other Allied Jewish soldlor is taken by tho Ooraano an a -risonor ,

of war, and that rfter his capture, when the fact that ho is Jowish ^

Is disoovorod, a Goman soldier dotcmlnos for this rer.son to ohoot
hir., and loads his gun and nakes roady for the oxccution, at which
noaont he io in turn captured b7 the advancing Allies and the cxocution
is forestalled, tho Goman soldier being caught in the sot. Can ono
imagine that the Goman would not bo o- urt-oar Haled lnrodlatcly- and
rightly, for the attcopted curdor of *n unamed prisnnoxv-of-warT
Such ox'ur-los could readily bo nultlpliod and serve to cephasiso
that we d •> not find international penal law cocplotoly oodlfiod and
ready to hsnd, as in State crlninal codo.

Consequently, if Lav r«. 10 doos -v t nsko express reforcncc to
cons iracy as an did to determining guilt for war crimes that In it¬
self is hardly governing. As wo have pointod out tho language of
parn,-r- h 2 of Articlo II of Lav Fo. 10 is broader than tho doctrino
of conspiracy. Purthcrmorc, if the doctrine of conspiracy should,

contend, nor*ally be drawn upon in dotominisg guilt for crlnos

/ 0>4 )


f*2 VC


9 July-«-JB-6-3-ItenielB (Int. Fr-nk)

joiit sssszc?


at international law. Law Ho. 1C ir sob a'- barier to such use. Para¬
graph 2 of Article III of Control Council Law To. 10 onprescly statoa
that:

»7othing heroin ie intended tn ; or shall, ispair or linit tho
jurisdiction or over of any court or tribunal now or horcaftcr
established in any Zone by the Conrender thoroof, or of tho
International I'ilit-ry Tribunal established V tho London
AoTocnont of 8 August, 1945."

Ordinance yo. 7, which of course cannot and doos not purport to croato
or dcflno crises, but which docs rroscribo tho organization and oovoro
of thtso Tribunals for tho trial and punisJrant of offensos rocognicod
as criroo In Law Jn. 1C, oxprossly prorldcs that tho guilt for tho
co=r.i3oi'<n of any such cri-cs attaches V* conspiratoro

In concluoi'-n, tho pr' sorutioa respectfully suggest that it would
by usolooo, aaocnlnoa, and hamful if tho doctrino of c-nopiracy is
hold to bo applicable in tho casos of criccs against ponce but not in
tho c-.sc of vnr cri-os and crises a*"lost hunanity. Vo ore unablo to
find any ccasiblo basis for such " distinction, and we bolievo that
such a C'nclusion will tend to varp tho logical and ronconrblo appli¬
cation 'f international penal law,

Boforo sitting down, I want to out oat vory briefly or. tho rcoulto
w-.lch dcfwnoo counool oo.r t- think would flow fr'o a decision in thoir
favor on tho question being argued this porring. I sup.-ono that the
question this corning is being argued ir. general and without special
rofcrenco to the dis o»ition of the threo eases in which tho prose¬
cution has charged a conspiracy in the first counts of the i-.dictncats
therein. Presumably, should the Tribunals cn bone docido in accor¬
dance with tho pocition takor. by tho dofenso counsel. Tribunals I, II,
and III will thereafter dotcrcinc individually what disposition slvuld,
in conscqucaco, be cado of Counts 1 in oach of thoso threo indictnonts*
However, tho '.rosccution thinks it appropriate to point out at thiB
tir.c thr.t each of those counts, in addition to charging that tho
defendants were eo-xcctcd with tho alleged crinos as conspirators,

/ 67 /(* ( 42 ^


9 July-ii-JB-B—3-Oaniels (1st. Freak)

J0I52 ZZZCICL-

alen contains charge# in the exact language n f paragraph 2 of Articlo
II of Coctr'l Council Lav To. 10. Thorcforc, vc suggest, those courts
*•'■14 O'-t bee' o .".cfccti"o, oven though the Tribunals on banc should
doterrljo thnt these charges cannot he r.ada in the language of cons¬
piracy. I'or do wo think that any significant shortening of tho pro¬
ceedings in those cases is likely rosult vhichovor way tho Tribunals
cn tare dccido tho question being argued this corning bocausc, as wo
ba/c pointed out, tho language of para raph 2 of Articlo II of Control
Law 1C is broader than tho concent of conspiracy, and it will
rer.ain open to tho prosecution to establish tho connection of tho
dofondanto with tho alleged crises undor that brondor l^ngungo of
Control Council Law So. 10.

I venture to cake only one other observation of gonorrl intoroot,
but which ray particularly oonccrn counsol f'r tho defonso. I havo
noticed ir. sovoral of thoir argunents, ad rossod t« today's quost’on,
before Tribunals II and III rnd in IT. Haonscl's learned pr.o'nta'.ion
today, that tho sug.-cation ia rcpeatodly rado that any application
ir those trials of doctrine unfaclllAr to Comae In* will work grnvo
injustice rnd will ~i lato a nunbor of lermod Latin log»d mucins sueh
r.s nulla ^ocna sine logo . I entirely agree at eocs without saying,
that a nan putt not bo punished for ncto not unlawful at the tiro of
their con-, i salon. But I have tried today to illuaiaato tho proposition
that, in the field of lntcrn*ti'nnl por.nl law, r.any auxiliary nrin-
ciplos and d'-ctri os aust bo drawn fron e varioty of legal oysteno.

Those and other internationally constituted Tribunals canr.ot work ex¬
clusively in the Medina of Oernan law, »r Aneric-n law, nr cron a
c-nbinati'a of tho two. That is not tho gcdlus of international low.

^hd Bay I bo perritted to rccarfc als' that if tho * bjcctions of
dof nso counsel to an infusion of legal principles fr'-~ non-Comar. logal
aystfles were V- be taken at face value, certain consequences would
flow thor fro-', which, I as sure, they would find oo*t unvclcor.o, I will


/tycffl


9 Joly-E- JB -8 4 - SOniali (Int. Trank)

j nn oissick


e* nfine r73olf to two illustrations. Under Gcrnan lew, a defendant
cannot testify under oath in hie own behalf. It is because of na
infnaioa r.f -'.i>-Cera«n legal principles that the defendants in those
pr^.-co: -•-% arc entitled t'. take ar. ari:. and enter that box. Undo*-
Gcr-.-c lav, there ia ca requircsent that the guilt of an accuaad ho -'rov¬
ed ‘beyond a reasonable doubt* in - lor to support a Jud^aont of guilt,
Ejalrar Schacht vm acquitted by the Ir.tornntionnl Military Tribun/2
beenoso his '-novledgo of Hitler’s plans for aggrossivo warfare) van
■■no: established boyoad a roneonnblo d«ubt". Erhard ::ilch wr.o ccquittod
undor 2-unt 2 of tho indictscnt filod against his bocauso Military
Tribunal II bolierod that his guilt had not boon established "beyond
a roMnncblo drubt J , end Tribunal II strtod in its Judeaont acquitting
Mil chi

“I/iloso tho court vhlch noaro tho proof in convinced o' guilt
to tho point of roral certainty, the prcouiptior of i. nocimoo
n, *st continue to protodt the accus«d. If tho frets as drawn
fr-ei the oridonca aro equally consist at with guilt .u»d
innocence, they uoet be resolved on the sfdo of lruv.«x.ncn.

Undor Acorican lav. noithor lifo nor liberty is to b-i ll,:nf y
taken ova:’, and. unJoss at *..e o-.nclusi-n of tho pro-.j thoro
is on abiding c>r.viction of guilt in the ulnd 'f tho court
which aits in Judgaent; the accusod say not bo clarmifiod.

Paying reverent attention to thoso sacred principles. It is
the Jud^ceat of tho Tribunal that the dof.-ndr.at is not guilty
of tho eh.-rgo b oebraced in Ount Iv' of tho Inriictron<-.‘'

Iho f-. principles which I have usod for illuatrati- r. aro r.ot
known t> the Ccxnaa law. They aro bo Lug n 3 ~ lied in these proceedings
boc-usc, i.i th- view of tho f' ur r„v C rs wh> drew up tho London Chirtor
ar.d O' ntrol O uacil Law Ko. 10, they arc principles o nducivo the Irir-
ness and Justice in tho odeinistration of mtcmati-nal ponal low.

They both dcriro fr-r tho ^lo-Saxon cor.-on law. I do n't bcliovc that
wo will hear nay defense counsel arguo thrt their ap--licatl'n in theco
proccodir-^s works injustice bccauso of thoir alien origin.

TEZ PHZSID2^: Counsol for tho dofonso has tea rinutcc rocaining
~f hie tLro.

U.. EAiT;732L: Vo, on aany point agroo with the Prosecution.

/&7/G 0 *)


9 Jdy-k-J?-8-5-Icniels (Int. Trnsk)

JOI'.T 323SICS

However, first of all, let nc say that tho Prosecution, too, based
thcnsclvos on tho assumption that international penal law is apnlicablo
and that wa arc not bound to any internal laws of any particular otato.
Conucqucr-tly, in this practical c-’u-, tho quosti.>n is whether tho
conspiracy to conduct war, and again., crimes against hucanity, io part
of this international law. I bcliovo that of all tho orguaonto statod
by Gcnoral Taylor, tho 'no th»t is the no B t ieportant, and tho oro
which I will oanoon rysolf with now. Is tho question as t>- whothor
that conspiracy is nocossary for tho achiovoccnt of a Just Judgment*

In othor words, da we aoed the conspiracy in order to note out

punisteer.t which otherwise would not be noted out for certain criros?

I will ad it that we, tho continental Jurists, havo nany diffo-
roncos and pro much in the dark regarding tho interpretation of that
lav, of conspiracy, and wc still rcnaln in the dark to o'-no CXtont,
However, I r.uat any that General Taylor Is probably not altogether
dorr about continental law because it is a aattor of courco th»t wo
too kn'v responsibility for porpotrations comlttod by others. Vo
d' n't only punish tho so v»v shoot, but also thoso who inctigato tho
shooting, even if they arc not physically inroivod at first sight.
Participation, instigation, all such "a*.tore arc, as a rnttor of courso,
punishable undor C'Ctlnontal law too; and, of couroo, n' International
penal law can bo imagined without punishing those who in realty
d.'sired the porpotration and carried it into offect in n-ao way.

The great difference, however, botwocn that and conspiracy,
es vc cac it, is th«t nary nay be oaught in the conspiracy charge
who di :ot t:.o-aolvcs desiro such a dc_d but who got involved not
through their ow-i volition and then arc brought into tho conspiracy,

The other objection against conspiracy is that the basic idoa
held by tho authors. Bishop and Sors, is tho fundamental thought that
so-aothing night not be punishablo which is oiarittcd by an individual
but night become punishable if it is brought about by collaboration


/oyu(w.)


9 Jo37-iS-JB-8-6-Danicl« (Int. Trank)
JOICT S3SSI0F


between several# Let cc giro you an era.nple: If a grown-up nan seduces
e grown-up wnnen, then that is no. a punishable offense although it
is indecent. If 3Cvor»l non do it, haring agreed previously to do it
then it is conspiracy. That is where tho trouble begins. I do a&-i
that there in a correct principle attachod to it, but it is a thought
which is atrnrgc t'- us, which rakes us feel anxious, ard vo are likely
t' do it out of our own fear that justico nay not bo norrod through this


bccauso the problca bcdo.ncs too oxt A nsivo. Sbat is the reason why
wo hold against conspiracy.

I therefore say it is not necessarily goraanc for a Just finding
or Judgior.t as for as tho ouostior. is concerned as to whothor conothing
c*n K c nsidored right under international law, which is no hotly
fought about as tho conspiracy, I would liko to say, just as fonnedieux
do Vnbro pad General Taylor have said. That is tho vory nrgiccnl
against conspiracy., It soobs to anphosixo that conspiracy was not to
be includod In Law !7o. 10, because L'-w 10 was not publJ chcd until
tho Err was in oocsior- Contradictions which affooted tho HT, said
Eonnedioux do Trbro, ware a rarently doliboratoly cxcludod, and
prjsair.bly the final Judg-ort of tho I T shows th-t tho final decision
wao thr.t r. punishable conspiracy was in oxistonco due to rpocial laws
dealing with cri-ct og^inst poaco, but not against hurunity.


9 July- .-GJ-9-l-?eldt-(Frank-)


Joint session.

T:.is become abubdantly clear if yew examine the initials history
which Jen. Taylor dealt with. It shows with abundant clarity tho question
brought up by *aerican jurists, too, namely that this was not to bocone
part of international law.

Once when I was young student I went to Latcn in I-ngland and I
was taken to a hall, one wall of which had toppled over. This wall had
a doer which was cade in the 13th century and had boen made so low
that evory one going through that door had to bend down. How, this wall
had fallen down -nd the possibility existed to put . beautiful new door
into -he wall, but what did tho nglish do? They put tho Some old door
in once again and everybody had to bend, uvoro afterwards. That is
tradition as a pleasure.

li Z trace conspiracy, if I look at’something made in tho 13th
century, it is an historical door, but I can't imagine that anything
that ms ri^ht ir. the 13th century is right today. Porhape it would be
right to accuse that socuthin*, sore timely, aon. aodern, would be aorc
applicable. And I also feel that tho principle which to arc now arguing
about the principle of guilt i*.ich TRAl.ft'Q preaches and which is
included in the I. T Judgment is not properly dealt with by the conspira¬
cy charge. That is our nain objection. That is we wanted to find expres¬
sion for. .lot by any soans that any crir s should bo unpunislx-d. They
aho .Id bo punished, yes, but let us punisr. thea concretely. Let us
punish thus with ruUr safety, without that we have this uncertain
spirit. This "wavering of the spirit" as our great thinker JJ.lEL callod
it, but we have concrete conceptions, and that is that wo are fighting
for.

- i/hat tho fomal decision is cone rned, I feel that we oust
considt-r that a way out would be this: application is Tribunal 3 which
only Tribunal 3 is entitled to decide upon. If a plenary ocetin, were
to deal with it, then it wouldn't sake a decision applicable to Case 3
bet t.culd sake a general decision so that tho judges of Tribunal 3 kno-
now the other judges feel when they in their town decide about Case 3.


9 July- .-GJ-9-2-?cldt-(?rani.)-
Jomfc session.

I feel that every individual court ought to decide its own casts,
individually, evan if a general agreement has here tec.n reached* 1
believe that the arguments brought forward about the interpr-tation
of Law Ho. 10 arc actually supporting ay thesis. Ocn. Taylor pointed
out that then, was, in fact, a considerable difference between crimes
against p-.ace and cria-s against peace and humanity, as far as the
conspiracy charge is concerned. The crime against peace is impossible
without Joint collaborative action, then consequently it had to be
Included, but the crime against the Hague Convention and humanity night
b« coccitted by on*, and it might b-. committed by thousands. Then let
us punish who wore the perpetrators, but not on uncertain body of peoplo
who were n^v^r demonstrated the AUCTOhlS 0 and nov-.r incurod

guilt theaselves.

THE PR’SILr.TT: Tfv. arguments of the Prosecution and the defense
hovin, been concluded, this tn banc session of the Judgos ol the different
Tribunals, the purpose of which was announced et the opening of the
stsaion, is now adjoum-d.

(The Tribunal adjourn-d at 11:35 hours.)


/D->/k Ac)


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 11
Target 2

Voluae 29
July 14-17, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG

1 ft 4 « * f ^ b t ^ ™ *


CASC No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U S. «• KARL BRANDT •» ol
VOLUMf 29


TRANSCRIPTS

(" 9 *)


14-17 July 1947 pp. 10717-11198


Court I

14 Jul 47-*-l-l-iB(-Cook (Von Scfcoen)


Official Transcript of the Acerlean Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of Arerica against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Suerntarg, Geroany, on
14 July 1947, 0930, Justice Beals ©residing.


ZKL MARSHAL: Persons in the courtroom vlll ©lease find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tribuhal
I la now in session. God save the United States of Aaerica and this
honorable Tribunal. There vlll be order In the court.

TEX PaiSIUE.'!: Mr. Marshal, hare you ascertained if the
defendants are all ©resent in court?

TKS KABSEAL: May it please Tour Honor, all the defendants are
present in the court.

THX PHXSIHSTi The Secretary General will note for the record
the presence of all the defendants in court.

The Tribunal win now announce its ruling on the notion of certain
defondants against Count I in the indietnent concerning the charge of
conspiracy.


h£LIS4feT IE


• 1


Count Z of the lndletaent in this case charges that the defendants,


acting pursuant to a eoaaon design, unlawfully, willfully and knowingly
did consolrs and agree together to connlt war crises and crises against
fcunanity as defined in Control Council Low So. 10, Article 2. It is
chargod that the alleged crine was cocnlttod botveen Soptanber 1939 and
Aeril 1945.


It is the ruling of this Tribunal that nelthor the Charter of the
International Military Tribunal ncr Control Council Law So. 10 has
deflnad conspiracy to coenlt a war crlae or crlae against hucanlty as


a separate substantive crice; therefore, this Tribunal has no Jurls-

ucon a charge of cons©lracy considered sre

fi ^<o\

•ate ...-- __ .

: - J - - V&\

I of the iofti tnent. in addition to the separate charge of


suastactlv®.affens e,

* v^Y

of the lniiitnent.


conspiracy, also all


•cW


unlawful participation in the fornulation and


execution of plana to coenlt >«r crines and crises against huaanity


10717


Court Z

14 Jttl 47-K-l-&-i£M-Cook (Von Schoen)


which actually involved the commission of such crises. Vc, therefore,
cannot properly strike the vfeole of Count I from the indlctaent, but,
insofar as Count I chargee the commission of the alleged crlne of con-
srlracy aa a aeparate substantive offenae, dlatlnct free any war crlne
or crlne against hunanlty, the Tribunal will dlareg&rd that charge.

This ruling nuat not be construed aa Halting the force or effect
of Article 2, paragraph 2 of Control Council Law Ho. 10, or aa denying
ts either prosecution or defense the right to offer in evidence any facte
or clrcuaetancea occurring either before or after Septeaber 1939, if
such facte or oircunetancee tend to ©rove or to dlecrove the coealeelon
by any defendant of war crlaee or criaee agalnet hunar.lty aa doflned In
Control Council Law Bo. 10.

The Tribunal has convened thle aornlng to hear argunente of the
prosecution and couneel for defense In the case which has been ©ending
before thle Tribunal. Counsel for the prosecution may now orocoed with
its argunent.

MR. ..C HABIT: May it please the Tribunal:

ihibcductics

Today narks the Closing week of this trial, which began on
December 0, 1946. Today we have behind ua 133 trial days, apcroxicatcly
33 of which were consumed by the ©rosecutlon In ©resenting the caoo-ln-
chief and rebuttal evidence. Thirty-two witnesses gave ovidence orally
for the prosecution and thirty witnesses, in addition to the t-enty-
three defendants, gave evidence for the defense. The prosecution sub-
nitted In evidence 670 exhibits, aoet of which were Goman docuoenta
captured by the Allied araies. Defense exhibits totalled 855, consist¬
ing primarily of affidavits. 3y the time the Judgment has been rend,
the record will exceod 12,000 pages.

It is appronriate, in looking back over the history of this ©rocoed-
lcg, to note the fairness with vfcich the trial has been conducted.
Whatever the defendants could say In their behalf, they were allowed to

10713


Court I

14 Jul 47-ii-l—3-AHH-CooJc (Von Schoen)


•ay. The Tribunal has been unstinting in its efforts to orocure such
witnesses, documents, and facilities as the defense has reouosted. Is
Justice Jackson has stated, "They have been given the kind of a trial
which they, in the days of their posp and glory, never gave to any can.” 1
Several of these defendants are peculiarly able to atmreeiate that fact
to the fullest. The defendant Xarl Brandt, for ezasple, is no stranger
to fail Justice. In April 1945, as a result of difficulties with Hitler
and Boraann, he was afforded a trial of a few hours on a charge of
treason. Tried by an SS Obergrupnenfuehrer, he was sentenced to death.
Only the confusion of the dying days of the war saved hia for this
reunion. Brandt adeltted to this Tribunal that there vas soee fault to
be found with that trial because, as he put it, "the sentence had been
established beforehand.■ 2

The responsibility of a fair trial to the defendants has been dis¬
charged. So also for the prosecution has that obligation to the peoolos
and races on whoa the scourge of these crises was laid. The crises
which these defendants oerpetrated in the case of nodical sclenoo have
been establlahed by clear and overwhelning nroof which is indelibly
written in the record of this proceeding. No one can doubt that theso
incredible events were fact and not fable. The tine for suspended Judg¬
ment is now passed. The tiae for decision has been reached.

Before proceeding to outline the prosecution's case, it nay oorhaos
be desirable to anticipate several legal ouestlono which will undoubtedly
be raised with respect to war crises and crises against husanlty, as
defined in Article II of Control Council Lav Bo. 10. Law No. 10 is, of
course, the law of this case and its teres are conclusive uoon every
wu-ty to this proceeding. This Tribunal is, we resueetfully suboit,
bound by the definitions in Law So. 10, Just as the International Mili¬
tary Tribunal was bound by the definitions in the London Charter. It


1. I.M.T. transcript, p. 14332

2. Transcript, p. 2622


10719


Court I ,

14 Jul 47-H-l-4-Z3t-Cook (Von SchoenJ


ms stated In the I.K.T. Judgment that:

■The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is defined in the
Agreement and Charter, and the crines coning within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, for which there shall be
individual resoonslbllity, are set out in Article 6.

The law of the Charter is decisive, and binding uoon the
Tribunal...


■The Tribunal is, of course, bound by the Charter,
in the definition which it gives both of war crines and
crines against humanity." 1

In outlining briefly the prosecution's conception of some of the
legal principles underlying war crines and crines against hunanlty, I
shall, with the Tribunal's permission, adopt tone of the language free
the opening statement of the urosocutlon in the cose against Friedrich
Flick, et al., now pending before Tribunal So. IV. General Taylor
there said!

■The definitions of crises in Law So. 10, and the
comparable definitions in the London Agreement and Charter
of 8 August 1945, are statements and declarations of what
the law of nations was at that time and before that time.

They do not create 'new' crimes; Article II of Law So. 10
otates that certain acts are 'recognised' as crimes. Inter¬
national law does not soring from legislation; it is a
•customary' or 'common' law which develoos from the 'usages
established among civilized peoples' and the 'dictates of
the public conscience.' (2) As they dovolop, these usages
and customs become the basis and reason for acts and con¬
duct, and from time to time they are recognised in treaties,
agreements, declarations, and learned texts. Tho London
Charter and Law Ko. 10 are important items in this stream
of acts and declarations through which international law
grows; they are way stations from %fclch tho outlook is both
prospective and retrosnective, but they are not retroactive.

Mr. Henry L. Stinson has recently expressed these prlncloleo
with admirable clarity: (3)

•International lav is not a body of authoritative
codes or statutes; it is the gradual expression,
case by case, of the moral Jud^sents of the civil¬
ised world. As such, it corresoonds orecisely
to the common law of Anglo-American tradition.

Ve con understand the law of Nuremberg only if
we see it for what it is - a great new case in


1. Trial of the Major bar Criminals, Vol. 1, pp. 218, 253.

2. Hague Convention Ho. IV of 18 October 1907.

3. "The Buremberg Trial: Landmark in Law", Henry L. Stiscon,
published in "Foreign Affairs", January 1947.


10720


12* Jul-tf-jO-2-1—Gross
Court Sc. I*


■law No. 1C is all this and something more
besides. It is a legislative ^nactnent by
the Control Council, and is therefore port
of tte ls« of end within Gomncy. Cne of
the infirmities of dictatorship is that,
when it suffers irretrievable and final
mili tary disaster, it usually crumbles into
nothing and leaves the vie tins of its
tyranny leaderlass amidst political chaos.

Tho Third Reich had ruthlessly hunted down
ov^ry man and woman in Germany who sought
to oxpress political ideas or dovelop politi¬
cal leadership outside of the bestial ideo¬
logy of Nazism. When the Third Reich collapsed,

Go nanny tumbled into a political vacuum. Tho
Declaration by tho Alllod rbnors of 5 Juno,

19U5, announced tho *cssvription of supreme
authority* in Germany if or the maintenance of
order* ard 'for the administration of the
country*, and recited that:

•There is no central govenvaont or
authority in Garunny capable of
accepting responsibility for tho
maintenance of order, tho adminis¬
tration of tha country, and con-
pllanco with the requir^r-onts of
tho victorious powers.«

Following this declaration, th. Control Council
war constituted ac tho repository of centralized
authority in Germany. lev No. 10 is in onr.ctoont
of that body, and is tho law of Go nanny, although
its substantive provisions dorivo from and embody
tho law of nations. Tho Humborg Military
Tribunals arc ostablishod under th> authority of
Low Ho. lO,* and they rondor Judguont not only undor
international lav os declared in Law No. 10, but
under tho law of Germany as onneted in law Ho. 10.

Tho Tribunals, in short, enforce both international
law and Goman Lur, and in interpreting and apply¬
ing Law No. 10, they nust vies: Lew Ho. 10 not only
as n declaration of international law, but as an
onactrant of tho occupying powers for tho govorn-
a:«o of and administration of justico in Goroany.

Tho enactment of Law No. 10 was on oxorciso of
lugislativo power by tho four countrios to which
tho Third Reich surrendered, and, as wao hold by
tho International Military Tribunal: 2

'......tho undoubted right of those

countries to legislate for tho occupied
territories has bo-.n recognized by tho
civilized world."*

IS. H:KAK5X: That's the end of tlx- quotation from General Taylor's
statesjjrt. War Crimes are defined in Law Ho. 10 as atrocities or of¬
fenses in violation of the laws or customs of vcr. This definition is

based primarily upon tho Hague Conventions of 1907 ard the Geneva Coa-

1. Control Council lew No. 10, Article m, pnrs 1 (d) and 2; Military
Govonxcnt Ordinance No. 7, Article H.

2. Judgment of the Interactional Military Tribunal, Vol. I, Trial of
the Major ■■or Criminals, p. 218.


lh Jul-il-SC-S-S-Gross
Court Ho. I.


vent Ion of 1929, which declare the law of nations at those tiros with
respect to land warfare, the troetaont of prisoners of war, the rights
and duties of a belligerent power when occupying territory of a hostile
state, and othar natters. The laws and customs of war apply bo t to on
belligerents, but not daajstically or aaong allies. Crimes by German
nationals against other German nationals aro not War Crimes, nor aro
acts by Ocrnan nationals against Hungarians or Roumanians ■ The War
Crir.es charged in this Indicteent all occurred after 1 September 1939,
and it is therefore unnecessary to consider tho somcwhnt narrenr limita¬
tion of the scope of War Crises by tto International Military Tribunal
to acts couolttod after tho outbreak of thu war. Ono night argue that
tho occupations of Austria nr.d tho Sudotonlnnd in 1933 and of Bohocia
and Moravia in Kareh 1939 wore sufficiently s im i lar to a state of belli
gcroncy to bring tha laws of war into effect tut such questions aro
academic for purposes of this com.

Htwuvor, in tto ensa of sono of tho defendants, and this is es¬
pecially true with rospoct to Qobhardt, Fischor, and Ctoorhausor in con¬
nection with tho sulfanilamide experiments, it is to bo oxpcctod that
tho arguiont will bo c/tdo that crims ng.ainot Polish, and perhaps also
Czech, nationals do not constitute War CrL.es within tho meaning of
Control Council Law No. 10. This arguiont is based upon tho proposition
that Goranny was no longer bound by tt^ rules of land warfare in many
of tho torritorios occupied during tho war because Gormrny had coaplotoly
subjugated thoeo countries and incorporated thorn into tte Third Raich,
and thoroforo Germany had tho authority to deal rith tho occupied
countries as thouf^i thay were port of Qcrvny. Thus, tho defense placod
in ovidjrcc tho Ru3so-Gor=an Boundary and Friendship Treaty of 30 Decem¬
ber 1939 "s well as certain Goman decrees concerning tho c.dainistrr.tion
of occupied Poland. 1 Without stopping to argue tho poing that that part
of PoL-nd acrxinistcrad by tho so-called Governor General from which onus
tho Polish subjects for the sulfanilamide experiments, was never incor¬
porated into the Reich, it will be sufficient to point out that this
1. Gebhardt Exhibits 13, lh and 15.


10723


lii Jul*4MG-2~3-Qrc2s

Court Ho. I.


argument was disposed of ry the International Military Tribunal. In
its Julgnent, the following was said:

"In the vieiv of the Tribunal, it is
unnecessary in this case to decide
whether this doctrine of subjugation,
dependent as it is upon military con¬
quest, has any application where tho
subjugation is tho rosult of tho crice
of aggressive war. Tho ctoctrino was
never considered to bo applicable so
long as there was any arty in the fiold
attempting to restore the occupiod
countries to their tn» onnors, and in
this case, therefore, the doctrino could
not apply to any torritorios occupied
after 1 Septenber, 1939-

Tho arguant also has no validity with respect to Ctech nationals.

The International Unitary Tribunal said that:

■As to War Critfcs comittod in Bohonia
and Moravia, it is a sufficient answar
that the so torritcrios were nover addod
to ths Reich, tut a nore protectorate was
established over then." 1

In connection with tho charge of Crises against Humanity, it is
also anticipcitod that an argunont will be .ado by tho dofonoo to tho
effect that crises cocnittcd ty German nationals against othor Ooraan
nationals cannot constltuto Cri es against Huaanity ns dofinod by
Articlo II of Control Council lew Ho. 10 and honev. nro not within tho
Jurisdiction of this Tribunal. Tho evidence af tho Prosecution has
proved tfrt in substantially all of tho experiments prisoners of war or
civilians fraa Goman occupiod territories wore used ns subjects. This
proof stands uncontradicted save by general statouontc of tho defend¬
ants that they roro told by Hinolor or solo unidentified person that
tho experimental subjects were oil Go man criminals or that they spoke
fluont Oornon. Thus, for tho :ioot part, tho acts here in issue con¬
stitute Knr CriLOS and honco, at the seno tire. Crimes against Humanity.
Certainly thcro has boon no proof whatever that an order was over issued
restricting tho experimental subjects to Goman crinlnals ns distinguished
free ncn-Gcrean nationals. If, in this or that minor instance, tho proof
has not disclosed tho precise nationality of thu unfortunate victims or


1. Trial of tho lfcjor War Criminals, Vol. 1, p. 2$h


1072 U


Hi Jul-«-»5-2-ii-Gro5S

Court 5o. I.


las been shown t h en to be Gcracns, wc nay rest assured that it was scruly
a chance occurrence.

Be that as it nay, the Prosecution docs not wish to ignore a
challenge to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal even though it is of
ainor ia^ortarco to this esse. One thing should be nade clear at tin
outsett wo are not boro concerned with any question as to jurisdiction
over crises coaaittod before September 1, 1939, whether against Ooman
nationals or otherwise. That sifcjoct has bean nootod and is in issuo
in another case now on trial, but tho criras in this caso all occurred
after tho war began.

Moreover, wo arc not concerned with tho question whether crlraos
against twaenity nust have boon ccCBdttod "in oxccution of or in con¬
nection with any crixvj within tho Jurisdiction of the Tribunal*. Tho
International Kilit'ry Tribunal construed its Cliartor as requiring that
Crises against Huacnity bo ccmittcd in oxccution of, or in connection
with, tho criru of aggressive war. Whatever tho njrit of that holding,
tho language of tho Charter of tho International Military Tritunal
which led to it is not included in tho definition of Crinos against
Huncnity in Control Council Law Ho. 10. There oan bo no doubt that
Criros against Runcnity es dofinod in Law Ko. 10 stand on an Independ¬
ent footing and constitute criros per so. In any ovent, tho cri-xo
with which this caso is concornod wuro in fact all "comittcd in oxoc-
ution of, cc in connection with, tho aggrosslvo war". This is truo not
only of tho nodical oxporiaonts, but also of tho outhnnasia jrograa,
pursuant to which a largo nurfcor cf non-German nationals wore killed.

Tho Judgment of tho Intornational Military Tribunal expressly so holds. 1

Thus, it is clear that tho only issuo which is raised in this caso
as to Crinos ag'inst Humanity is rhothjr tho Tribunal has Jurisdiction
over crinos- consitted by Gomans against Gomans. Docs the definition
of Crires against Himnity in Control Council Law No. 10 cccprohend
crinos ty Gomans against Germans ofthe typo with which this caso i3
concerned. Thj provisions of Lew Ko. 10 .re bin d ing upon the Tribunal
1. Trial of the Jfcjor War Criminals, R>. 231, 2U7, 252, 25U, 301.


10725


Hi Gross

Court No. I.


as the lair to bo applied to the case. 1 The provisions of Section 1(c)
of Article H are clear and unambiguous. Criros against Huoanity are
there defined as:

■Atrocities and offenses, including but not United to
nurdar, oxtomimtion, enslavenent, deportation, ii>-
prisortent, torture, rape, or other inhumane acts con-
nittod against any civilian population or persecutions
on political, racial or religious grounds whether or
not in violation of the domstic laws of the country
■here perpetrated."

The words "any civilian population" cannot possibly bo construed to ox-
cludo (fcrncn civilians. If Gomans are dcoaod to bo excluded, there is
little or n ot h ing loft to give purpose to tto concept of Crises against
Husanity. Vfar Criicr includo all nets listed in the dofinition of Criros
against Humanity whon ccrxdttod against prisoners of war and the civilian
population of occupied torritcry. Tho only remining significant groupa
aro Gomans and nationals of tho satclito countries, such as Hungary or
Rouaania. It is ono of tha very purpooos of tho concept of Crinos against
Hucanity, not only as sot forth in Law No. 10 but also as long rccognizod
by international law, to ru^ch the systauatle cccnission of ntrocitioo
nnd offonses by a State against its own pcoplo. Tho concluding phrnso
of the definition of Crime against Hvrrnity, which is in ttn nltorna-
tivo, oakoa it quito clear that crises by Gomans against Oonoans aro
within tho Jurisdiction of this Tribunal. It roads "or persecutions on
political, racial or religious grornds whother or not in violation of
tho dors Stic lavs of tho country -..here perpetrated ". This reference to
"dotwstic laws" c-n only no an discriminatory and oppressive legislation
di roc tod against a State's own people, as for oxanplo tho Numberg lnw3
against Gerrv.n Jaws.

The matter Is put quit® beyond doubt by Article III of Law No. 10,
which authorizes oach of the occupying powers to arrest persons suspoctod
of having comitted crims defined in Low No. 10, and to bring thorn to
trial "buforo an appropriate tribunal", fhragraph 1(d) of Article III
further provides that:

"Such Tribunal nay, in tho ease of crime cemitted by
1. Trial of tho ifcajor war Criminals, pp. 17L, 253*


10726


Hi Jul-*W©-2-6-Gross

Court Ko. I.


persona of Gersan citiscnship or nationality against
other parsons of Goman dtisonship or nationality,
or state la as persons, be a Goman court, if author¬
ised by the occupying authorities."


10727


h. July-a-Fl^-3-l-Leonard

Court No. I


This constitutes an explicit recognition that acts committed by Gorsacns
against other Gormans are punishable as crises under Law Ho. 10 accor¬
ding to the definitions contained therein, in the discretion of the
occupying poser. This has particular rcfcreisco to Crises against Huma¬
nity, since the application of Crises against Peace and War Cri-oos,
while possible, is almost entirely thooritical. If the occupying pernor
fail* to author!ao German courts to try crimes coaaitted by Gormans
against other Germans (and in the American zone of occupation no such
authorization has been given), then theso cases arc triod only bofore
non-Gorman tribunals, such as these Military Tribunals.

What would bo the effect of a holding that crimos by Gormans against
Germans can undor no circumstances bo within the jurisdiction of tho
Tribunal? Is this Tribunal to ignore the proof that tens of thousands
of Go neon s wore oxtonainntod pursuant to a secret decree, because a
group of criminals in control of a polico State thought thorn "usoloss
eaters" and an unnecessary burden, or that German prisoners wore nurdcr-
od and mistreated by the thousands in concentration camps, in part by
modical experimentation? Military Tribunal II in tho Milch ccso hold
that crimes against nationals of Hungary and Roumania wore Crimos
against Humanity. There is certainly no reason in saying that thoro is
jurisdiction over crises by Germans against Hungarians but not against
Gomans.

Tho Judfl»nt of tho International Military Tribunal shots a clear
recognition of its jurisdiction over crimos by Germans against Gormans.
After reviewing a largo number of inhumane acts in connection with War
Crimos and Crimes against Humanity, tho Tribunal concluded by saying that:

".froa tho beginning of the war in 1939 War Crimos

wore committed on a vast scale, which wore also Crimes
against Humanity; and insofar as the inhumane acts chargod
in tho Indictment, and coaaitted after tho boginning
of the war, did not constitute War Crimes, they were


10728


1 U Jui7-tf-rL-3-2-I^onard
Court No. I


all committed in execution of, or in connection with,
the aggressive war, and thereforo constituted Crises
against Huma n ity." 1

Since war Crises aro necessarily also Crimes against Hunanity, the
broader definition of the latter can only refer to crioos not covered
by the forcer, namely, crisis against Germans and nationals of coun¬
tries other than those occupied by Germany. Moreover, the Prosecution
in that case maintained that the inhumane treatment of Jews and politi¬
cal opponents in Germany before the war constituted Crimes against Hu¬
manity. Tho Tribunal said in this connections

"With regard to Crisis against Hunanity thore is no doubt
whatever that political opponents were wardered in Ger¬
many boforo the war, and that many of then wore kept
in concontraticn chaps in circumstances of great horror
and cruelty. Thj policy of terror was certainly carried
out on a vast sc-lo, and in many oosos was organitod and
systematic. The policy of persecution, repression, and
murder of civilians in Germany bofore the war of 1939,
who wore lilfoly to bo hostile to tho Govurruiont, was moat
ruthlessly carried out. Hie persecution of Jens during tho
same period is established boyond all doubt."

The Tribunal was there speaking exclusively of crimes by Gormans
against Gormans. It held that such acts wero not Crimes against Humani¬
ty, as dofinod by tho Charter, not because they wero crisis against

Germans, but because they wore not committed in uxocution of, or in
• #

connection with, aggressive war. Indeed, tho Tribunal wont on to hold
that tho very sumo acts committed after the war began woro Crisis
against Humanity. No distinction was drown between tho murder of German
Jews and Polish or Russian Jews. And, noroover, no distinction was
drawn between criminal medical experimentation on German and non-Gorman


concentration ca;
1 ibid, p. 254.


inmates or tho aurdor of German and non-German ci-


10729


U July-4J-FL-3-3-Lcor.ard

Court So. I


v ill ana under tho euthanasia program] Tho Tribunal held than all to bo
War Crimes ard/or Crimea against Humanity.

Vr.at i« cliargod in the Indicant against these defendants? What
is the nature of tho crimes for which tboy are on trial? In Count I
of the Indictment all of the defendants ore charged with having parti-
cipatud in a cccnon plan or conspiracy to cocoit, and which involved
the commission of, criminal nodical experiments on involuntary human
subjects, which roailtcd in murders, atrocities, and other inhumano
acts. The Tribunal has already heard argument on tho question of ju¬
risdiction to entertain tho charge of conspiracy, and accordingly I
shall Unit nyaolf, at a later point, to a few remarks on tho law of
conspiracy os such, tho foras of participation set forth in Soctlon 2
of Article IV of Law Ho. 10, ar.d tho appUcation of both to tho facts
of this oaoc.

Under Counts II end III (War Crimes and Crlmos against Humanity,
respectively), certain of the defondants are charged with participation
in tho murdor of persons pursuant to tho outbargain program, tho murder
and ill-treatment of tubercular Polos, and tho murder of 112 Jews for
a skeleton collection. Undor Paragraphs 6 and U of the sano counts,
nU of tho defendants are charged with participation in criminal medi¬
cal oxp-xiaontation on human subjects without their consent, which ro-
oulted in murders, atrocities, and othor inhuaano acts. It should be
oophasized, as the Prosecution has frequently pointed out during tho
trial, that tho basic charge under Paragraphs 6 and 11 of tho Indict¬
ment is participation in criminal experiments, whatever thoso. experi¬
ments nay have been. Particulars concerning certain experiments woro
set forth in tho Indictment and certain of tho defendants wore Ustod
as having boon specially activo in and responsible for them. This, now-
evor in no way limits tho Prosecution in supporting tho basic charge by
whatever avidonco is in tho record. It is c completely erroneous coi»-
ception of tho Indictment to view it as charging this or that defendant


10730


Court So. I


with having participated in this or that experiment. This amounts to
confusing the proof to sustain the charge with the charge itself.

Moreover, the proof *ith respect to a given defendant should not be
viewed by dismembering it and examining its separate parts, evidence
aust be viewed as a whole to roach a judgnent as to the real guilt of the
defendants. It is impossible to assess the cumulative effect of tho proof
if the documents axe separately considered and weighed ns so mny pieces
of lifeless paper. I venture to predict that in the clowing statements
of dofenso counsol there will be a tedious torturing of each document,
each to bo discarded before proceeding to the next, without over mooting
tho case established by the Aill swoop of tho proof. One is sc^timcs
able to brock individual sticks from a tree. But if those ssa» sticks
arc bound together, tta result is unbreakable. So it is with proof.

Ho more can th, -xporiments be viowod as hermetically sealed con¬
tainers. Various oxperiaents aust tx» considered together to appreciate
the full guilt of a defendant even though n Judgment of guilt may not bo
sought with inspect to each such experiment. For example, all of tho
Luftwaffe defendants would have tho TVibunnl find that in the high al¬
titude experiments the dead Raschcr was somehow exclusively responsible
for all fatnlitios, even though at tho time b- was on active duty with
tho Luftwaffo. i.hun tho defendants Ruff and Romberg allegedly first
loarned of his "oxtracurricular" aurdors by having ono killed in front
of Romberg, tho y only hung around Dachau working with Race her for an¬
other 6 weeks or so, and after nil, according to Romborg, ho saw just
two more acn killed in that time. Now, if one were somehow to think for
a oDocnt that thorc is somo faint mitigating circumstance in tho exemplary
conduct of those two knights of Luftwaffo nodical virtue, lot us test
the truth of their allogod disassociate on from Raschcr by looking at
the freezing experiments which began less than 30 days after Ruff, Rom¬
berg, and Raschcr published their Joint report on tb, high altitude
"tea party". Did the Luftwaffo Medical Service have anything to do with


10731


U Jul7-L<-r'L-3-5-Lccr^rd
Court So. I


tnoae experiments on inmatos in Dachau After that blackguard Raschor
had killed a on in tbuir decompression chamber? Yoa, tho experiments wore
ordered oy the Luftnaffw and executed exclusively, by Luftwaffe doctors.
Did Raschor have anything to do with then? Yes, indeed. Ho assistod
Holzloohnor and lirJce in torturing to death many more concentration ccrop
victims. Did Ruff end Rccberg know anything about all this continued
criminal activity? Yob, Rcoborg was awarded a modal on Raschor 1 s recom¬
mendation in September end in October 1942 both Ruff and Roabcrg wore
hero in Numborg listening to the very edifying reports on tho freez¬
ing experiments by Holzlochnur and Race her. Thus, to appreciate tho full
guilt of the defendants Ruff and Raaborg in connection with tho high
altitudo experiments it is nocussary to look to tho freezing oxpsri-
conts to soo that Rosa her, far free boinr court martin led by tho Luft¬
waffe, after obtaining full knew lodge of oxectly what had happened, ro¬
ta ire d his rank and continued his aurdorous work in cooporation with
o thor Luftwaffe doctors.

It will be soon from this review of the Indictment and from tho
ovidonco submitted by thu Prosecution that thoso defendants aro, for
tho most part, on trial for tho crime of murder. As in all criminal
cases, two simple issues aro presented: Were crimes coamittod end, if
so, wore thoso defendants connected with tholr cocodssion in any of
tho ways spocifiod by Low No. 10? It is only the fact that those crimes
woro c omitted in part as a result of taodical experiments on human
beings that ockoa this caso somewhat unique. And while considerable
evidence of a tochnical nature has boon submitted, one should not loso
sight of tho true simplicity of this caso. Tho defendant Rose, who was
permit tod to croes-cxaainc tho Prosecution's witness Dr. A.C. Ivy of
the Medical School of the University of Illinois, became quito oxnspo-

• s

rated at his reiteration of tho basic principle that human experimental
subjects must be volunteers. That, of course, is tho carnerstorw of this
ease. Thore ere, indued, other prerequisites to a permissible radical

10732


11 July-il-?L-3-6-Loonard


Court Ho. I


experiment an huacn beings. The experiment oust be bases on the results
of animal oxporimantetioo and a knowledge of the natural history of tho
disease under study end designed in such a way that the anticipated ro-
jwlta will Justify the perlorsar.ee of tho experiment. TWs ia to say
that tho experiment oust bo auch as to yield results for tho good of so¬
ciety unprocurable by other methods of study and must not be randan end
unnecessary in nature. Mcroovor, tho experiment must bo conducted by
scientifically qualified pereona in aucy manner ea to avoid all unnocos-
sary physical and oontal suffering and injury. If there ia on a priori
reason to believe that death or disabling injury


10733


14 July 47-*-at-4-l-!'aloy
Court 1


night occur , the experimenters oust serve as subjects then:selves
along with the non-adentific personnel. These are all important
principles and they were consistently .violated by these nefendants
and their collaborators. For example, »e have yet to find one defendant
who subjected himself to the experiments which killed and tortured
their victims in cone- ntration camps. But important as these other
considerations are, it is the cost fundamental tenet of medical ethics
and human decency that the sibjects volunteer for the experiment after
being inform'd of its nature and hazards. This is the clear dividing
line between the criminal and what may be non-criminal. If the experi¬
mental subjects cannot be said to have volunteered, then the inquiry
need proceed no further. Such is the simplicity of this case.

'bat then is a volunteer? If one has a fertile imagination,
suppositious cases night bo put which would require a somewhat refined
Judgnent. Mo such problem faces this Tribunal. The proof is overwhelm¬
ing that there was never the slightest pretext of using volunteers.

It was for the very reason that volunteers could not be expected
to undergo the murderous experiments which aro tho subject of this
trial that theso defendants tunvd to tho inexhaustible pool of
miserable end oppressed prisoners in the concentration camps. Can
anyone seriously believe that Poles, Jews, and Russians or oven

Germans, voluntarily suhoitted themselves to the tortures of tho

•

decompression chamber andfreozing basin in Dachau, the poison gao
chambor in Vatzweilor, or the st- rilization X-ray machines of Ausch¬
witz? Is it to be held that the Polish girls in Ravnnsbruck gavo
their unfettered consent to be mutilated and killed for the glory of
the Third Reich? '“as the miserable Gypsy who assaulted the dofondant
Beiglbocck in this very court room a voluntary participant in the sea
water oxptrinents? Did the. hundreds of victims of the murderous
typhus stations in Puchrmald and Hatzweiler, by any stretch of the
imagination, consent to those experiments? The preponderance of the
preof leaves no doubt whatever as to the answer to these questions.


10734


li. July i7--S-/.-2-Maloy
Court 1


The testimony of experimental *ibycts, eye-witnesses, and the documents
of the defendants own caking establish beyond a shadow of a doubt, that
these experimental subjects wore non-volunteers in every sense of tho

word.

This fact is not seriously denied by the defendants. I lost of
then who performed the experiments themselves have admitted that they
never so nwch as ask-xi tho subjects wh- ther they were volunteering for
thw experinmts. As to the legal and moral necessity for consent, the
defendants pay theoretical lip service while at the sane tine leaving
the back door ajar for a hasty retreat. Thus, it is said that the
totalitarian "State" assumed the responsibility for the designation
of the experimental subjects and undor aich circucstnncea tho men
who planned, ordored, perforrrd, or otherwise participated in tho
experiment cannot be held criminally responsible oven though non-
volunteors were tortured and killod as a result. This was perhaps
brought out most clearly as a result of questions put to the defendant
Karl Brandt by tho Tribunal. *.»inn asked his view of an experiment


which was assumed to havo been of highost military necessity, and of
involuntary character with resultant deaths, Brandt replied:

"In this case I am of tho opinion that, when
considering tho circumstances of the situation
of the war, this state institution which has
laid down the importance in the interest of the
state at tho same time takos tho responsibility
away from tho physician if such an experiment
ends fatally and such a responsibility hes to bo
taken by tho state." ^

Further cuestioning elicited the opinion that tho only man possibly
responsible in this suppositions Caso was Hianlor, who had the power
of life and death over concentration camp inmates, even though the
experiment may bavo been ordered, for example, by tho Chief of the
Medical Servico of the Luftwaffe and executed by doctors subordinated


1. Transcript, p. 2567


10735


U July
Court 1

to his. !fcat of the other defendants took a siaiLar position, that
they had no responsibility in the selection of tho experimental
subjects.

This defense is, in the vi-w of the Prosocution, conpl"tely
spurious. Thu use of involuntary subjects in a medical experiment is
n crino, and, if it results in decth, it is the crime of mirder. Any
party to the experiment is guilty of murder and that guilt CAnnot be
escaped by having *. third person supply the victims. The person planning,
ordering, supporting, or executing the experiment is under a duty, both
moral and legal, to see to it that tho experiment is properly performed.
This duty cannot bo delegated. It is surely incumbent on the doctor
performing tho experiment to satisfy himself that the subjects volunteered
After having been informed of the rturo and hazards of tho experiment.

If thoy *pe not volunteers, it is hia duty to report to his superiors
and discontinue tho experiment. These defendants have competed with
each othor in feigning complete ignorance about the consont of tho
experimental victims, "hey knew, as the ovidenco proves, that the
misor».bl" inmates did not volunt-or to be torturod and killed. But evon
assuming the impossible, that thoy did not know, it is their damnation
not their o»nerntion. Knowledge could have been obtained by tho simple
expedient of e*ing the subje cts. Tho duty of lnruiry could not bo
cloarer and cannot bo avoidod by such lame excuses as "I understood
they wer« volunteers" or "Himlir assured me they were volunteers".

In this connection, it should never be lest sl£it of that these
experiments were performed in concentration c^mps on concentration
cpnp inmates. Kcwevor littlo scec of those defendants say they knew
of th* Lawless jungles which were concentration c-mps, there violent
d*ath, torture and starvation cutdc up the daily life of tho inmates,
they rrr least kn^.w that thoy were places of terror where all persons
opposed to the Nasi government were imprisoned without trial, there
J'va and Poles --nd other so-called "racial inferiors" for crime


10736


li July 47-*-SW-fr^-tal«y
Court 1


tever, unless their race or religion be a crime, were incarcerated.
'T.Hse simple facta were knom during the war tc people all over the
to rid. How much greater then was the duty of these defendants to
et< mine very carefully the voluntary character of these experimental
subject a xx were so conveniently available. True it ia that these
defendants are not charged with responsibility for the manifold complex
of crimes which cade up the concentration carp aystec. Put it cennct
be held that they could enter the gates of the Inferno and say in
effect: "Bring forward the subjects. I seo no evil; I hear no evil; I
apeak no evil." The aaked no < uesticna. They didn't inquire of the
ineatea as to such details aa consent, nationality, whether a trial
had been held, what crime had been cooc'tted, and the like. They did
not because they knew that the wretched inmates did not volunteer for
their experiments And were not expocted to volunteer. They embraced tho
Wati doctrines and the Nazi way of life. Tho things those defendants
did were the result of the noxious nerg-r of O-rrv.n nilitarlan and
Nazi raclrl objectives, 'hen. In the faco of a critical shortage of
typhus vaccines to protect tho sTchmacht in its lxstom invasions.
Handicap and ; is cohorts decidod that animal experimentation was too
slow, the inaatos of °uchcnwald wore sacrificed by tho huedreos to
test n«.w vaccines, ^cn Schrooder war.ted to deteralno the limit of
huoan tei-rwee of s*a wat-r, he tread the path woll-wom by tho Luft-
wnff- to Dachau and get forty gypsies. Those defondants with thoir own
ejms open used the oppressor, end p'rs- cutod victims of thn Uazi
regime to wring free their wretched and unw lling bodies a drop of
scientific i Jorsiation at a cost of death, torture, cutilation, and
permanent disability. For thn so palpable crimes Justice dcmn-s st-*rn
retribution.

MR. HARDY: dr. Hardy will continue with the closing statement.

THE PRESIDENT: Ccunael, in order not to break into your argument


10737


U July 47-M-SW-«.-5-raloy
Court 1


*hon you have start- d it, the Court will now be in recess for a
t>n> accents.

(Thereupon a recess was taken.)


10733


ll* July o7-¥-¥5C-6-l-frlnocu (Int „von-Sehon)

Court So. I

THE HaJS'dALi The Tribunal is a Rain is session.

1.3 pa231L2?Ti The prosecution cay proooed.

HR. HA&Yi Key it please the Tribunal, before 1 proceed 1 request
that the footnotes oontained in the English copy of the proseoution's
olosing argument be included in the transcript of the trial — thet is,
the oourt interpreters inolude the footnotes whioh we have in the Eng¬
lish oopv of the olosing argveenfc whioh are cot being read here in open
oourt. m .

THE P&25XUVTi The erguectne of oour.sel w:ll be inoluded in the
in the proceedings of the reoord of the oourt as contained in the trene-
oript.

US. HAi&Yi 1 will continue, your Honors,

It oust not be overlooked thet the experlaonts proved in this
osse wure not haphazard and unrelated oriaoa. On the oontrary, they
oor.aistutod a well integrated orininal progroa, in whioh the defend¬
ants planned und collaborated oaong theasolvoa ond with other persons.
Ono thing should bo aado olear ot the outsot. Eaoh oxporloent oonsit-
ituted t criminal oonapircoy in end of itself. Hone of the experiments
woro formulated end excoutod by cne sen. Eaoh roquired ths offorts
of c ni*bur of men and tive oooporatlon of sovercl Lgonolos. Thus, in
tho typhus expericents in Buohenwald, tho cediool sorvloos of tho Amy,
Luftwaffe, and 3S oil playod an important r«U, The boo sure of tho
guilt of suoh defendants os Hnndloser, Sohroodor, Rose, Gontken,
Mrugowsky, Poppondiok end Horen is tho total of tho oricos oormitted
there. These axperlaonts wero, indood, ono continuous crino In whioh
all ployod o substantial part. For exanple, the dofondant Roso por-
aonally initiated experiaonts in Buohenwald in August 1^*2 and Karoh

whioh resulted in tho death of ten persons. But ho is oquolly
guilty of tho several hundred other cut dors since ho Joinod in and
furthered the Joint venture.


10739


14 July U7-4J-ilS£-6-2-Frincau (Int.,vor. Sohon)

Court So. 1

Ihua, it is incontrovertible that oach 6xporinent oonstitutod pa -
to c re 11 conspiracy end ovary participant in it nust bo found ropon-
slblo fcr tho sua tot*l of criBos oomittod in its exoouticn. But
it is also olocr that those oriainal conspiracies overlapped and blooded
to pother to form e broad oorsaon dasign. Theso orieses wo«o systematic
and woro oomittod pursuant to a policy, fornuleted by the loodora of
tho Goman aedioal sorvicoa, approving of, and ordorir.g, the oxooution
of highly dangerous exporimonts on hunan subjoots without thoir con¬
sent. Tho intor-reletion end oornon basis of thoso erisos in brought
into sharp focus by a sinplo ohronologioal review. The program hnd its
oarly boginning in key l<>Ul, when Luftwaffe Ccptain Resohor, oidod
and abetted by tho defendant Holts and on aasistent nemod Kottonhof*-
mado overtures to Hlcnlor for prisenors to bo used in high altituio
experiments, whioh, ho stated, woro so dangorous that "nobody was
volunteering". In dooonber 1$1, when typhus vnooinaa wor*. neoded
for tho Hohraaoht's invasion of tho Bast, tho defendant Har.dlooor,
as Arrgr Radical Inspeotor, rot with Conti, Soorutaey of Stnto for
Health, and Vrugowsky, subordinate of tho dofondant Gonskon and
Chi of of tho fygiono Instituto of tho tioffen SS, and mde tho boeio
dooislon to teat typhus vaooinca by cxperiDOnts on human boings. As
a roault, by tho turn of tho year, tho oriainal typhus oxporinonts,
whioh woro to ooat tho lives of sovornl hundred human boings, woro un-
dorway in Buohessald. tr. Sohilling was provided with "human ontoriol"
for malaria experiments at Dachau in Fobruory 1^*2, through tho good
offices of Ccnti, and in tho saeo month at the some place, the dofond-
ants Ruff and Hoaborg Jcinod partners in the danoo of death with Resohor
and ..alts. In Uay at tho mooting of tho Consulting Phvsioians of
tho Tiehmscht, the dofondant Rostooic locutrod on tho ohor.io-thornpout-
ical tr.atnont of wound infections, ospodaily with sulfnnileaido.
Forty-five days lstor, the defendant Gebhcrdt, spurred on by his loss
of "Har.gcon" Hoydriofc, began his sulfonilocdde experiments in Ravens-
bruok with tho assistance of the defendants Fischer and Oberhnusor nnd


10740


Ik July -7-ii-kSL -6-?-Primoau (Int.,vc,r. Schon)
Court I


-ho ganTOCOua oulturo* ^WTishod by Genskor. and krugcwsky.

-r.'-or tho ('iroctior. of Grawitt, ooepanlon uxporinerts to tost the
bin-ofcoxiocl treataoat of sepsis, induced by injooticns of pus,

Kor* run slnultensoualy in Dachau, In August I 9 U 2 , when the blood of
inect-s autopsiod in the deoosprossion ohanber had scarooly driod, tho
Lodioal Servioo of tho Luftwaffe ordored Eolsloahr.er, Finko, and
SaschoT to portora froosing exporinonta to establish tho nost offcctivo
coans cf treating prolonged exposure to oold. In Kovosbar I 9 U 2 ,

August airt, under tho aogia of tho rooently orcatod Instituto of Uni¬
tary Soiontifio research of tho Ahnor.orbo directed by tho dopravod
Siavors, boron his r.urdorous gua axporl.no ts cidod and cbottod by Kinmop
Bed lor1 of floor of the Luftvrffo, In oornoctioa rith thoso arao oxpor-
iconts, tho do.ondant Siovors, who *ns at tho.snoo ties aooing to it
that things ran smoothly with tho mlaria and froosing orinos, wroto to
Rudolf Brandt of his outrage at tho suggestion that tho wrotohod
vlotlBS bo paid for, Llko tho holpful wr. that ho waa, Brandt 1 med¬
iately put things straight with Oborcrupp nfuohror Pohl, ndcinlstrativo
Chief of tho oor.oontroticn oaeps.

Thoso oriaos were not oomittod as a slcple noadonio pursuit es
woro s-ao of tho nore "pardon variety" concentration oemp atrooitioa.

In October 1542 a it at Cold Congress in Hurnborg was sttondod by tho
defendants Booker-Froysor.g, Ruff, Rooberg, &oso, Sohacfor, and Kelts,
to/rcthor with nearly 100 roprosontatives of ell tho nodioal sorvioec in
Gorcony. Tho r-weting was error.-od by Anthony and the defendant Bookor-
Froysorg on behalf of tho Luftwaffe. S 0 hroibor, ono of tho prir.oipol
suberdi-atos of Hsndlosor, ms there, Holtloohnor and Raschor gavo a
report on their froosing oxperioer.ts and it was rwdo clear to all who
ctrod to liitoa th>t concentration carp innatos waro used es aub'oota
and that doaths had oocurrod, Sohroibor apparently gavo his ohiof
Hacdlosor such o glowing report that Holrloohnor was invited to a ro¬
pe et porforisacoo at tho Second Meeting Scat of tho Consulting Physicians
of tho uuhrsecht in Looenbor ld+2. Hncdloaer personally hoard the


10741


14 July -lU113i:-6-J*-Pri3jau (Ir.t, , vor. Sohon)
Court Se. I


lecturo this tine. It *?:■ at tho ocao noting th-t ting was ordered
by his superior Mrugowsky, at tho instigation of Handlcsor's honohnen
Schruibor and Killian, to giro several of tho inaetos in Buohonwold
an intravenous dose of phenol and r-.port book on tho ol inicol details
of the onsuing deaths. Those gentlonon weru troubled by tho obsorvn-
tlcn that sono of their soldiers were dying after roooiving gas
oedema s»rus and they wanted to osoortaln whothor it wes causod by tho
pher.cl contort. .

At tho Third footing of Consulting Fhysioicns in liny 1<^3#

Gobhnrdt told of his axporiaonts tc tho suotion on surgory. Rostook
arranged the progren and prosidod, while Kcrl Br'-ndt ond Kendlosor woro
in the seat* of honor, hhet thoy hoird obdo es no surpriao. Gobhr.rdt
and Flsohor gave a full report on tho sulfcnilaaido oxporioonts down
to tho lest dacth. Gobhrrdt was so anxious to sprord his guilt sono-
whot thinner *.h t ho emphasised to tho Tribunal tho oorploto naturo of
thoir roport. This proved a littlo esbarrassing to his prodooossors in
the vritnoss box who wore qulto suro that nothing had boon said about
artifioiol ir.feotion or d-oths. Karl Brandt had no noro than loft
this tooting wj.on had nedo orrongononto with Crav.it* to got innntos at
tho Soohaonhouson Concentration Cosp for tho opidosdo Jaundioo oxpori-
aonts by Lohaor., a nodical orfioor of tho Af.-y ur.dor Handloaor. This
diaooso waa oauaing oaaualitios up to 60 % in tho nohrmroht units in
tho So st.


107L2


1*. July i-7-M-MSL'- 7 -l -For r in (3nt.,von So hen)
Court Ho. I, Cese 1


*t tho Tory samo iwoting, ting loo;ured to tho hyglono soction
of hi* murderous typhus experiments at Buchonwald. Schreiber pro-
slcjd and tho defendants Rosa and Mrugowjky woro la attendnnoo ca
aull as tfco Luftwaffe typhus oxp rt Esagon, who, to say tho least
of It, was oxaoodingly parsleocious with tho truth whon ho testified
boforo this rribmol. There is no question that Rose took strong
exouption to this roport. Although his prior and subsoquant oonduot
loavo little doubt that it was on soiantific rather than aoral grounds.
In any ovont, what was good onough for Ding wos -ood enough for Hnngen.
Thst Tory saco month ho boren his own typhus vsooino tosts in tho
Sohirasok Conoontration Comp, aidod end obettod by Roso and tho kodioal
SorTioo of the Luftwaffe. In a Df.ttor of thirty days, two inmates had
died os a result. In tho fell of 19*3, Bar r on shiftod his notivlties
to tho larger orap of Katswoilor whore ho oontinuod his orlainnl
work uitil tho lato svreor of 19uU, iedor tho euspicos of tho defend¬
ant Sohroudor.

In tho fell of 19*3# &-r 1 Brandt, es Conerd Commissioner of
tho Modioi,l ~nd Her 1th Sorrioos, mdurtcok porson> 1 sponsorship of tho
phosgono res exptrino ts of Biokonbaoh, who hrd proriously workod with
Hirt on inmates rt Kntswsilor. Tho Wohroeoht was <>lso lntorostod
in theso uxporlnonts. Brandt rooolTed brooo powors in tho flold
of oheeiotl wr.rfcru in Q Fuohror do or 00 of 1 Haroh 1$/*4. Shortly
thoroal'tor ho conferred with tho dofer.dcnt Siuvors and Hirt on t.ho
uxperlBonto in Sntxwoilor. he personally supoliod Biokenbnoh with lobo-
rrtory faciliti.s, who, by Soptoobor l$ii, hod murdered four Russian
prisoners of war.

In June 15k, the dofondont Sohrooder personally initiated plans
for the sea wr.tor axpuriconts, with the rssistrnoo of his subordinates
3eolcor-Froys'jng and Sohaofer. In a letter to Hindi or, through
Growlt*, asking for "Uo healthy tost si-jocts" for experiments ho
knew would probably and in deaths, ho said that "Sorlior already you
node it possible for tho Luftwaffe to settle urgent nodioal mnttors


10743


1^ July i*7-IMISB-7-2-Perr In -ron Schon
Ccurt Ue. I


through experiments on hvcan being#". 1 He conoludod by saying* "As
it ia knows from previous experiments, that necessary laboratories exist
in the concentration camp Lachau, this camp would be very suitable".

The defendant Beiglboeck Joined in the conspiracy and axeouted the

experiments*

In June I 9 LU, a oonforenoe was oalled at Breslau by the defend¬
ant Handloser for the pirpose of coordianting Joundico researoh.

Joundico experts from all branches of the hehraaoht wore present, in¬
cluding Ha*gen, and Handloser's subordinate Sohroibor presided. Ex¬
periments on hrnan beings woro disoussed and a few wooks later Haagen
and throe other offloera of the Luftwaffe began laying plans for exper¬
iments on hroar beings in "Strassbourg or its vicinity", an obvious re¬
ference to Satxweilor. That criminal experiments on oonoontration
oamp inmates were disoussed at the Breslau meeting lo oionr from tho
faot that Sohreiber personally requested krugowsky somewhat later
to make available inmates in Buohenwald for Jaundice exporimonts by
Lr, Lrosel,

The foregoing ohronologioal analysis of sooo of tho exporiments,
while not ooaplete, is sufficient to show that thero was a systoantlo
and well intogratod program involving modioal exporlaontation on
concentration camp inmatos without thoir oonsont. The demands upon
tho SS for h via an guinea pigs had beooce so oxtenslvo thrt by Vay, I 9 W*
a centra oloaring ooenlttoo had been sot up by Hinalor. The defondant
Gebhardt passed on the sodioal necessity of the proposed experiment,
while Glueoka and Kobo acted as tho Valfyrioa in solooting tho sac¬
rificial victims. As early as August l$k2, tho Institute of Unitary
Scientific Rosearch of the Ahonoerbo vndor Sievers was oraatod to fin¬
ance and to fuiish oquipmont, priaoners, and administrative assistance
for experiments in which Hinalor was ospooially intorostod. Thia
criminal program was motivated from two principal sources. Himmler,
as head of tho SS, providod unco vxi tod victims for tho experiment a and

1 ffo'-ia5, Pros. Sx. 1 &,"3:U837


107U


lU July 47-^-MSD-7-3-Forrin-<£ct., vonSohon)

Ccurt I

tboroby gained nww prostige and power for hia criainal organization.

“he leadara of the Soman military and oirilian mcdioal sorvioes*
aa the othor driving force, ruthleaaly aoizod the opportunity with
whioh they wore presented and submitted their aciontifio problems for
solution in tho conoentration oaapa. The aciontifio inpetua oomo from
Earl Brandt, Eandlosor, Sohroiber, Hippko, Sohroodor, Conti, end their
subordinates, among others. Rudolf Brandt and Sievers gevo effeot
to niaader's approval to furniah the viotias and tho administrative
machinery was har.dlod by thorn. The SS modioel loodora - Growitt,

Gens Icon, Gebhardt, Mrugowsky, and Poppendiok - gave directions to their
underlings auoh aa L ing, Horen, and Fisoher, and eaaiatod in tho oxoou-
tion of the crimoa, Brandt. Blcsae, and S Q hreiber oxtondod finanoial
support through the Roioh Researoh Council, whioh epprovod an nll-
ooation of govoraaont funds to onlargo tho SS modioal aorvioo on tho
ground it had hvaaan "oxporimentol material" nvailoblo, Rostook, na
Chief of the Offioo for Soionco and Reseoroh, olaaafied aa "urgent"
the criminal rosearoh of Hirt, Haagen, ond Biokonbaoh. The Viohmaoht
providod supervision and teohoioal assistance for thoao oxporimonts
in whioh it was moat interoatod. k low prossuro ohambor waa furnishod
for tho high altitude experiments, tho sorrioos of Holtz, Ruff, Romborg,
Rasohor, Rolsloehnor, and Pinko for tho high altitudo and froozing
atrooitios and thoso of Bookor-Froysong, S 0 haofor, and Beiglboook for
son wotor. Roao waa in and out of the Buohonwold typhus atotion for tho
Luftwaffe and ohookod the work of aaogon at S 0 hiraook and llatzwoilor.
handloser kept on oya on Ling's experiments through S p hroibor, Kyor, and
Sohaidt and furnished hia with vaooinoa and typhus infected lioe. Ho
saw to it that tho usoful rosulta of tho orinos woro roportod to his
Consulting Physicians and passed on to tho toohrmaeht.

This was the unholy, trinity; this was the oossaon dosisn. It woe
like a gigantio wagon wheel, the spokes of which woro the experi¬
ments loading into the conaon hub of tho SS whioh furnishod tho viotims,
end all bov»d together by tho policies and ordors of tho loaders of tho


10745


12 * July Uj -U-USL-J -U-Forr ‘n-Int., vonSohoa
kilt SC. 1


Gorssn nedical services which forced the outer ria. While tho defended*
deny that there was a co=on dosipi or that thoy participated in it, all
aoolc at tho saao tine tho contradictory "protection" of State approval
of tho experiments. Tho dofondant Rose, broken by proof fTos hia cr*n
hand that ho pertioipatod in tho typhus orines or Buchonwald, gave some¬
thing of a valedictory when ho said:

"This institute had boon sot up in Sorsany and wee
approved by tho Stato and oov^rod by tho State. At
that sooont I was in a position vhioh porhaps oorro-
sponds to a lawyor who is, porhaps, a btsio opponont
of axeoutlon, or doath eontenoo. On oooesion whon ho
is doaling with loading soabors of tha govornnont, or
with lawyors during publio Congrossos or nootinga, ho
will do ovorything in hia power to srir.tain his opinion
on tho subjoot and hovo it put into offoot. If, how-
ovor, ho does not suocood, ho stays in his profession,
and in his environcont in spito of this. Under oir-
ounstonoos ho swy porhaps ovon bo forcod to oronounoo
ouch a doath sontonoe hissolf, although ho is bosio-
olly on opponont of that sot up." 1

Oobhardt testified that flitlor approved tho polioy of oxporisontation

on oonoontrotion ccucp lnnot-s. Bo adalttod that those experiments would

not hovo been porforr.od without approval froa tho top; ovon Hinnler

hiasolf sought oovor froa Hitlor. Tho Proseoution olaims no ooro. This

polioy of systematic experimentation on involuntary aub'.oots was

fornulatod and oxocutod by thoso dufondonto and tholr aooomplioos.

This, thon, was tho eodioel sorvioo of tho Third Roioh at

work. There oon bo no doubt that those woro not a hotorogeneous

and unrolatod group of crises. Thoy nosh togothor to fora 0 oloar oon-

spiraoy. each orporinent in turn ratified its prodooosaors and gave

ieputua to its successors. Whatever.»oy bo the judgment of this

Tribunal on the question of jurisdiction, there wa# a conspiracy in

fact. Since a conspiracy was charged in Count I of tho Indiotnont,

It is important to know what a conspiracy oomprehonds and punishos,

Justioe Jackson stated in hia closing address to tho International

Military Tribunal thati


lU July U~! -M-USE-7>-5-Porrln-lnt „von Schon
Court 1


"In the conspiracy we do not punish one aan for another
nan'i orlno. He seek to punish occh for his corn crino
of joining a coseon plan in whioh others also pertioi-
pated. The noasure of the oriainality of the plan and
therefore of the guilt of eaoh participant is, of oourse,
the siv total of orimos oaaaitted by oil in oxeouting
the plan. But the gist of the offenso is participation
in the formulation or exooution of tho plan. These aro
rules whioh every sooiety has found neoessory in order
to reaoh Ben...., who neror got blood on their own
hands but who lay plans that result in the shedding of
blood. All over Germany today, in overy sono of oooupa-
tion, little con who carried out those orioinol policies
ur.dor ordors are being conriotod and punishod. It would
present a vast and unforgirooble oariocturo of justioo
if the aen who planned theso polioies and direotod thoee
little sen should escape all ponalty." 1

The essence of the orise of oonspiraay is t*ro or noro persona
oonbining and oonfodereting with the intent and purposo of committing
an offonse by doing an unlawful eot or doing a lawful not in an unlaw¬
ful Benner. It ocn bo established by direct tostioony but it may also
be inforred froo things aotuolly done. It is enough if tho minds of
tho pnrtioa »oot and imite in an understanding way with the dosipi to
aooonplish a ooeoon purposo whioh nay bo established by substantial
evidence or by deduction fros foots, fron whioh a noturol infor-
enoe srisod that tho overt oots woro in furthoranoe of a common
do sign, intont, and oppose. The oorrton dosign is the ossonou
of the orioe end this Eoy be cade to appoor whon tho parties con¬
tinuously pursue tho sono objoct, whothor aoting separately or
together by coecon or difforont naans, but ovor loading to tho sano
unlawful result, hhen one or noro of tho oonspirntors mokos on open
deolaretlon and the others thereafter ndhoro by wordo or aots, tholr
responsibility is oonplete and thoir guilt thoroby ostablishod for
they have boooae agents ad hoo in tho crimes. Tho oontpirotors may
not know eaoh othat* or suoh others' part in tho plan, nor, lndood, oil
the details of tho plan itself. He oay know only his own part. That
is enough if there is an intentional conteibution to tho whole. It is
enough if one had knowiedgo of the general purposo and joint himself.
Saoh is responsible for all aots done in fimthoronce of the objoots of


lU July U7-4£-M32-7-6-Porrin-Ict ij von Sohon
Court H„. I


tho conspiracy and daring its lifo. (face a person joins a conspiracy,
he ratifies all that he been dono beforo by oath of the others. 1

Shot has fcion said with respect to the oomon dosigr. or conspiracy
is, of oourso, quite pertinent vron though the Triounnl dooidos thr.t «t
has no jurisdiction over conspiracies to comit liar Crimes and Crimes
against Huaanity. Paragraph 2 6 f Artiole II of Law Ho. 10 rends, in
part, as follows!

"Any person without regard to nationality
or tho oepaoity in whioh ho coted, is -oonod
to have oosnittod a crime os dofined in
paragraph 1 of this Artiole, if bo was (n)
a principal cr (b) was on accessory to tho
coeriission of any such orimo or ordered or
abotted the siuao or (o) took a oonsonting
part thoroin or (d) was connootcd with plans
and entorprisos involving its oomission or
(e) was a combor of any organisation or
group oonneoted with tho oomission of any
such arioo......"

This porogroph, although it doos not employ tho tord "conspiracy"
or the phroso "oomon plan", rooognitos tho oriminnl


1 lU. v. Border., lib V. (^)','^.A.7, certiorari doniod.


107LB


lii July U7-!Kl75-6-i-Coak (Int. vcn Schoon)
Court «o; 1


liability of those who wero substantially connected with the couaission
of a criao, even though the final criainal act is connitted by sonoono
also. Those who are found to have been connected with crimes in the
way specified by the quoted .paragraph must be found guilty of the
substantive erica itsolf, which in this caso is predordnantly tho crime
of mrdor. Quito clearly the status of criminal rosponsibility of a
person whe "took a consenting part" in or "was connected with plans or
enterprises involving" or "was a nonbar of any organization or group
connected with" tho coasission of a crino noro than caaprohonds the
crininal liabilities which are held to attach to those who enter into
i erica conspiracy. Thus, whothor tho o-isdnal oxporlnentation program
be callod a "co-taon design", '’conspiracy", or simply "plans and enter¬
prises", thoso defendants who Jointly participated in its execution
mist bo found guilty of tho sun total of crises c omit tod,

THF RESPONSIBLE LZJJTJ'S .OF 7H5 i'SDICnL SERVICES

In view of the cl oar and ovurwholrdrx’ proof, it can only bo con¬
cluded that tho practice of cxjxjriDontatlon on concentration camp
imateo without thoir consent -.ras an organizod an.! systematic program.
It is thoroforo appropriate to considor whothor wo havo in this dock
tho loadors of tto Gorman not'd cal scrvico3 without nhon thoso crino 3
would not havo boon poosiblo. It wcnld bo an unforgivable niscarriago
of Justico to punish tho factors who workod on tho vie tins in tho con-
con t rati on ccnpe while thoir superiors, tho loaders, organizers, and
instigators, go froo. It has boon established beyond controversy that
thoso things coul’ not have happened without cover fron tho top. V/ho,
then, were thoso non on tho top? Thoir survivors, with ono oxcoption,
aro all in this Jock.

In tho number ono 3oat wo havo tho defendant Karl Brandt. Ho
hold suproew authority over all tho nodical services in Oormny, both
military and civilian. Ho Joined tho Nazi Party in January 1932 and
tho SS in 1931a, in which he roso to tho rank of Gruppenfuohror. In
the latter year, at the ago of 30, ho bocaae the attending physician


10749


Hi July L7-*4-ATD-6-2-Ccok (Int. von Schoen)

Court Vo. 1

to Adolf Hitler and retained this position until 19l5 His close personal
relationship to the Fuehrer explains his rapid rise to powor. On tho
day Poland was invaded in 1939, Hitler ordered Brandt and Philipp
Bouhler, the Chief or the Chancellery of the Fuehrer, to carry out tho
so-called euthanasia pro.'ran.

Aside froa his personal influence and inti ante connection with

Hitler, Brandt's greatest power in tho nodical services oamo fron his

position as General Coccissioner and later Roich Comissionor of the

Health and Hedioal Services, As a rosult, of the disastrous winter

campaign in the East In 15Ui, Hitlor osUVlishod for tho first tine a

nodical and hoalth official voder his direct control by dodroo of 28

July 191*2. This docroo aauo Brandt tho suproae authority ovor all

nodical sorvicos in Ocraany. It stated in part as followsi

"3« I copowor Prof. Dr, Karl Brandt, subordinate
only to no personally ani receiving his instructions
directly froa ao, to carry out apodal tasks and
negotiations, to readjust tho r«v»uirQrnnts for
doctors, hospitals, radical supplios, otc., botwoon
tho nilitary and tho dvilian coctors of tho Hoalth
and Medical Sorvicos,

"»ly plonipotontiary for Hoalth and Hedioal Sorvicos
Is to bo kept inforaod about tho fundamental ovonts
in the Ifodical Sorvico of tho Vohraacht and in tho
Civilian Health Service, Ho is authoritod to intox*-
vonc in a responsible acvnnor."l

By the sane docroo chiefs woro also coadssionod for tho nodical

sorvicos of tho vrohrnncht and tho civilian hoalth sector.. Tho dofondant

•

Kandlosor beoaao Chi of of tho Medical Sorvicos of tho ‘/ehmacht, whilo
Dr. Leonardo Conti, Socrotary of Stato for Hoalth and tho Roioh Hoalth
Loader, was redo Chief of too Civilian Hoalth Sorvicos. Brandt was tho
superior of both Hanlosor and Conti, and through thorn hod oxtonsivo
powors over tho .any. Navy, Luftwaffe, .offon SS, and civilian nodical
sorvicos. Brandt stood at tho apex of powor.. Ho wassubordinatod to no
ono 3avo tho Fuahrer. He wa3 the nan to act for the Fuehrer in nodical
natters. The decree authorized Grandt "to intervene in a responsible


1. ID- 060 , Pros. lx. $, R. 93-


10750


Hi July 3-Ccok (int* von Schoen)

Court to. 1


manner" and directed that he bo kept informed of "fundamental events".
Certainly nothing coul ‘ be =oro fundamental than a policy of perforrlne
nodical experisents involving tho torture and death of involuntary
huaan subjocts.

On 5 Septeuber 19U3 Hitler issuod a second dacroo ec^owering
Brandt "with centrally coordinating and directing the probloos and

activities of tho entire nodical and health servicos." The ordor

expressly stated that Brandt’s authority covered tho field of nodical
scionce and rosoarch. Shortly following tho issuance of this decree,
tho defendant Rostock was appointed by Brandt as Chiof of tho Office
for Science and Research, with plenary powers ix. tho field*

Finally, on 25 August 19Ui, tho Fuehrer elevated Brandt to Roich
Coaaisoiorwr for tho Hoaltn and Hodical Sorvicos and statod that in
this capacity "his office ranks cs highest Roich authority". Brandt’s
position was this oquivalont to that of a Roich I tints tor. Ho was
authorized "to issuo instructions to tho cfficos and organizations of
tho State, Party, and 'ehrnacht, which oro concomod with th> problems
of tho nodical and hoalth sorvicoa". It is eloar that this dooroo
was issuod to rosolvo a strugglo for power botweon Brandt an l Conti.
Cortalnly the docroe Jo os no aoro than givo Brandt a raoro august titlo
and restato his powors, powers which ho had olroady rocoivod as early
as July 191*2. Brandt tootifiod that it norely "strengthened" his
position. A Service Roculatdon issued by Keitel for Handlooor, as Chiof
of tho Hodical Services of tho ~ohrnacht, at a tino whon Brandt was
still Gonoral Cocmissionor, providod that Handlosor w a s subject to
tho "gonoral rules of tho Fuohrcr’s Cocfiissionor General for tho
Medical and Hoalth Services" and that Brandt had to bo inforood of the
"basic evonts" in the field of tho Medical Servicearof tho Hehrnacht.

In a pro-trial affidavit the defendant Kandlosor stated that after ho
bocano Chief of tho Medical Servicos of the “■ehrnacht on 26 July 19U2


1. ND-061, Pros. Ex. 6, R, 92*.

2. 20-082, Pros. Ex. 7, R. 95.


10751


Hi July lx7-y-^TD-3-i*-Cook (Int. v6n Schoon)
Court So. 1


1

"Brandt was qy imedlate superior in nedical affairs". Schrcedor

stated that "Karl Brandt, Handles er, and Rostodc were informed of tho

2

nodical research work contacted by tho Luftwaffe" • In addition to
his position as Genoral and Reich Coaaissioner of the Health and
Ifcdical Services, Brandt was also a a neebor of the Presidential Council
of the Reich Research Council, an organisation which gavo financial
support for criminal oxperinonts.

In the racbor t»w» soot in tho defendant Handlosor who held
auprooo power ovor the Medical Sorvicos of all tranches of tho
Wohroacht. Early in 19U1 he was appointed A nay Medical Inspeotor and
Angr Physician. Ho hold those positions until Soptosber 19Ui, and as
such had coaplote co*»nd ovor tho ontiro Array Medical Sorvicos, which
was by far tho largost of tho nodioal branchos of tho '^ohraacht. In his
capacity os .’.nay ’todical Inopootor, Handlosor had subordinated to hin
tho Consulting Physicians of tho Array, tho -Jilitary Modi cal Aoadaay,
tho Typhus and Virus Institutes of tho OKH at Cracow and Lanborg, and
tho Modical School for Mountain Troops at St. Johnann. He attained tho r
rank of Gcnoroloborstabsarst (Lieutenant Oonoral), tho highest nilitary
nodical rank.

On 28 July 191:2, Handlosor was olovatod to tho nowly croated
position of Chiof of tho Medical Services of the Fchraacht. This was
tho sono docroo which appointed Brandt Genoral Cosraissionor, to whon
Handlosor, on tho nilitary sldo, and Conti, on tho civilian side, woro
subordinated. Handlosor was charged with tho coordination of tho
Hodical Services of tho ehmacht and all organisations and units
subordinated or attached to the ahrnacht, including the Jledical Sorvicos
of tho 'il at ton SS. Prior to this docreo thore wore four separate nodical

1. Kl-UJ/Pros. Ex. 10, R. 99.

2. NO-U.9, Pros. Ex. 130, R. 1:71*.


10752


1U July L7-M-AT^-8~5-Ccok (Int. von Schoen)
Court :io. 1


bronchos of the .ehrnacht, the Army, Luftwaffe, Navy, and ' affon SS,

each operating independently of the other* Pursuant to this decree,

Handloser was appointed to coordinate an* unify their operations and

was directly responsible to Keitel as Chief of the High Coruani of the

Rohirv-cht (OK.T). Ho had authority over the Chiefs of the Army, Kavy,

Luftwaffo, and 'affen S3 lledical Sorvices, and all organisations and

sorvicos employod within the framework of the "elirracht, and over " all

•

soiontific nodical institutes, academies and other nodical institutions
of the Services of the 'ohmacht and of the affen SS" , Ho wa3 the
adviser of the Chiof of the High Conaand of tho ohraacht in all
questions concerning the .’krUcal Servicos of tho Viehmacht and of its
health guidance. In the field of nodical science, his duties wore to
carry out uniform censures in the field of hoalth guidance, rosoaron
and combatting of epidemics, and all nodical aattors which roquirod a
uni fora ruling nnong tho Kchraacht, and furthor, in tho evaluation of
nodical oxyorionces .

One of tho principal moans used by tho dofondant Handloscr in

coordinate scientific roso&rch was tho Joint rooting of Consulting

Physicians of tho four branchos of tho Vohnaacht. «t tho Sooond

Mooting East of Consulting Physicians in December 19^2 at tho Military

Medical Academy, Kan.Hosor hinsolf pointod out quito cloarly tho task

of tho Chiof cf tho Medical Sorvicos of tho T.ohraacht in unifying

nodical scientific rosoarch. In addrossim; tho full mooting ho saidt

"The damnls and extent of this total war, as well
as the relationship between noods and availability
of personnel and material, require measures, also
in military and nodical fiolds, ..hich will sorvo
tho unification and unified leadership. It is not
a question of "marching separately and battling
together", but marching and battling must be done
in unison from the beginning in all fields,

"As a result, as concerns the military sector, tho
_r ehrancht Medical Service and with it tho Chiof
of the Medical Services of tho ''ohmacht cane into


1. IB-227, Pros. Ex. 11, R. 101


10753


1!; Ally UT-a-iinj-S-^-Cook (Int. von Schoer.)
Court :*>. l


being. Ifot only in natters of personnel and ni to rial —
even as far as this is possible in view of special fields
ant; special tasks which Bust be considered — but also
with a view to nodical scientific education and research,
ons path in Ae ' ohraccht HartLcal Service aist and will
be a unifiod one. iccordinaly, the croup of participants
in this Secc ad * ork Confarenco East, which I have no*
opined, is tifferontly conposed front ho Pirst fori
Conference in :;ay


1C754


14 July -*?-K-rtX-S—l-Gros3-

COURT I


of this year. Thar, it was a conference
of the army; today the three branches of
the Wehrmacht, the Waff on S3 and Police, the
Labor Service and the Organisation Todt
are participating and unified.

■Ycu will surely permit that I great you with
a j.’enoral welooao and with the sincere wish
ththit our common work may bo blessed with the
hoped for Joint success.

"1 would, however, like to extend a apodal
greeting to the Reich Chief of Health Services,
Inder Secretary Conti, who holds the central
leadership of medical services In the civilian
seotor. I see in his presenco not only an
lnterost In our work themes, but the expression
of hi a connection with the Vohnnaoht Medical
Servloe and his understanding of the special
lnportanoo of the '/ehraaoht In the field as
*oll as at hone. I nood not emphaslso that
we are as ono In the recognition of the noooa-
slty to asaur.- and oaso the nlnd of the soldier,
that ho need not worry about the physloal voll
being of the homeland as far as this la within
the realm of possibility In wartlao. " 1 .

iigaln, at the Fourtn Mooting of Consulting Physicians

In May 1*44, the defendant Karl Brandt stressed the importance

of HanHosor's position, saying:

"Gonoraloberstabsarst Handlosor, you a
soldier and a physician at the aano tine,
are responsible for the uso and the por-
foraanoo of our medical officers.

■I believe, and this probably Is the solo
expectation of all concorned, that this
meeting which today starts in Hohenlychen
will be held for the benoflt of our soldiers.

The achievements to dato of your physicians
Herr Gencraloberstabsarrt, confirm this un¬
equivocally, and th lr roadlnoss to do tholr
share makes all of us proud and - I nay also
say - confident.

"It is good simply to call theso things by
their n-.ces and to look at them as thoy aro.

This meeting Is the visible expression of It -
It is, It shall be and It must bo so In every
reapoct; the consulting physicians aro
gathered around their Medical Chief. When I
look at these ranks, you Generaloberstabsartt

1. NO-922, Pros. £x. 4*5. R. 2050.


10755


1 July *7-X-AX-9-2-Grc8 8
COURT I


Handlorcr, are Co bo envied; medical experts,
with tho bost and most highly trained special
knowledge, are at your disposal for care of
'the soLdlera. In reciprocal action between
yourself and y>ur medical officers, tho
problem of our modloal knowledge and
oapaclty are kept alive." 1 .

This waa no accolade paid to a man without povor and
lnfluonce. If tttndlosor la not responsible for the crimes
committed by the Kedloal Services of the Wohrmacht, and
especially of tie Army and Luftwaffe, then no one la respon¬
sible.

In tho number throe seat wo have the defendant Roatook
who, as 3ran^.t 1 a apodal deputy, was ohargod with tho task
of "centrally coordinating and dirooting tho problems and
activities if the entiro Modloal and Health Servloos" In
the field of soionce and rosearch. Svon prior to his appoint¬
ment to that position in the Fall of 194', Rostock was ono
of tho responsible Isadora of the O.rcan modloal profosalon.
In 19-.2 he was appointed Doan of the Helical Faculty of tho
Unlvorslty of Berlin. In the anno year he boo-uae Consulting
Surgeon to Handloaor as the Army .Medical Inspootor. He
attained tho rank of Brigadier tenoral (Oonoralarst). As
Chief of the Offioo for scl >nce and Resoarch under Brandt,

It was Rostock's task to coordinate scientific research In
Germany. He rooolvoa reports as to the lssuanco of research
assignments try the various agencies In Germany, and detarmlflod
which of such assignments should bo considered "urg.r.t". Ho
also served as Brandt's alternate on th;- Reloh Research
Council.

In the number four seat wo have the defendant Schroeder,
who from 1 J,-.nuary 194«. until the end was the Chief of the

1 i'0-924, bros. 2x. 4*7, R. 2067


10756


1* July -«7-i(-«K-&-*-&ros8
COURT I


Radical Services of the Luftwaffe. Fron 19^5 until February
1940 Schroedor was Chief of Staff to his predecessor, Erick
Hlppke as Luftwaffe Hedlcal Inspector. From Fobruory 1940
until January 1944 ho served as Air Floot Physician of
air Fleet II, when he replaced Hlppke as Chief of the
Medical Services of the Luftwaffe. Simultaneously he was
promoted to the rank of Generaloboretabeartt. As Chlof of
the Medical Services of the Luftwaffe, all medical offloers
of the German Air Firco wore subordinated to him. Hie position
and responsibility are clear and unequivocal.

In seat number fivo 1s the dofondant Gontkon who, as
Chief of the Medical Sorvioo of The Vaffon 3S, •■'as one of
the highest ranking medical officers in the 33. Ho Joined
the Natl Party in 1926 and In 19 T 5 ho wont on aotlvo duty
with the S3 in the ! odloal Offloo of the SS Suoclal Sorvlcos
Troops lSS-Verfuegungstruppo), whloh 3ubsoquontly booaao
the Waff on S3. In the Spring of 197 the hoiloal Offloo
(Sanitatsoat) of the SS was enlarged and split into two
departments. Gentkon was made Dlrootor of the department
ohargod with the supply of medical equlpaont to and tho
supervision of medical personnel in the concentration camps.

In this ojipaolty he was the medical advisor to the notorious
Slcke, predeoessor of Pohl as the commander of all oonoontration
camps. Saohsenhauson, Daohau, Buohenwald, Mauthausen,

Flossenburg and Neuengommo, among others, were undor the
medical supervision of Gentkon. Fow men could have boen
bettor aivlsod as to the systematic oppression and persecution
of the helpless prisoners of these institutions.

In May 1940; Gsntkon became Chief of the Medical Office

t

of tho Waffen S3 lr. tho S3 Operational Headquarters, with

10757


14 July AX- 9- -i- Gro a 8

COURT I


tho rank cf Oberfuohrer (Senior Colonel). The 3S Operational
Headquartors was subordinated to Gruppenfuehrer Hand Juettna*
and was one of the twelve main offices of tho Supreme
Coa.u.d oi tho SS. While Juottnor was Gonrkon's military
superior, his technical or nodical superior was Holchsartt-
SS Grawltt for whoa ho served as doputy on many oooaslons.

In 1942 hla position became known as Chief of tho Medical
Sorvloes of the Waffon SS, Division D of tho S3 Operational
Headqunrtors. Ho attained the rank of Orupponfuohror In
tho S3 An 1 Gonoralloutnant of the Waffan S3 (Lloutonant
General). Among tho off loos subordinated to Gonsken was
that of tho Choalcal and Pharmaceutical Sorvlco under
Bluoaor.reutor, and Hygiene undor tho dofondant Mrugovsky.
Mrugowsky was attached to Gontkon's offlco ao a hyglonlst
In 1940 and was at tho same tlno Chief of tho Hyglono
Instltuto of tho WaTfen SS which, In turn, was subordinated
to Gontkon. On 1 September, 194, tho Modloal Sorvloos of
tho SS was roorganltod and, among other things, Bluomon-
routor, Mrugowsky, and tho Hyglono Instltuto of tho Waffon
SS woro transferred to tho Offlco of tho Rolohsartt SS,
Grawlts. Thoroaftor tho diroot subordination was to
Grawltz rather than to Gonzken.

and then there Is the dofondant Blomj, Orupponfuohror
(Major General) m tho 3A, Deputy Roloh Health Loador,

Doputy Leader of tho Reich Chamber of Physicians and tho
National Socialist Physicians Association, Representative
for the Department of Medical Study, Plonlpotontlary In
the Reich Research Council, and Chief of Research on
Bacteriological Warfare, as the closest associate of
Conti, he cannot be omitted from the list of the poworful


10758


U July-J-OJG-9-5-Grc s s
Court Sc. 1


CcnU was the highest authority in the field of civilian health
ad m i ni stration. The decree of 2S July 1942, signed by Hitler, concern¬
ing the reorganisation of tho nodical services, defines the position
cf Centi ns fellows:

■In tho field cf civilian health administration tho
Secretary of State in the Uinistry of Interior, and
tho Chief cf the Health Administration cf the Reich
(Ruichsgcsundheitsfuchrcr), Dr. Conti, is responsible
for coordinated measures. For this purpeso he has
at his disposal the competent departments of tho highest
Reich authorities and their subordinate cfficos.E 1

There was net a single nodical question which did hot roach tho Reich

Health Deportment of tho Kami Party md tho Reich Chanter of Physicians,

subordinated to *hich were all physicians in Germany, with the excoption

of thoso on active duty with tho arttod fcrcos and in tho SS. As a nanbor

of tho Reich Research Council, Blent was personally connected with

plans wd enterprises involving crirdnol nedical experimentation.

Theso wore tho rcsponsillo leaders of tho Hodied Services of
Germany. Who, thon, is missing frua this illustrious gathering? During
tho courso cf tho trial, wo have froquontly heard nontionod tho nemos
of Centi and Grawltz. Indood, tho defendants would hnvo us bcliovo that
in thoso two men, together with Hitler and Himlcr, ruoidod tho oxclusivo
responsibility for the manifold crimes with which we oro here concomod.

I hardly need call attention to tho fact that all arc dead. All of thorn
tcok their cwn lives rather then face tho ter cf Justice. No one can
deny that theso men wore, indeed, guilty. But this in no way serves
to exonerate theso defendants, *ho all played important roles in tho
ard scheme. It is a curicus thing that not cnc of the defendants has

pointed n n accusing finger at a living man. If they arc to be baliovcd,
all the guilty parties tc th.so crimes ore dead. According to thon,
Jurticc must seek retribution only free the cadavers. Tho Luftwaffo


1. JC-OSO, Pros. Ex. 5, R. 93


10759


U July-IMJS-9-c-Grc 3 s
Ccurt So. 1


defendants have toon stranroly silent as to Hippfco, who, but for a
belated capture, would hpve a preninent seat in the deck. Those
defendants who worked with the deed criminals — such as Gobhardt,
lirugcwsky, arvd Poppcndlck with


10760


Hi Jul-JW2—lO-l-Leoaard
Court Jfo. I.


Grtwitz, and Blcos with Conti - ask the Tribunal to say that thoir as¬
sociation v-s honoraUd and pure, that thjir work was in another fiold,
that thoir castors' crines ccoo as a groat surprise, and were never known
tc then. The evidence proves, horevtr, that thoy not only know of and
supported those crices, but also took a personal part in them.

In connection with the responsible positions of those defendants,
ard aost particularly of Karl Brandt and his assistant Rostock, !hnd-
loeor, Schrcedcr, Gentken, and Bloac, I wish to e a 11 to the Tribunal^
attention the decision of the Suprono Court of tho Unitod States in tho
cc*.. of In ro Yruvrshita. 1 On 25 Sopteii>er l$t5, Yanashita, the Con-
narding General of tho Fourteenth Arry Group of the Inporial Japanese
Amy in tho Philip.;ino Islands was char od with violation of tho lav/s
of wr. :Io th: re after ploaded not ;.uilty, was tried, found guilty as
charged and sontercod to doath by hanging. A petition for a wit of
ir.tK.23 corpus was filed with the Suprorc Court purporting to show that
Yimehita's dotontion was unlawful for the r_ -son, anong others, that
the char go prjfenvd against his failed to charge hie with a violation
of the laws of war.

Tho ca-rgo stated that Y.wishitn, botuoen October 9, 1?Wj and
Sc^e ber 2, 1965, in tho Philippine Islands, "while corvnndor of amod
forces of Japan at war with tho Unitod States of Anorica and its allios,
unlawfully dicregrxd-d and failed to discharge his duty as ccmwander to
control the op-ratiens of tho rorfcjrs of his cccirmd, poroitting tlwa
to cai.it brut -1 atrocities and other high crircs against peoplo of tho
United St tee and of its Alliod and dependencies, particularly tho

Philippinej and ha.thereby violated tic Laws of war". Tie ailitary

coc-ission thic’a tried Tsaaahita found that tht atrocities and other high
criixs had teen coixdtted by nrtoers of tho Japanosu an-ed forces under
his con and, that they wore net sporadic in nature but in many casus
wore rot ha die all y supervised by Japanese officers, and that during tho

1 6S Sue. Ct. 360 (19U6).

10761


1 h Jul-«-l3-10-2-^onard
Court Ho. I.


period in question Yneoahlta failed to provide effective control of
his troops as was required by tha circuostnnces. The Supreme Court
stated the question for their decision in the following languago*

"It is not denied that such acts directed against
the civilian population of an occupied country and
against prisoners of war aro rccognizod in inter*.

national law as violations of the law of war .

3ut it is urged that the charge dees not allege
that potitionor h-.s oither couaittod or directed
the ccxsls 3 ion of such acts, and consequently that
no violation is charged against bin. But this over¬
looks tho fact that thj gist of the charge is an
unlraYul breach cf duty ty the potitionor as an
furor cocr.cnd_r to control the operations cf tho
cccbors of his eoocnnd by *poxidtting then to
ccoxit' thj oxte naive aid widespread atrocities
spocifiod. The quostion then is whether tho lot
cf war inpesos on an anay cor: andcr a duty to toko
such appropri-to noaaurcs as aro within his power
to control tho troepo under his comard for tho
proventicn of the specified acts which aro viola¬
tions of tho law of war and which aro likoly to
attond tho occupation cf hostilo territory by an
uncontrolled soldiory, ud wbottar ho nay bo
ch-rgcd with porsonal rosponsibility for his fail¬
ure to take such :ensures whon violations result".

The Court held that tho charge xms sufficient and that tho lnv/ of
war "plainly ixiposod on tho petitioner, who at tho tlno spocifiod was
military governor of tho Philippinon, as woll as corrvirdor of tho
Japnr-.se forcoa, an affirmative duty to toko such noasuros ns woro
within his power and appropriate in the c ire urns tanc»s to protect
prisoners f wax aid tho civilian population. This duty of a conmnd-
ing fficer has heretofore been rccognizod, .and its breach penalized
by cur own nilitnry tribunals".

This decision is squarely in point .as to tho crlninal rosponsibility
of our defendants in this deck who had tho per..’or and authority to con¬
trol the agents through when thjso ertaoa vert coionittud. It is not
incirobont upon thj Prosecution to show that this or that defendant
was faniliafr with -11 of tho details of all of those experiments. In—
dCwd, in tho Tamshita case, there was no charg- or proof that he had
knew lodge of tho crises. In tho ease before tho International Military
Tribunal, proof was submitted that tha Roichsbank, of which tho defend¬
ant Funk wan president, had received fret; the SS tho personal belongings


lii Jul-U-H3-lCfc-3-Lconard
Court No. I.


o! victlij who had boon extenainatod in concentration can pc. In that
ccnrxcticn the Tribunal said in its Judgm-nt:

"took has protested that he did not knev that tho
Roichsbaak was receiving articlos of this kind.

Tho Tribunal is of tho opinion that ho either
knor what was being rccoivyd cr was deliberately
closing his oyoa to what was being done". 1

But wo rvx-d not discuss tho requirement of knowledge on tho foots
of this a coo. It h“s boon ropoatodiy prevod that those roaponaiblo
loaders of tho Qerren nodical sorvicos In this dock not only know of
tho systematic and crininnl use of concentration camp iiTictcs for nur-
dcrcua nodical exparinonta, but also actively participated in such
crises. C-n it bo held that Karl Brandt had no knowledge of those
crines \hon ho. paraonally initiated tho Jaundieo exporinonts by DoJtaon
in tho Saohsonhauson Concentration Crajp and tho phosgono oxporir.onts
of Bickonbach? Can it be found that ho know nothing of tho criminal
outhrneaia program when ho was charged by Hitler with its oxooution?

Can it bo said that Hand loser had no knonlodgo whan ho participated in
tho confurenco cf 29 Deceit or 19hl wharo it was docidod to porferu tho
Buchorvnld typhus crirrr., »hen reparts wore given on criminal oxrcri-
renta at ixx;tirg3 called and presidod ov^r by hin? Was Rostock an is¬
land of ignoranco when he arranged tho program for an presided ever tho
meetings at which Gubhardt and Fischor lectured on tholr sulfnnilanido
oxpcriixmts, wlun ho classified as "urgent" tho criminal research of
Hirt, Haagon, ajid Bickcnbach? Did Sc hr coder lack knowledge when ho per¬
sonally requested Himlor to supply him with in into8 for tho soa water
experiments? Can it h. found that Go nr ken had nc knowledge of those
crinos whan tho idsorsblc Dr. Ding was subordinated to .and recoivod orders
fron him in connection with tho typhus experiments in 3uchenwr.ld, whon
his offico suppliod Raschor with oquiaaont for tho freezing oxporimnts?
Was Bloco insufficiently inforraed in tho fact of proof that ho collab¬
orated with Ra.sohor in tha blood coagulation cxpcriisents, issuod a ro-


1 Trial of tho Kajor War Criminals, Vol. 1, p. 3C6.


10763


14 Jul-J£-4E—IG-4-Leonard
Court Sc. I.


search assignment to hie on free sing experiments and to Hirt on tho gas
experiments, as well as performed bacteriological warfare and poison
experiments hireolf?

So, it was not tho lack of information as to the criminal program
which explains the culpable failure of ttose aon to destroy this Frank¬
enstein's aonstar. Hor was it lack of power. Can anyone doubt that
Karl Brandt could have issued instructions to Handlosor and Conti that
doctors subordinated to then m>ro not to experiment on concentration
coop iroatoa. It is no oxcuso to say that Hitler and Hirnlcr approved
tho policy and that his offorts nay have failed. Certainly they ap¬
proved it. But tho fact is that Brandt also approved of and personally
participated in tto program. Ho was tho "hlghost Reich authority* 1 in
tho nodical sorvicos, net Hinder. Tho nodical sorvicos woro Brandt's
primary function, while Hirnlor hod a few othor tasks to kocp him busy,
such as running thu SS, tho Ministry of Interior, tho German Police,
and tho Hcco Amy, to nontion a few.

Nothing could hr*, boon oasior for Handlosor than to issue a gonorol
diroctivo that officors of tho Medical Sorvicos of tho Wohrmcht wero to
koop out of concentration canps. If ho could not havo done so, then wo
must concludo that no ono could havo. Handlosor had no poor in tho
military radical sorvicos. And what Handlosor could havo done for all
bronchos of tho Wohmacht, Schroodcr, Gomkon, and Blomo oould havo dono
with rospoct to tho Luftwaffe, tho Waff on SS, and the Reich Health De¬
part runt.

Tho conclusion is inescapcblo that tho crinos of those responsible
loaders is a hundred fold groator than that of tho wretches who oxccutod
tho murderous experiments in tho concentration canps. Theirs was tho
power, the opportunity, and tho duty to control and thoir failure is
their everlasting guilt.

Dr. Rochnald will continue tho prosontation for the prosecution.

BY DR. HCCKfAlDi

Jfcy it please the Tribunali

10764


li* Jul-5*-13—10-£-Io oaard

Court No. I.


This Tribunal is facod with no difficult local questions as to
whether the acts proved in this case constituted crires. Ifeny of the
nodicrl experironts with which this case is ooncomod have long since
been held to Mvo boon crirdnal by a meber of difforent courts. The
International Tribunal stated thati

•'The imatas were subjected to cruel experiments
at Dachau in August 191*2, victims wore irraersed
in cold water until their body torperaturc was
roducod to 28° Cuntigrack, *dion they died im¬
mediately. Other exportrents included high
altitude experiments in proesuro charbors, ox-
poriaonta to dotorrine how long hunan beings
could survivo in freezing water, experiments with
pa is on bullets, oxpcriiaonta with contagious dis¬
eases, and experiments dealing with storilization.
of non and wcoon by X-rays and other not hods." 1

The International liilitary Tribunal hold that tho foregoing oxpori-nnts

constituted *..'ar Oriaos ard Crlma against Hioanity.

In tho case against Erhard Hilch, rvcontly concluded boforo Mili¬
tary Tribunal Mo. II, tho high altitude and f roc zing experiments por-
ferred at Dachau wore adjudged to bo crlnos. Similarly, in U.S. vs .
Woiss ct al. , tried before a Military Cocr-.ission in Dachau, a largo
nunbor of Dachau concentration camp officials woro found guilty on
proof including tho high altitude, freezing, ualaria, sepsis, and
Boawater oxporiumts. Dr. Claus Schilling vs scntoncod to death for
his part in tha malaria oxporinonts. In a rocont case in tho British
Zono concerning atrocitlos comittcd in tha R-yo ns brack Concentration
Camp, Schoidlcu3ky, Rosenthal, and Treito, who woro canp doctors in
R-yonsbruck, woro nil triod and s onto need to death, in part on tho
basis of evidence of the sulfaniliuido and bone, ausclo, and nerve ro-
gonuration oxperironts which wore pr-fcnx--d by tho defendants Gc'ohardt,
Fischor and Cb.rhousor.

Tho '.aw with respect to tho criminality of tho so-called outhanasia
program in tho Third Reich is equally cL. nr. This Tribun-1 is not cnllod
upon to dofino with juridical nicety what a stato cay Lawfully logiclato


lii Jul-lMS-lO-6-Lc.cnard
Court Ho. I.


with respect to outhanasia. The Prosecution asks only that this
Tribunal find, r.s other Tritwnals have already hold, that there was no
valid lew in tie Third Reich emitting euthanasia and that tho exec¬
ution of persons under tho guise of euthanasia, with the connivance
and assistance of the defendants Karl Brandt, Brack, Blorao and Hovon,
constituted the crirc of nurder and was a War Crico and Crixx- Against
Hunanity. Again, the foronost -authority on tho legality of euthanasia
as practiced under tho Nasis is in the Judgiaont of tto International
Military Tribunal. It was there hold that:

"During tho war nursing hcaxjs, hospitals, and
nsylvns in which outhanaaia was practiced as
described olscwhoro in this Judgaont, care under
Fricks Jurisdiction. He hod knowlodgo that in¬
sane, sick, nrai agod people, ‘usoloss asters',
rjro being systcmticnlly put to doath. Cco-
plnint of those nurders roachod hin but ho did
nothing to atop than. A report of tho Czocho-
slovak War Crises Co=rdssicn ostiastod that
275,COO mentally doficiont and aged pooplo,
for whose welfare ho was responsible, foil
victin to it." 1

This finding draws no distinction between Gormn nationals oxocutcd

urdur th, jregrra and rvon-Oom.an nationals. Tho so executions arc dos-

ertbod with tho word "nurder" and constitute War Crinos and Crlii03

0

against Hunanity under tho Charter and Control Council Law No. 10.

This was ono ef tho principle crlxxs *.rhich lod to the Judgajnt cr
guilty and tho sontonco of death against Frick. How r.u*h greater is
the guilt of the defendant Karl Brandt.

Thj review of tho Doputy Theater Judgo Advocate in tho ease of


tho U.S. vs. Klsin, TTahlnm, ct al., hold at Wiosbadon,


14 July-it-OJG-U-l-iklcy
Court Ho. 1


Germany from 8 through 15 Octo cr 1945, is a dear precedent that the

execution of non-Gcrnar. nationals pursuant to the euthanasia program

constituted the crime sunder. Since the end of the war, German and

Austrian courts have repeatedly held that the killing of persons of any

nationality under the guise of euthanasia was in violation of German

Criminal Code and punishable as mrder. It is interesting to note that

in a caso before the Dlotrict Court for Criminal Cases in Vienna in

July 191*6, Dr. Srnst Illing, who was charged with putting to death
•

children under the euthanasia program, testified that ho was called up
by Hofclnann, one of the su' ordinates of the defendant Brack, and given
a lettor signed by Adolf Hitler according to which the defendant Kerl
Brandt was given the task of putting into offoct and working out adjsinia-
trativo regulations for the killing of incurablo idiotic childron. Illing
stated that aftor examination and docision by a flC ionUfio medical
cccnlttoo. Dr. Brandt, or tho deputy designated by him, would givo tho
ordor in each individual caso. Ildlng was found guilty as charged and
sontoncod to death by hanging.

I '

Th« Court of Assizes in Borlin, in tho session on 25 'March 1946,
found the dofundents Hildo ’ cmicko and Helene Uioczcrck guilty of
nurdor and'soatcncod then to death for their activities in the euthanasia
program. Tho Court of Appeals in tho same case rejoctod tho appeals
of both defendants. Tho court statod thet, “It era mot bo mistaken that
tho defendants bomicko and Uieczorek aro only tho last links of a long
chain, and that they were preceded ty persons whoso guilt is still
greater." In Karl Brandt and Victor Brock wo havo in this dock tho
first and third links in that long chain. The second link, Mr. Bouhlor,
has found his salvation in self destruction with a time tool. Not far
1 ehind in this'chain of organized mass murder was the deforciant Blanc
and while ffeven nay not have sat among tho leaders, he was more tangibly
rewarded by way of bribes as t: paid killer of Buchtnwald.


10767


H July-M-DJG-ll-2-i£al oy
Court Ho. 1


Dofcnscs

Time docs not porait a detailed analysis of the proof against
these defendants. The Prosecution is filing with the Tribunal briefs
against each of the defendants, and I shall therefore restrict qysolf
to a few observations about the cceaon defensos and a muster of the acre
interesting specific dofcnscs.

The defense evidence cases frea thr c gain sourcciT^affidavits,
witnesses, and testineny of the defendants. The overwhelming tulle of
the dofense documents consists of affidavits. These, for the most
part, aro affidavits as to character, which arc rcploto with such
statenents as ".....I cannot icagino that ho approved or evon know of
the 'scientific* oporinonts which scorn all humanity and all nodical
ethics.'' 1 Then thorc was a groat flood of effidevits swnppod around
nttcng the defendants thcnsolvoa, which usally tako tho fora of saying,
in of feet, I didn't coon what I said about you boforo tho trial began.*'
Thcro is scarcoly a defendant in the dock who was not tho grateful bene¬
ficiary of a few kind words from that resistance worker Sievors. This
reached the extroao when several defendants sufcadttod affidavits in
their own behalf.

When one sifts through this mountain of affidavits, a snail
rosiduo is finally roechod which bears, to a greater or lessor dogroo,
upon tho ultimate facts in issue. Theso no find aro, in tho most pert,
sworn to by parties to tho very crimes which they seek to explain away.
Axaong then, to nemo a few, arc statements by ifiss Crodol, assistant to
Haagen in tho Natzwcilor typhus experiments; Blononrcutor, chiof of the
offico for Chemical end Fharoeceutical Service under Goniken and supplior
of equipment for a number of experiments, including tho sulfanilonido and
freezing crises; Cromer, Chiof of the Medical School for Itount&in Troops
at St. Johann under Handloser, and a collaborator with Raschcr; and Ven-
kenncl, chief of tho Experimental Department V in Leipzig and a collabor¬
ator of Foppendrek in tho Buchenwald typhus experiments. Such affidavits


1. Handlc3or Ex. U9

10768


U July—If-DJG-U—3-£ialcy

Court He, 1

lack any credibility whatever. Vcnkcnnel, to give a specific case,
solemnly assured us in his swern statement that his Research Department
V "never had anything to do with tho hormone experiments of Dr. Vacmct,
*»ith typhus, or with experiments concerning 'urns".^ However, in a
letter free Poppcndick to Urugowsky, which was su'ait ted ty tho Proso-
cuticn after Herr Vcnkennol's affidavit, he roo.uestod that a drug
developed by Vonkcnnol be tested as to its therapeutical offcct on typhus
in tho axporincntal strtion in Buchenwald and concluded his lottor by
stating thati

"Profoasor Dr. Vcnkenncl considors it very advisable that Dr.

Ding should call on him in his clinic in Leipzig for tho purpose
of discussing this rather diffor-nt therapy. The necessity for
absolute sccrocy is stressed to ell institutions concornod." 2

I nood not renind tho Tribunal that the drug was in fact sent to Buchcn-

wold for testing in the crisinal typhus experiments.

Then there aro the affidavits which attorapt to explain away this or

that document which shows tho crime on its very faco. Schrcodcr and

Bcckcr-Froysong, finding thamselvoa in this embarrassing dlloxia with

respect to the report cn tho soawator conforonoo of 19 and 20 llay 19 /J,,

0

obtained from tho obliging Christenson, who signed the damning roport,
an aaswor to their figurativo appoal to "say it ain't so". Christenson
in his sworn statement said, in offcct, that the roport was drawn up
fren numory sov-ral dr; s after *.hc event by his assistant Schickler,
who was really c protty stupid follow anyway and was not apt to under¬
stand or roaoober nich which wont on in tho mooting, that although he
(Christensen) signed the report ho didn't reed it, end in any ovont
Schroeder's offico called hin after their receipt of the report and
pointod out numerous, but unspecified, mistakes, and that ho didn't
chengo tho report bccauso it «s superseded by a latter meeting.

Its, it was all sweetness end light, if one finds if possible to


1. Pcppcndick Ex. 7

2. NO-1184, Pros. Ex. 476, R. 5639


10769


14 July-U-DJG-ll--V-ifeIoy
Court So. 1


believe the atatoEonta of these parties to the crises. !het has Icon
said with r'tfiyoot to the defense affidavits is also truo of the defonso
witnesses. Thoso few who woro in e position to know what they woro
talking at,ut were testifying cs nueh for thenselves as for the defen¬
dants. It is patently impossible to deal with the testimony of all those
witnesses, ut ono may teko Bernhardt Schaidt and Eugene Haagen as
typical cases. The Ding Diary on tho typhus experiments in Buchunwald
proves that on C Pobrurry 1943, Dr. Eycr of the 7yphus and Virus Institute
of tho OKH in C re cow, *hich was subordinated to Handlosor, and Dr.

Scheldt, a hygienist attached tc Handlcaor'a staff, inspected the typhus
experimental station. This entry in the Ding Diary was corroborated
ty tho work report-of the Tophus and Virus Institute of tho l.nffon SS
in Buchonwald for the year 1943. Scheldt was crllcd as a witness for
tho defendant K-ndloser and tostifiod that he and Eyor or do the long
trip to Buchcnwrld for the very important purpose of demonstrating to
certain SS doctors, when ho could not nano, hew a glass contalnor of
yellow favor veccino should to broken open. Although $-or and Schmidt
woro very much interested in typhus problems, and although thuro was
c typhus experiment in progress in Buchcnwold on tho very day they
wore there. Dr. Scheldt asks tho Tribunal to credit his testimony that
they knew nothing of that. Even the dofendant Rose found Dr. Schmidt's
testimony somewhat hard to accopt. He said* "Berhardt Schmidt's tcati-
ocnoy is dear preef to me what sort of nensense a witness can say whon
he is under tho pressure of fear and is afraid he rill express himself
to publicity and to the public eye ty his testimony". 1

Eugene Hesgen, whe was called principally on behalf of Schroodcr,

Rose and Bcckcr-Froyscng, to explain his typhus experiments in Schin-
nock and Buchorrcld, told an equally incredible story. He cerrlod out
vaccinations in these concent rati n camps only because the camp ccrmndor
feared an epidoede and Haagen wished to do what ho could tc avoid this


1. Transcript, p. 62)1 - 2.


10770


U July-IMJJG-ll—5-lfcicy
Court Ho. 1


danger. Although there was insufficient typhus vaccines in Germany
to vaccinate all personnel especially exposed to the disease, Haagon
shewed admirable concern for the concentration camp inmates. He affirmed
to the Tribune! time and again that he carried out no vaccinations in
Schirnock after Hey 1943 and in Natzwoiler after February 1944. Ho
testified that tfco Prosecution witness Hirtz perjured himself when ho
said that two of tho inmates used by Hnagen as exp crimen tel subjocts in
Schedmcck in the Succor of 1943 died. Haagon was squarely impaachod
on those qnd other significant points by tho notes on his own typhus
experiments, ihich he identified as having been written by Ifiss Crodol,
his trusted assistrnt for many years. Tho entry for 6 July in theso
notos proves that on that day Haagon was in Schirmeck for the purposo
of withdrawing blood from ton inaatos who haul l oen used to tost a now
living typhus vaccine. The entry gives tho soruo titor veluo of 0 of
the oxporiaontal subjects, and is concluded with the laconic note "tho
othor two wore net hero any noro". -1 Thus, it would soic to oven tho
raost critical observer that tho testimony of Hirts, who personally
sewed up tho bodies of these two inaates in pepor bags and delivered
thorn for crcoeticn, is somewhat acre rolieblo than that of Haagon. Tho
Crodol notos show that not only did Haagon conduct exporimonta in Schi-
occk after lioy 1943, but that ho was still doing so as Into as January
1944. Vlth respect to tho criminal experiments in Natzwuilcr which he
swore woro finished in February 1944, tho entry for 25 liay 1944 states
that 30 poraons woro innoculatod in Natzwoilar".. .during tho incubation
period (a transport containing also sick poople) 13 bocarao sick in the
period from 29 Hey to 9 Juno, of these 2 died".

Insufficient time is avcilefclo to give tha perjurcus testimony
of Haagon tho attention it sc richly deserves. But I think it fair
tc say by way of suaa--ry that substantially tho only truthful answer ho
gave to questions propounded teth by tho defense and prosecution wr.a *on


1. HO-3C52, Pros. Ex. 521, R. 9^0


10771


1M Jul7-U-DJG-lI-6-leicv
Court No. 1


ay distinguished opponent. Dr. Tipp, opened the examination by saying*

"Your name is Dr. Eugene Haagen. You wore horn on the 17 June 1890 in
Berlin. At present you are a prisoner in tho court prison in Nurnborg.

You arc a doctor of nodicino by profession and your speciality is hygiene
and bacteriology", to which tho witness responded: "Yea, that la correct."'

That other groat source of defenso proof — tho testimony of tho
defendants thcoselves — auat also be described, if one wishes to bo
charitafclo, as not cbovo reproach. Hew aany times hevo the deforviants
said, "I hevo hoard of that for the first tiao hero in Nurnborg." This
propensity for perjury on tho part of tho defendants was typifiod by tho
"highest Reich authority" in tho nodical services, Karl Brandt. Undor
questioning during corss-cxcsination as to his connection with tho
phoagono gas oxperioonts performed by Otto Bickcntach, Brandt tostifiod
that this roao-rch came to his attention in tho fall of 1943 on tho
occasion of a visit to Strasbourg to soo e cyclotron; that lator ho
helped Bickotbach to obtain a laboratory for his work; that ho essistod
him in obtaining experimental animals oven to the extent of having them
flown frem Spain; that Bickmbech did not conduct oxporiments on human
boings; that he holped him in 1944 aftor tho laboratory had boon oatab-
Ushod in tho vicinity of Strasbourg. The defendant Rostock was with
Brandt when ho sew Bicksnbach in 1943 and lator classifiod his rosoarch
as "urgent". The Sievors Diary for 1944 proves that Bickcnbach was
performing his work under tho control of Brandt. Tho entry for 2
Fobruary states that:

"....cot Prof. Bickcrfach in Karlsruhe, end ho advises that ho

has put his research werte under tho control of General Cocnlssionor

Prof. Dr. Brandt."*

Brandt adsdttod that he was in Hatzwcilor with Bickcnbach but insisted
that, strangely enough, only animal oxp.rimcnts wore conducted in this
concentration camp. Evidence suhaittod by the Prosecution following this

1. Transcript p. 9409

2. 3546-PS, Pres. Ex. 123, R. 2629

10772


14 Julj-H-DJG-11—7-Jfcloy
Court So. 1


cross-exaaination proved beyond controversy that Brandt was advised
of the details of 3ickcnbech>8 crlainal experiments cn Russian prison¬
ers of ear end that, indeed, this research was carriod out with his
support. An affidavit from Bickenbach himself states that he discussod
the necessity of carrying cut phosgene gas experiments on human beings
with


10773


lU July-K-3&.ia»2«Meefa^n
Court Fo. 1


Brandt before they vere perforaed end that 3r«:dt later advised his
thet the experiments had to be executed. The reports by 3iekenbach
cn his experiments were ell addressed to Brandt as Commissioner
General of the Health and Medical Services. They show on their face
that the experiments were perforaed on forty Sussian prisoners of war
and that four were Jellied as n result.

The defendant Gebhardt, who figuratively beat his chest and loudly
proclaimed his willingness to tell the full truth, wns not above
false testlaony on his own behalf as well as a few gratuitous perjuries
for his colleagues Oentlcen and Krugovsky, icon# others. Gebhardt,
while assuming responsibility for the sulfanllnOldeiSkparlnentsoon
Polish women In the R-vensbrueck Concentration Crep, attempted to
dissociate himself from the vivisections performed in the course of
the bone, muscle, and nerve experiments. He testified thrt his
sulfanllrcide experiments were completed by December I 9 U 2 and he hrd
no further connection with experimental work in Ravensbruehk. The
affidavit of Jritx Suhren, Camp Commander of Ravensbrueck, squarely
contradicts Gebhardt in thrt regard. He stated that in the beginning
of 1943 he contacted Oruppenfuehrer Mueller of the RSHA to have the
experiments stopped because, among other reasons, they could not be
kept‘.secret, and that Mueller agreed. « short tlmo later an neslstnnt
of Gebhardt'• requested additional wonen for experimental purposoe
which Suhren refused. That ease evening Oebkardt reprimanded Suhren
and threatened to submit the matter to the Reichsfuohrer. Sometime
1 ater Suhren was forced to go to Kohenlyehen and apologise to Geb¬
hardt, os he puts it "in a vary humiliating way*. He wns ordered to

make three additional women available for Gebhardt's experiments.

%

So one who has had occasion to observe Gebhrrdt's vain and overbear¬
ing manner in this courtroom can doubt the truth of Suhren' s statements.

In his zealousness to protect his fellow defendants and heap e.ll
the guilt on Gravitx, Gebhardt testified that neither the Itygiene


10774


14 July-H-5E-12- 2-Keehrn
Court To. 1


Institute of the Stifft n SS nr»r the defendant Xrugowaky, vho rt thr.t
tiae vps subordinated to Oensken, played ray prrt In the sulfanlla-
nlde ex perlrents, and that the Infection aaterlal was sent to hi*
by Crrvlts. Genrken and Krugoweky, needless to sry, ardently support¬
ed Oebh«rdt on this point. » prellsinrry report by Sebhnrdt on these
experiments, certified rs a true eory by Grawlts's assistant Foppen-
dick, proves precisely the contrary. It states that "SS Oberfuohrcr
Dr. Eluneareuter put tbe complete eurgtcnl lnstruncntatlons and
cedlcaaen tat Ions at ay disposal. SS Stradartenfuehrer krugowsky put
his laboratory end co-workers at ay disposal." The report also str.teo
that!

"Since in thle exporleant »oo-*;.definlte gangrene could be
produced clinically speaking, yet Its picture did not lr.
any wry correepond to the one known In war-aurgory, rfter
furth*r coneultation with the collaboratore In the Hygiene
Institute of the Vrfftn SS the vaccine vaa changod by
adding wood shaving#."

CAE7AI* HOCFVALD: The Prosecution requests an adjoumnont for
noon recsss at this tine to pernit the interpreters to oonplet© the
translation of the docuaents.

*H£ PBZSIDSETi The Tribunal will now be in recess until lj 30
o'clock.

(A recess was taken until I 33 O hours.)


10775


lix July lx7-1-..TT—13—1-Prineay (Inti Brown)

Court Ho. 1

A5T5RIPQU SESSION

(Tha hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, llx July 19lx7)

DH. aXTt-ALD: "ay it ploase the Tribunal, even the. asst osincot
scientist in the dock, the dofondant Rose, triad to shield his guilt
by a tissue of lios. The entries in the Ding Diary for 19 August 191x2
and 8 "i-rch 19Ux prove that typhus experiments were earriod out in /

Bucheranld by Ding at tho suggestion of Rose. Ten irrctt>3 wore killed
during the course of those experiments. Rcae expressly lenied the
accuracy of these entries in tho Ding Diary. Ho donied over having
sent vaccine to Ifrugovsky or DLng to havo tested in Buchomml:!. Ho
denied that llnxgowsky over oskod him for vaccines to bo usod in typhus
experiments or that lie over negotiated with I'rugowaky in that roearJ.

Jtrugowsky has choerfully testified that ho, also had nothing whatever
to do with Ding's oxporiaents in Buchomald. Ho stated that: "If he
had cone to no I would havo sent hin on to seneoos else. I would havo
sold, UST dear ran, that doos not havo anythin to do with no."

The porjurous testimony of thoso two defendants was clearly rovoalod
by the subsoquont intro diction of tho correspondence botwoon then on
tho Tory experinonte with which they denied any connection. On 16 liny
19U2 Mrugowaky wrote to Rose as follows:

"Tho Roich Physician SS and Polico has consontod to
tho execution of experiments to tost typhus vaccines.

Hay I thoroforo ask you to lot no havo the vaccines.


"Tho other quostion rhich you raised, as to whothor-
tho louse can bo infsctod by a vaccinated typhus patient,
will also be dealt with. In principle, this also has boon
approved. Thoro are, however, still some difficulties at
the n»nont about tho practical execution, slnco wo havo
at present no facilities for brooding lico.


■Your su;' ostion to use Clzscha had boon peered on to
tho Personnel Department of the SS Ifedical Offico. It will
be given consideration in due courso."2


tho basis for tho experiments carried out by Di^; in
'^Burrhom.-aid^k^^ ust 19U2 as reportod in tho Ding Diary.


I


!• >C-*73li, Pros. Ex. 1x73, R. 5622.
2. M>4751i, ?ros. Sx. 1x91, R. 61x60.


\ /
\


J


- 10776 -


Hi July Ii7---».TD-!3-2-?riaeau (Int. Broro)
Court tic. 1


Those defendants were again thoroughly lnpeachod by the letter of

Rose to Krugowaky of 2 December 19a5 which reeds, in part, as follows:

•At jresent I have at ay disposal a nustoer of
samples of a new nurine virus typhus vaccine which
was prepared fron nice livers and proved in animal
experiments to be quantitatively a 1000 tines nore
effective than the vacclno propared fron nice lungs.

To decide whether this first rate curine vacclno
should be used for protective vaccination of human
beings against lico typhus it would be desirable to
know if this vaccine shewed in your and Ding's experi-
nental arranrenont at Buchonwald an effect sirdlar
to that of tho classic virus vaccines.

■loud ycxi be ablo to have such an experimental series
carriod out7 Unfortunately I could not roaoh you over
tho phono. Considering tho slownoss of postal conuuni-
cations I would bo grateful for an answer by tolophono.''l

This lettor in turn substantiates tho entry in tho Ding Diary for

0 March 19UU.

Those defendants, without oxcoption, showod a vory romarkablo
praotico of ocononiiing in tho uso of truth. Tho record is full of
thoir outright falso statooonts, doublo talk, fantastic explanations,
absurd professions, dissijsulations, and ovnsions. Wo havo not ovon boon
sparod tho oxperionco of .nt’loast ono instance of deceitful and con¬
temptuous alteration of original docuaonts in a vain attempt to mask
tho truth. Thoso things typify tho philosophy of the National Socialists.
As Juotico Jackson said?

"When for years thoy havo docoivod tho world, and
masted falsehood with plauslbilitlos, can anyone bo
surprised that thoy continuo tho habits of a lifotimo
in this dosk? Credibility is one of tho noin issuos
of this trial. Only thoso who havo failed to loarn tho
bitter lo33ona of thu last decade can doubt that son
who havo always played on the unsuspecting credulity
of the genorous opponents would not hesitate to do the
saao, now."2

Ono of the oocnon defenses which has boon utiliaod rathor oxtonsivoly
in this caso is a variation of tho old "sholl gone" — not/ you so© it,
now you don't.- This conos into nost activo play when wo havo a criminal
who had two or nore titlos. Thus, for example, Haagon was simultaneously


1. 10-1186, Pros. Sx. U92, H. 6163

2. I.H.T. Transcript, p. Ili377.


- 10777 -


Ik July 1*7— .V-..TD-13-3— Prineau (In-. Brown)
Court No, 1


Consulting Hygienist to Air Floot Reich with the rank of Stabsar z t and
the Director of the Hygiene Institute of the University of Strasbourg.
.'Oso, Generalarzt Schreibor, one of the principal subordinates of
HandLoser as Arny Medical Inspector, was Cosnandor of the Scientific
Group of the Military Medical Acadany and at the sane trtnn pleni¬
potentiary for the CoabattinG of Epidemics in the Reich Research
Council, In the face of proof that both of these non engaged in a
varloty of crises, the incriminated defendants have nado tho of fort
to hide tho pea which is tho crine under the shell for which they deny
responsibility, while at tho sane tine hopofully ignoring the obvious
faot that the pea is undor both sholls. Thus,Schroedor, Rose and Dockor-
Freysong would havo tho Tribunal nako tho fantastic fincing that tho
Rector of the University of Strassbourg was exclusively Haagon's bos3
and, if ho did anything wrong, it was tho Roctor's responsibility.
Handles or takes a similar lino with tho very unpopular Schroibor, and
by sono wondrous working of fato, evory tiao Schreibor was sponsoring
a crinlnal experinont ho was acting in his capacity as a nonber of the
Roich Roeearch Council, Bio no, according to his story, was only doputy
to the "good" Conti while tho "bad" Conti went his crinlnal way without
the assistance of his chiof collaborator. Poppcndick and Orawitz had
tho anno unique relationship, Conzkon and iirugowsky perform a sinilar
bi-eootion of Ding) whilo his right hand was in tho vaccino production
plant at Buchenwald undor their coesand, his left hand porforaod the
criminal typhus experiments at the direction of Grawits, and never tho
twain did meet. I will not consume tho tine and pationco of this
Tribunal by pointing up the woalth of ovidonee which proves that
Hangen, as ho I n deed admitted, and Schreibor and Ding woro performing
their criminal research with tho knowledge and activo support of those
defendants who arc now so anxious to disown then. The Prosecution ttoos
not dissent from tho concensus that other ..ersons are also guilty of
these crimes, including rest cortainly the Rector of tho University of
Stras3fcourg and the n-r-bors of the Reich Research Council. After all, w a

- 10778 “


Hi July U7-A<.tD-13-ii-Prlnoau (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


hare in Karl Brandt and Bio so, two of the six doctors who wore naabers
of the Reich Research Council. But the faot that other persons are
equally quilty in no way serves to exculpate those defendants. The fact
that these criminal experiments were perforced with the knowlodge and
assistance and for the benefit of several different agencies only goes
to prove that they wore executed pursuant to a coraon design. Thus, the
report on the first typhus experiment in Buchenwald, which cost tho
lives of five inretes, was sent by lfrugowsky to Conti as Reich Health
Loader, in which capacity Blome was his deputy, Qrawitz, Qen?ken,

Eyer of tho Typhus and Virus Institute subordinated to Handloeor, and
Dr. Donnitz of the Behring -forks. The "sholl game" is no dofenso.

OuUt was indeed widespread, but that is neither exculpation nor miti¬
gation for those dofendents.

Mr. HacHonoy will proceod with tho closing stateaont.

!tR. ‘KCH.NEYi Another of tho rathor ccexaon dofensos urgod by tho
defendants is that tho oxporinontal subjects were criminals condonnod
to death who, provided they survived the experiment, wore rewarded by
confutation of their sentence to life imprisonment in a concentration
camp. For one who has even tho slightest knowlodge of the conditions
in concentration camp, and the life expectancy of an average irvnato,
this alleged dofonso assumes tho aspect of a ghastly uoko. Wo nood
only recall th. remark made by one of tho women used by Rascher to
rewara his frozan victims in Dachau, who when askod by him why she had
volunteered for tho camp brothel, replied: "rather half a year in a
brothel than half a year in a concentration oanp". But the dofects is
this spurious defense run such deeper. Concentration camp* wero not
ordinary penal Institutions, such as are known in other countries, for
the connittocnt of persons oonvicted of crimes by courts. The vory
purpose of concentration camp* was the oppression and persecution of

•

persons who were considered undesirablo by tho Nazi regime on racial,
political, and religious grounds. Hundreds of thousands of victims were


- 1D779.-


Hi July ii7^«..TD-13-5-Prireau (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

confined to concentration canpa because they were simply Jews, Slavs, or
Gypsies, Free Masons, Social ItenoGrate, or Coasunists. They were not
tried for any offense and sentenced by a court, not even a Nasi court.
They were in prisoned on tho basis of "protective custody orders" issued
by the RSHu. Tens of thousands were condemned to death on the single
order of HL-rder, who, as Gebhardt put it so well, "had the powor to
execute thousands of people by a stroke of his pen"/ There wore,
indoed, a relatively snail group of 1 mates who night be classed as
ordinary criainals. These wore non who had served out their sentences
in an ordinary prison and then wore coaaitted to concentration camps


1. Transcript, p. h025.


- 10780 -


Court 1, Case 1

14 July 47 -A-14-l-ASG-Porrin (von Schon)


for still further detention* A memorandum of 18 September 1942 by

Minister of Justice Theirack concemir^ a conversation with Hinnler

tells us the fate of those unfortunates:

"The delivery of anti-social elements from the exe¬
cution of their sentence to the Reichsfuehrer 38 to
be worked to death. Persons under protective arrest,

Jews, Gypsies, Russians and Ukrenians, Poles with
more than 3 year sentences, Czechs and Germans with
8 year sentences, according to the decision of the
Reich Minister for Justice". 1

Tho proof in this case has demonstrated beyond all doubt that
so-called criminals sentenced to death were very rarely used in any
of the experiments. True it is that Himmler said prisoners condemned
to death should be used in those high altitude experiments whore the
long-continued activity of the heart after death was observed by the
experimenters. He was generous enough to say that if such persons
could bo brought back to life, then they were to be "pardoned" to
concentration cacg) for life. But even this unique amnesty had no
application to Russians and Poles, who wero used exclusively in

those experiments.

But, assuming for the moment, that this alleged dofenso might
have a mitigating effect under oooo circumstances, it certainly has
no application to this case. Be it notod that this is an affirmative
dofenao by way of avoidance or mitigation. There hos boon no proof
whatever that criminals sentenced to death by an ordinary court could
possibly be executed in a concentration casp. Such nattors were with¬
in the jurisdiction of tho Ministry of Justice, not Himmler and the
SS. The experimental subjects we oro doaling with here are those
that Himmler could cordecm by "a stroke of his pen". If the inmate
usod in tho experiments was condemod for merely being a Jew, Pole,
or Russian, or, for example, having had sexual intercourse with a
Jew, it does not answer the criminal charge to say that tho victim
was docced to die. Experimentation on such a person is to compound

1 654-PS, Pros. Ex. 562, R. 10695


- 10781 -


Court 1, Case 1

1A July 47 -A-lA-2-AB3-?errin (Von Scnon)


the crime of hla initial unlawful detention as well as to cocrdt the
additional crime of aurder or torture. As has beer, said by another
Tribunal, "Exculpation from the charge of criminal hcnicide can only
can only possibly be based upon bona fide proof that the subject had
committed murder or any other recognised capital offense; and, not
even then, unless the sentencing Tribunal with authority granted by
the State in the constitution of the court, declared that the exe¬
cution would be accomplished by moans of a low-pressure chamber". 1

In this connection, it might be noted that German law recognized
only three methods of execution, namely, by decapitation, hanging, and
shooting. (German Penal Code, Part I, Par. 13; R.G.3.L. 1933, Part I,
p. 151; R.G.B.L. 1939, Part I, p. 1457). Moreover, there is no proof
that any of the experimental subjects had their death sentences ccn-
muted to any leaser degree of punishment. Indeed, in the sulfanil¬
amide crimes it was the experiment £lus lator execution for at least
six of the subjects.

Since the defendants Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oborheuser havo put
particular stress on this alleged defonse, I should like to nwko a
few remarks in that connection, but it should be rcambered that they
apply with equal force to most of the othor deforciants. Gebhardt,
speaking for his co-defendants Fischer and Oberheuser, took the po¬
sition that the Polish women who had been used in the sulfanilamide
experiments had been condemned to death for participation in a resis¬
tance movement and that by undergoing the experiments, voluntarily or
otherwise, they were to have their death sentence coanuted to some
lesser degree of punishment, provided they survived the experiments.
This was no bargain reached with the experimental subjects; their
wishes were not consulted in the natter. It was, according to
Gebhardt, left to the good faith of some one unnamed to sec to it


1 U.S. v. Milch, Concurring Opinion of Musaanno, J., p. 53-4;


- 10782 -


Court 1, Case 1

14 July 47 -A-14-3-A3G-Ferrin (yon Schen)

that the death sentences were not carried out on the survivers of
the experiments. Certainly Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser as-
summed no responsibility or even interest in that regard.

It should be pointed out that the proof shows that the experi¬
mental subjects who testified before this Tribunal wore never so
much as afforded a trial; they had no opportunity to defer*! them
selves against whatever crimes they were said to have ccoaitted.

They were simply arrested and interrogated by the Gestapo in Poland
and sent to the concentration camp, lhey had never so much as been
informed that they had been narked for, not sentenced to, death.
Article 30 of the Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War
on Land, annexed to the Hague Convention, specifically provides that
even a spy "shall not be punished without a previous trial".

Gobhardt would have tho Tribunal believe that but for tho experi¬
ments all those Polish girls would bo doad; that ho proservod the ovi-
donce which was usod against him. Nothing could bo further from the
truth. Thoro is no proof in the record that these women would have
boon oxocutod if thoy had not undergone tho experiments. The wit¬
ness Uagzka is living proof of tho contrary. Sho was arrested for
resistance activities on 11 September 1941 and shipped to Ravonsbruck
on 13 September. She was not an experimental subjoct yet sho lives
today. Substantially all of tho Polish experimental subjocts ar¬
rived in Ravonsbruck in September 1941. These girls had not boon
executed by August 1942 when tho experiments began. There wore 700
Polish girls in that transport. There is no evidence that a sub¬
stantial number were over executed even though most of them were not
experimented on.

The proof suboittod by tho Prosecution ha3 shown beyond contro¬
versy that those Polish women could not have been legally executed .

Tho right to grant pardons in casos of death sentences was exclus¬
ively vested in Hit lor by a decree of 1 February 1935. On 2 Kay 1935.


- 10783 -


Court 1, Case 1

14 July 47 -A-i4-4-AEG-Ferrin (von Schon)

On 2 May 1935, Hitlar delegated the right to sake negative decisions
on pardon applications to the Reich Minister of Justice. On 30 Jan¬
uary 1940 Hitler delegated to the General Governor for the occupied
Polish territories the authority to grant aM deny pardons for the
occupied Polish territories. By edict dated 8 March 1940, the
General Governor of occupied Poland ordered that:

"The execution of a death sentence promulgated by
a regular court, a special court, or a Police court
martial, shall take place only when ay decision has
been Issued not to nake use of my right to pardon." 1

Thus, even though we assume arguendo, that the experimental
subjects had all committed substantial crimes, that they were all
properly tried by a duly constituted court of law, and that they
were legally sentenced to death, it is still clear from these decrees
that these women could not have been legally executod until such time
as tho Governor General of occupied Poland had decided in each case
not to make use of his pardon right. Thero has been no proof that
the Governor General ever acted with respect to pardoning the Polish
women used in the experiments, or, for that matter, any substantial
number of those not used in tho experiments. The only reason these
700 Polish wanen were transported from Warsaw ard Lublin to Ravons-
bruck, in the first place, was because the Governor General had not
approvod their execution. Otherwise they would have been imediately
executed in Poland. At the very least, these women were entitled to
remain unmolested so long as the Governor Gonoral took no action.

He may never have acted or, when he did, he may have actod favorably
on the pardon. Who is to say that the majority of these 7CO women
did not live through the war even though they did not undergo the
experiments? Certainly it was incumbent on the defense to prove the
contrary by a preporderence of tho evidence. This it did not do by
any evidence.


1 fJO-3073, Pros. 2<. 534, R. 10359.


- 10784 -


Court 1, Case 1

14 July 47 -A-14-5-A3G-Perrin (von Schon)

The defendants Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser certainly can¬
not claim that they believed in good faith that the Polish wanen could
have been legally executed. Even the camp doctor, Schiedlausky, knew
that the Governor General had to approve each execution. Moreover,
the largo number of 700 women being sentenced to death at this early
stage of the war was onough to put any reasonable person on notico
that something was wrong.

Additionally, tho uncontrovorted evidence proves that survival
of the experiments was no guarantee whatever of avoidir^ execution in
any event. At least six of tho experimental subjects were proved to
havo beon exocuted after having survivod the experiments. It was not
a quostion of the experiment or execution, but rather tho experiment
and execution. Indood, in Pobruary 1945, an offort was made to execute
all of tho experimental subjocts, but bocauao of confusion in tho camp
duo to the war situation, tho exporimontal subjects wore able to obtain
difforont identification nunbors and so avoid dotoction.

But even if ono takes tho case of tho dofonso at its faco valuo,
tho Tribunal is in offcct asked to rule that it is legal for military
doctors of a nation at war to experiment on political prisoners of
an occupiod country who are condemned to death, to experiment on
thorn in such a way that they nay suffor death, cxcrutiating pain,
mutilation, and permanent disability, all this without thoir consent
and in direct aid of the military potential of thoir onomy. There
would, of course, bo no valid reason for limiting such a decision
to civilian prisonors; tho experiments would certainly havo been no
worse had they boon performed on Polish or American prisonors of war.

It is impossible to consider seriously this ghoulish ruling being
sought for by the defense.

I should now like to turn briefly to tho spocific defonscs of
some of the defendants. It is a toeptation to take up each defend¬
ant in his turn, but since my appropriate time does not permit, I


- 10785 -


Court 1, Case 1

14 July 47 -A-14-6-ABG-Perrin (ven Schon)

can only hope that we will not be accused of partiality in selecting
only a few for cceaent.

The defense of Handloser is a general denial. He says in effect
that: I was a soldier. I was in charge of the cedical administration
of the Wehrmacht, but had no power and no right to issue orders, and
that whatever may have happened, I am not responsible for it. It is
interesting to note that this defense is very similar to that put for¬
ward by Field Marshal Keitel in this same court room approximately a
year ago. He was represented by the same defense counsel. Keitel
also said that he could not issue orders. We have already discussed
in acme detail the position of Handloser, and it has been established
beyond a ahadeer of a doubt that he was the supreme authority in the
military medical services. We need not stop to consider the prectieal
difference between


10786


14 July-i-2&-15_l-Cook
Court So. 1


an order end a directive. Ve have pointed out that the opportuni¬
ty end power to control the participation of the military nodical
services In these crises wee hie. The evidence shows that Erod-
loeer was connected with a nusber of crlalnol nodical erperlnente
including the typhus and other vaccine erperlnente both In Buchen-
wald end Yatxweller, and the freexing, sulffcnllrnlde. Jeundice, gas
and the gas oedema experiments, among others. But it was his
participation in the Buchenwrld typhus experlnents which now causes
Handloser the cost distress. The first entry In the Ding ^lory
proves that Handloser participated In the conferenceewhich decided
that those experlnents should be perforsed. This has brought
forth a concerted attack on the authenticity of this docunent by
Handloser as well as Mrugowsky. But after Dontha of torturing
and dwistlnf, the diary has not been disproved in a single respeot.
To the contrary, it has been substantiated tliao and again by the
introduction of Independent docunente which are too numerous to
here detail. There Is scarcely a line In the whole diary which
has not beer, borroborrted either by docusonts or by testimony. The
defense itself proved that the diary was all typed on the oamo
aachlne. The genuineness of the signatures of Dr. Ding, which
appear on substantially every page, has been proved beyond contro¬
versy. The diary auet be accepted as accurate In Its entirety.
There is no basis for accepting sobs entires and rejecting others.
The defense has presented no creditable evidence of nny Inaccura¬
cies. The living record of the deceased Ding 1s the best evidence
of what actually happened.

3ut one could disregard the Ding Diary and the proof would still
require a Judgment of guilty with respect to Hrndloser. The Buchen-
wald typhus experlnonts were also discussed at a preliminary con¬
ference on 29 Deceaber 19^1 attended by a subordinate of Handloser.
His office received a copy of the conference report. Medical


officers under the direct command of Handloser were Informed of the

10’87


lU Jul7-A-E-15-2-Coolc
Court 5o. 1

details of these experiments — Syer, Scheldt, and Schreiber. Eyer
received r report oa the first series of experlcents nnd lotcr,
accocpenled by Scfcnidt, visited the ©xpsrinental station. Typhus
Infected lice as veil ns vaccines vere furnished to Ding by the
Typhus end Virus Institute of the OIH under Eandloser. Dins reported
on the typhus experiments nt a meeting of the Consulting Physiclais
called by Eendloser nnd presided over by Schreiber. Additionally,
the ^uchenvrld experimental station was used by Hnndloser to have
yellow fever vaccines tested on inartee, the resulte of which were
sent to his hyrlenist Dr. Scheldt. Conbined vaccine experlcents were
conducted at Buchenvald on the suggestion of Kandloser. Old blood
plasaa was tested on inmates of the "Little Camp" at ^uchenvald for
the Military Medical Academy under Erndloser. The proof Is quite
clear that Hendloser had knowledge of and participated In tho
crlclnrl typhus experlcents In Buchenwald, as well as other eodlcnl
crines.

Rudolf Srpndt reached the pinocle In the contost of self-abasomont
among the defendants. His testieony before the Tribunal can bo
sunned up In one sentence: "I receaber nothing." AAslde fron a
description of Hlmler ns something in the nature of a Jokyl rvnd
Hyde, he contented hlaself with giving answers to leading questions
put by his ettorney which were calculated to reveal hln ae a dis¬
embodied stenographic autoacton or a mechmlcally proficient half-wit.
He coaplnlne that the Prosecution only submitted 113 letters written
or received by hln to establish his complicity in these crines -
which he, indeed, admits. He wants the Tribunal to say he Is really
not very guilty since he was concerned with over loO.OOO letters in
e life-tin© at Hlcnler's tide. Of course, this mechanical neasure
of proof sulcitted by the Defense works both ways. It can be urged
with equal validity that he is twice the murderer thnt Sievers has
been proved to be on, shall we say. 50 docuaents. I need hardly

mention that a great number of these cany other letters mentioned by

10788


ll- July—A-3Z—lp-3-Ccok
Court Vo. 1

Brendt concerned such natters os the kidntoping of Ctochoslovekim
children, the destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto, extermination of Jews,
end the notorious flier Order, which encouraged the lunching of
Allied fliers who bailed out over Germany. The Prosecution does not
contend that Rudolf Brandt was as important as Himmler. But he was
an Inportent administrative osslstent to Himmler. While the basic
decisions were made by Himmler, 3raadt saw to it that they were carried
out. If the principle of relative gpllt has any place in the trial
of nen directly connected with the curder of thousands of persons,
which the Prosecution submits it has not, then the significance of
Brandt's position and his criainrl activities coses into clear relief
by comparison with that of the casp concander of Dachau and many of
his subordinates, who have long sinco been sentenced to death for
their participation in some of the same crises charged in this Indict-
nent.

Rudolf Brandt also pleads superior orders in citieatlon. There is
no evidence that Hinder ordered Brandt to participate in any crino.
Brandt did so wilfully. There is no evldenco that Brmdt retained
his position out of fear. He flourished in it. nothing would havo
been easier for hln than to be replaced out of request or feipied iiv-
efficiency. 3randt was not a soldier on the field of bnttle. His
activities were far resoved froo the confusion of the front linos.

He did not act in the spontaneous heat of passion; he had full tine
to consider and reflect upon his course of action. He continued in
his position froc 1933 until his arrest by the Allies in 191 * 5 , no less
than 12 years. This fact alone removes any basis for mitigation. More¬
over, assunlng that 3randt was ordered to conmlt the criminal acts
which are the subject of this trial, when there is no fear of reprisal
for disobedience, obedience represents a voluntary participation in
the crime. Such is the case with Rudolf 3rendt. Pinally the doctrine

of superior orders Can not be considered in nltigatlon where such

10789


lU July-A -SZ-lp-U-Cook
Court So. 1


nall&iaat end numerous crises here been continuously and ruthlessly
committed orer a period of cany years.

Vhet hrs been said with respect to Brandt exiles equally to the
defendant Tlscher who also pleads suporlor orders. He knew at tho
tine he performed these experinents that he was con-ittlng a crlse.

He knew the pain, disfigurecent. disability, end risk of death to
which his experimental victims would be subjected. He could have
refused to participate in the expericents without any fear of coneo-
quences. This he ndnltted In saying, "It was not fear of a doath
sentence or anything like that, twt the alternative was to either
be obedient or disobedient during war, and thereby set an exanple,
an example of disobedience." 1 J Such on rdnitaion rooovoB nn y brslo
for mitigation. A soldier Is alwnye faced with the alternative of
obeying or disobeying an order. If he knows the order is criminal,
it is surely a hollow excuse to say it oust be obeyod for the enke
of obedience alone.

The defendant Belglboeck attempts to run in all directions at once.
The gypsies which he used In his experinents he tolls us wore
volunteers, although he carried a pistol on his hip; they took the
seawater willingly, although he found it necessary to tie one to his
bad and seel his codth with adhesive plaster to provent hin from
obtaining fresh water; none of the experlcental subjects suffered
any haroful effects, although he contenptuously erased and altered
the wording of a clinical record of one of the subjects In a vain
effort to conceal froe the Tribunal his deeperato condition. This
reluctant admission of fraud and deceit on Ms part cnoo only after
the proof left hla no alternative, but he solurmly assured the
Tribunal that he node no further changes In the documents. A further
exenination, however, shows that he did exactly the snoe thing with

1/ Treescript, p. 4374


10790


lfc July-A-BK-l*-5-Cook
Court 3o. 1


respect to enother report of a subject's condition. But 3elgl—

boeck's prlcary defense seees to be based on the proposition

that it is not a criae against fcuaanity to experlcent on gypsies,

since they ere, at least according to Sa*l doctrines, necessarily

"asocial" persons. Belglboeck apparently considers hleself eoco-

thing of an expert on this subject. He testified that it was his

understanding that a whole f Killy could he classified asocial,

although this*does not exclude the possibility that. In this

frally, there can be a large nunber of persons who did not conait

any crlne", y This notion.fchat all gypsies are casftcinls Is

also apparently shared by his defense counsel who when cross-

examining the witness Hoellenrelner sr.idj "Listen, Or. Hoellen-

relner, don't evade ay question after the fashion of gypsies". 2]

It was also felt necessary to sutoit an extract froa a work known

as tho "Oypsy Book*, which reads in part as follows:

■The 'fypsy plague' froa which we Suffer is caused by
large nuabers of gypsy bands and individual gypsies
roming about the country between tho Austrian, Swiss

end french borders under the clor* of trading.

thereby seriously endangering public security by
their vagrancy. Besides begging, trosspasslng on
fiolds, forest land and ceadows, spreading the risk
of epideolcs and fires, trickery, these people are
inclined to thievery."

While this book was published in 1905. It could not have been
better written by Julius Stretcher. Such Satl doctrines of
inferior races and peoples sirsply serr e to explain how those
crises of can's inhuannlty to can could have occurred.

In Slever's we hove an unresisting neeaber of a so-called resist¬
ance aovenent. He asks the Tribunal to free hie froc guilt for
his bloody crices on the ground that he wr.e roolly working ee
an anti-Hasl resistance agent. Sor was ho a late-coeer to the
resistance oovecent; according to hin, he has been resisting sinco


1U July-A-BZ-l^-6-Cook
Court Ko. 1


1933. Yot In those lU years. yes to this very day. he hes not
performed one overt nc* *€«inst the men who ren the system ho now
professee to have always detested. Ho Joined the Si party ns
enrly as 1929 end the SS In 1935. He stayed with Hlnnler 's gang
until the Inst days of the collapse. Ke case to Numbere In 1946 ,
not to give evidence of the horrible crises of which he hnd first-
head knowledge, but to testify in defense of the SS. Poring his
testinony before the International Military Tribunal, he coneist-
ently denied rny knowledge of or connection with crimes committed
by the .'Ahnenerbe or the SS. It wos left to the cross-examination
of Xr. Zlwyn Jones to prove hia the nurdorer and perjuror that he
is. Hor did he show any signs of resistance In this trial except
to the manifold crimes with which he is charged. Not one now fact
did he rovorl to this Tribunal, although specifically askod to
tell nil he knew. If asked today, ho will assure one and all that
there is not a guilty nan In the dock, end least of all hinsolf.
But, for purposes of arguoent, let us concodo the truth of his
many lies. It does not harm our caso. It is not the law that a
resistance workerrCrn conait no crime end.


10792


lit July U7-A-.. "D-il6-1^3ross
Court !fc. 1

laaot of all, against the people ho is supposed to be protecting. It
is not the law that an undercover agent, even an F.B.I. agent, can join
a gang of murderers, lay the plans with then, execute the killings,
share the loot, and go his merry way. ’'any are the policeman who have
been convicted for taking part in crises they were entrusted to prevent.
Ho, the said thing is that this collector of living Jews for transfor¬
mation into skeletons has only ono life with which to pay for his many
crimes.

m view of the clear and unequivocal proof of the defendant Rose*a
participation in the typhus nurders of Buchezwald ho can only pload
that ho didn't enjoy doim what he did, that ho objected to tho
experiments at tho Third Meeting of tho Consultinr Physicians of tho
•’ohnaacht in M*y 19U3. But this is his condemnation, rot hia solvation.
In tiarch 19U2 to was in 3uchor*mld and saw what was being dono. In I toy
of tho saao yoar ho askod Jtrugowsky to tost a vaccino for him in thc.no
oxporinonts. Pour imntes wore killod as a rosult. In itoy 19U3, ho
objootod to tho oxporinonts in what ho doscribos as strong toms. But
in Poconbor, he was again instigating still another axporir.ont which
rosultod in tho rnrder of six non. Ho is a living exanplo of a nmn who
could have abstained from partidpatir* in thoso criaos without throat
of harn to his person or position by any agoncy of the ffasi Government.
Ho was not err os tod and tried by tho SS bocause of his objection. Ho
was not comittod to a concentration carp. In spite of that, he
voluntarily participated in these sane criaos to which ho said he
objected. :ith his knowledge, presti^o, and position, he is ovon rare
culpable than tho niaarable and inexperienced Ding wi x> actually por-
fornod the experiments in tho murder wards of Buchcnwald.

COICl'JSIOH

I havo already mentioned briefly the principle of relativo guilt,
but baforo concludin': I should liko to say a few more words in that
connection. Over the past half-yoar or r»re, we havo all because
acquainted with rjhastly evidence of ass nurders both from the record of


lu July li7-t.-.,ID-i6-2-Gross
Court No. 1


this proceed!n; and tho trials which have preceded it. It would not bo

surprisin'-, therefore, that wo night tend to regard a nan who killod

only three or five persons as a protty nice fellow by comparison. For

example, it =dght bo said that Gebhardt, who admitted that throe wonon

died in his sulfanilanide experiments, is entitled to a sonowhat

different punishment than Karl Brandt, who conceded that 60,000 persons

wero oxocuted under his euthanasia progroa. In response to a question

put by a defense counsel. Dr. Ivy emphatically stated that "thore is

no Justification in kUling five people in order to savo the livos of
1

300”. Tho idea that such thinkin;; nay bo Justified, with its inherent

usurpation of the Lord's prerogative, is typical of Nasi thought. This

whole system of Nazi an them tics is untenable in civilized socioty. This

corruption of thought is found ovon in a mthemtics problon book,

published in 1935, for uso by Oortaan school children. Undor tho guise

of nathcontics, tho rovulsion of nornal childron against the spreading

of death by poison gas is incidiously broken do', a. Let ua look at Problem

200 in this text book on mtheaatioa and eoewhat it says*

"According to atatooonts of tho Draogor “orks in
Luebock, in tho gassing of a city only 5CX of tho
ovaporotod poison gas is effootivo. Tho atrwsphcro
oist be poisoned up to a height of 20 motors in a
concentration of U5 ng/a3. How mch phosgeno is
needed to poison a city of 50,000 inhabitants, who
livo in an area of h square kilometers? How ouch
phosgono tou 1<1 tho population inhalo with tho air
they broatho in 10 minutes without protection
against gas, if or* person uses 30 litros of
b roe thin. T air par ainule? Compare this quantity
with tho quantity of tho poison gas used."*

The saao psrversion of thinking in terms of Nazi nathonatics also
explains *ho rass extermination of what several dofendants havo callod
■lives uirrorthy of living", tho agod, tho crippled, and tho insane.

Any German high school student who had studied this book on m thorn tic 3
could havo told us that. Frcfclore 95 and 97 tell the story mro oloquontly
than we could possibly state it.


Transcript, 9229.

Isathenafcics ir. the Service of National Political Education
■?ith Practical Examples from 3oonond.es, Geography and Natural
History, Adolf Do mar, 1935*

10794


ih July U7-^-ATD-16-3-<3ross
Court No* 1


"Probloa 95. The construction of an insane asylum
required 6 aillion B.M. Bam many settlement housed
at 1KXC0 R.H. each could have been built for this
sum?

"Problm 97* An insane person costs about h R.H.
daily, a cripple R.M., a criaiml 3$ R.U. In'
aany cases a civil servant only has about U R.!'.,
an office employee barely 3i~B.lt., an unskilled
laborer not even 2 R.H. per head of his family.

(a) Illustrate those figures graphically. According
to cautious ostiaites thore aro in Germany 300,000'
insane persons, epileptics, etc. under institutional
care,

(b) T/hat is their total annul cost at a figure of

U HH?

(c) How many mrriago allowance loans at 1000 R.K.
each - subjoct to ro rune inti on of repayment of the
oonoy la tor - could be paid out from this r»ncy
yearly?"

TJiis Tribunal oust solemnly roof firm an entirely difforont typo
of mathematicsj nathorntics in tho light of religious and hurnno
education which teaches that tho valuo of ovon one human lifo is Infinite,
which ooans, again nathermtically oxprossod, that one titsos infinity
is Just as infinito as 500 ticos infinity.

A distinguished Anorloan soiontist said in this oourt room

"Thoro 13 no state or politician under tho sun who
could forco no to perform a nodical experiment which
I thought was morally unjust! fie cl ".1

This was moro than tho viewpoint of an individual or of an American.

Dr. Ivy oxprossod the opinion of all nodical men and docont pooplo of

tho civilized w>rld. Theso defendants hold a vory different view in

thoir day of pomp and power, and so those crimes resulted.

A prominent present day Ouman loader has exprossod tho opinion
that we aro partly responsible for the siww-balling consoquoncos of
roamuaont in violation of treatios in 1936, because no did not then
strongly enough oxpross our disapproval. There is sono logic in this
statoaont, although it illuzdnates tho trade failure of being too
dependant on guidance from outside rather than on the dictates of ono'a
own conscience. Therefore, let thoro be no doubt about tho iogroos of


1. Transcript, p. 9229.

10795


11* July U7-u-.'.TD-l6-ii-Gross
Court Bo. 1

ycur condesnation of the acta of these defendants.

TH3 F32SII*OT: Before the ar.-unents on behalf of dofense
counsel the Tribunal will take a short recoss.


10796


Hi Jdy Ii7“i.TD—17-1-Leonard (Int. von Schon)
Court !fo. 1


THE MARSHAL* Persons in the court will be seated*

The Tribunal is again in session*

TiE "RESIDENT: The Tribunal will not: proceed to hear the arguconts
of defense counsol. Counsol for Karl Brandt nay open tho arruaent.

3T DR. SERVATItB (Dofenae Counsel for defendant Karl Brandt):

}tr. ^resident. Tour Honors*

I cannot consent on all the questions which the prosecution brought
up this noming. I aist Unit myself to a few things and can refor to
ny closing brief Tihero I have believed to have gone into considerable
detail on all theso questions.

This nomine I hoard tho detailod legal arguments §dvancod by the
prosecutor. I have consented particularly on thoso legal questions in ny
dosing brief, and I want to ncke nordy a briof coaaont now.

Tho prosecution assumes that Law Mo. 10 is an independent law. Thia
is not correct, for it designates itself explicitly as a law for tho
execution of the London Charter and docl^ros that Charter to bo an
intogrol part e t tho law.

Now, the solo purpose of tho London Charter is to punish tho dis¬
turbances of international logal relations and not what has happened or
is happening semowhore within an individual atato. Any othor conception
would bo the end of tho idea of sovereignty, and it would givo a right
of intervention into the affaire of arothor state.

In tho trial boforo Tribunal in, Caso Mo. 3 against Flick et ol.
General Taylor rofarrod to an alleged right of intervention, quoting a
considerable anount of literature in regard to this right of intervention
into tho internal affairs of another country.

I vonturod to put in ovidonee tho position takon by one of tho four
signatory Powers of tho London Charter, a signatory power which was
itself the vie tin of intervention in tho naae of civilization: the Soviet
Onion*

I have drawn the attention of tte Tribunal to tho position of the

Soviot Union in ny dosing brief in the attachment to Part I.

10797


12: July Ii7-A-:»T!>-172— Leonard (Int, von Schcn)

Coart No. 1

The Soviet Onion draw its clear conclusions fron the intervention
to which it had boon exposed by the Entente at the end of the first
'crld 'far, and obtained a clarification of tho text of the London
Chert or, under which intervention would have been possible, by insist¬
ing that the text, which was aablguous in consequence of the punctuation,
be altered by tho insertion of a co-ssa. This coma was so important
that the representatives of tho four signatory Powers sot on purpose
to discuss it.

It results thorofrea that the affairs in tho interior of a country
cannot bo affected by tho London Charter and, consequently, by Law No.

10. Punishment by this Tribunal of acts comitted by Gomans against
Gomans is theroforo illegal*


10798


lii Jul-A-?-S-l8 & 19-l-*alcy (Int. vcn Schoen)
Coia-t Ho. I.


Th« Prosecution further discussed this Borning at length another ques¬
tion, that is the question of conspiracy. In respect to this I also
have taken the position in ay closing brief.

The point of view of the defense that a charge for conspiracy as
an independent offense is inadaissible was confirmed by the Tribunal's
decision of today. In that way the hole in the dike, so to speak, was
stopped, and ore cannot let the ocean pour into the land free the other
side by declaring the conception of conspiracy admissible under con:.on
law. The conception of conspiracy is real y only a technical expedient
of the jurists. Its purpose is to effect beyond the nuiaber of accomp¬
lices in the true sense of the ward other persons whan one considers
to deservo punishment, but who cannot be convicted of complicity.

This may be done where the law acai at conspiracy is con-on law,
but if this law is to be Introduced in Germany after the event ard
applied to facts »hich have occurred in the past this would mean that
by the detour of the law of procedure now conceptions of offonso would
be introduced into material law. This is equal to ex post facto law
and is therefore an illegal attempt pursuant to the logal principles
generally recognised.

The pwpoea of enlarging the circle of participants cannot bo
obtained under law No. 10 by a dissolution of the conception of tho
conspiracy into its components, irri tho introduction of forms of com¬
plicity unknown till now in Germany.

Now, I shall read ay statement proper. In tho closing statement
against the defendant Karl Brandt tie Frosection discussed very little
tho counter-evidonce brought forward by tho defenso in tho courso of
the proceedings. They relied to a large extent on evidence already
advanced in the indictment.

The affidavits of the defendants themselves play a special role in
support of the prosecution. For the defendant Karl Brandt they are iav-
portant in respect of his position, and the resulting knowledge of the

events referred to in tte indictm en t.

10799

__AMI MAI


Hi ^ul-A-4Q—13 & l?-2-Ualcy (Int. von Schoen)
Court Ho. I.


As far as those affidavits contain charges they can be used, ac¬
cording to the Tribunal's statement, only against the affiants them¬
selves. Inasfar as they charge the defendant Karl Brandt, however,
they have been clarified in respect to the decisive issues. But in
spite of this correction the first atateaents ray reduce the credibility
unless good reasons justify such correction.

Here the result of interrogations redo in the initial proceedings
is in contradiction to the evidonco given before the Tribunal. On the
basis of practical experience, German law considora only tho result of
an interrogation cade by a judge valid evidence. The reason is the lack
of impartiality to bo found, quite naturally with an interrogating of¬
ficial who is to conduct the Prosocution. Tho capacity of tho inter¬
rogator to olicit the truth impartially depends on his character, his
training, and his professional experience.

Tho qualification of the interrogators has boon at tack od hare by
the Dcfonso, but tho Frosecution itas made no effort to substantiate it.

To fora a judgment it further is important to know on which gonoral
lino tho prosecution carries out its interrogations. Under Gorin?n Law
tho Prosecutor is also to ascertain and put forward oxculpotir^ notorial
when investigating a case personally or through assistants. For Afri¬
can Procedure, Justico Jackson clearly rojoctod this principle during
the trial before tho International Unitary Tribunal, and said ho could
never sorvo two jesters.

This critical view of tho affidavits is confirmed by their contents,
which frequently show the strug M between the interrogator and tho
interrogated person. He is no classical witness who says, "I boliovc,"
"I presume", "as far as I reoerfccr," etc., for he shows thereby that ho
can give no positive information. And such testimony becomes completely
worthless, if conclusions are drai.-n in the fora of, "It would havo boon
impossible for him," "he could have known," "perhaps he was thj higtast
authority", otc.


Not only individual words thus demonstrated that tho testimony is

10800


Hi Jol-A-JB-18 4 19-3-Kaloy (Hit. von Schoen)
Court No* I.


composed of conclusions, but whole parts of tho reports show the sa.-o
character.

Considcriixj all this the defendants* contentions are to be be¬
lieved that they raised objections, but sue curbed to the woight of tho
prepared record presented to then and signod, trusting that thjy should
have an opportunity later to clarify deficiencies and state their true
opinion.

This criticism of the deforciants* affidavits is also roquirod in
respect of tho affidavits given by tho witnossos for tho Prosecution
in which facts aro recorded which tho witnossos do not know themselves,
but of which they only heard and which thoy presume, after having been
made to boliovo ttoa by persuasion. Tho individual cases in which ob¬
jections aro to be raised in this lino have boon doalt with in tho
closing briof.

Tho charges advanced against the dofondant Karl Brandt includo
tho sptoroa of radical oxporirants on human beings and Euthanasia.

In both cases tho dofondant is charged with having comnittod
crijros against humanity.

Tho press consents on tto proceedings, anticipating tho sontonco
by publishing articles about abjoct characters and wickedness. Itnph-
luts with strong headings appear.

On tho other hand tho Tribunal will aako itself acquainted with
tho litoratiro collocted by tho Dofensc as ovidonce. If ono reads this
literature ono loses one's self-confidence and ono cannot finish with¬
out confessing that here thare aro problems which before tho doferdants,
persons not considered criminals have tried to resolve. Thosu aro
problems of the connunity. The individual may sake suggestions for
their solution, but the decision is tho task of tho comunity and thoro-
foro of tho State. It is the quosUon, how great a sacrifice the Stato
may demand in tho interest of the ccttwnity. This decision is up to
the Stato alone.

Hon the Stato decides deponds on its free discretion, and finds

10801


lii Jul-A-*2-l8 k 19-Ji-Maloy (Int. von Schobn)

Court Ho. I.

ita linit only in tho revolution of its citizens. In obeying the orders
of his State, the defendant Karl Brandt did no wrong. If sentence is
passed against his, it would be a political sentence against tho State,
and tho ideology it represents.

One can corvk-sn tho defendant Karl Brandt only by imposing on him
tho duty of revolution, and the duty of having a different idcaology
from his environnent.

It is contended that the State finds its limits in tto otornal
basic clenonts of Law, which are said to bo so cloar.that anyono could
discorn ttoir violation as a crime, and that ttoroforo loyalty to tho
State boyond those limits is a crim. Ono forgets that eternal law, tho
Uw of nature, is but a guiding principle for tho State and tho Legis¬
lator, but not a countcr-codo of law which tho sublet night stand on
against the Stato. It is onphasized that no othor State had made such
docisions up till now. This is truo only to a cortain oxtont. It is
no proof, howovor, that such docisions wero not nocassary and admissible
n<x. Tharo is no prohibition against daring to p*o gross.

Tho progressof nodical science took up tho problco of the oxpori-
rxnts on human beings already in tho pr.st contury, and eventually mado
it ripe for decision. It is not tho first tino that a Stato takos up
a position with rogard to outhanasia with a change of idoalogy.

What is to bo dona in tho interest of the concunity only the States¬
men docido, and they have nover hesitated to issue such a decision when¬
ever they docnod it nccossnry in tho interest of tholr people. There¬
upon their rulo3 and orders wore ccrriod through under the aithority of
the State, which is tho basis of society.

Inquisition, witch-trials, and revolutionary tribunals have existed
in tho name of tho Stato, arri eternal Justice, and the acting persons
did not consider themselves criminals but servants of thoir calamity.
They would have boon killed if they had stood up against what was be¬
lieved to be the newly discovered eternal Justice. hhat is the subject

to do if th? orders of tte State go beyond tho customary limits which

10002


1U Jul-A-45-13 & 19-5-ifcloy (Lot. vor. Scboen)
Court No. I.


the individual hinsolf took for inviolable according to traditions.

What did tin airman think who dropped the f irst atonic bomb on
Hiroshima? Did ho consider hinsolf a criminal? What did the States¬
man think who ordered this atomic boefc to be used?

Wo know freas the history of this event that the motive wre pat¬
riotism, based on the hard necessity of sacrificing hundreds of thou¬
sands to save thoir own soldiers* lives. This motivo waa stronger
than the prohibition of the Hague Convention, under which bolligcronta
have no unlimited right in the choice of joans to inflict daraago on
the enemy.

"My ccuso is Just and my quarrel honorable," says the king. And
Shakospear's soldior answers him "That's more than wc know." Another
so Id lor adds: "Ay, or more than wo should Book aftorj for wo know
enough if wo know wo aro the king's subjects; if his cause be wrong,
our obodicnco to the king wipes the crime out of us."

It is the hard nccossity of tho State on which the dufonao for
Karl Brandt is based, against the charge of having oarriod out criminal
experiments on human beings.

Hero also - in addition to tho care for th_ population - the llfo
of soldiers was at stake who must be protected from death and epidemics.
In tho oxporioonts Prof. Bickenbach's, tho iscuo was tho lives of women
and children who without US million gas masks would have been un¬
protected against tho expected gas attack, as thj Japanese, woro against
tht atomic boob. Biological warfare, was in.incnt, oven praised abroad,
as cheaper and more effective than tho atonic bccab.

Is it really against the la' and all political morals if tho stato
provides there for such oajrgerey and orders tho necessary nodical ex¬
periments to bo performed on its own citizens? As applied to foreign-rs
such procedure is limited on principle; in my closing brief 1 have dis-

A

cussed the exceptions.

What is to be done is decided not by th. physician but by tho

political leader. Even tho expert Dr. Ivy had to grant him thj furtfa-

10803


1U Jul-A—3-1S lc 19-6-*iiloy (Int. von Sc hoe r}

Court No. X.

Rental .authority.

Tto question remains why, with tho legal position 30 clear, a
man like Koitel refused ro have such experiments carried out in the
ffohnaacht ard wfry tho defendants thocsolvos in pert try to disprove
any connection with the experiments. The answer is, a measure may be
as unavoidable as war and still bo abhorred in the same way.

Italiko ft-ofessor Ivy, those men certainly consider thoso experi¬
ments an evil, and thoir personal dosire is not to have to participate
in thou if possible, and not to engago in thua troop units who wore not
to bo bur do nod with such questions, and had no insight into the nocos-
slty of tho noasuras to bo taken. In spito of everything Germany was
not yot so "conmmirod" that all private fooling of tho individual had
diseppoarod.

Tho Prosecution opposos to this necessity tho condition of absolute
voluntariness.

It was a surprise to hoar from tho export Professor Ivy that in
ponitontinrios many hmdreds of volunteers wore dying for admission to
experiments end that more voluntocrod than could bo usod. I do not
want to do away with this phonoacnon with Irony and sarcasm. There
may be px-oplo who roalito that tho coceunity has tho right to ask thorn
for a sacrifico. Thoir fooling of Justico may toll them that insistonoo
on humanity has it3 limits. If humanity moons tho appeal to the strong
not to forget tho weak in tho abundance of night and wealth, tho woak
should also aako thoir contribution when all arc in need.

But what if in thL cncrgcncy of war the convicts and thoso declared
to bo unworthy to serve in the Armed Forcos refuse to accept such a
sacrifico voluntarily, and only prove an asocial burden to State and
conn unity and noko the community break down; isn’t compulsion by the
State then allcs^cd as an additional expiation?

Tho Prosecution says no. Then human rights require tho downfall
of hunan beings.

But there is a middle way between voluntariness and compulsory ex-

10804


Hi JuI-A-43-13 & 19-7-Maloy (Int. von Schoen)
Court So. I.


piation: "purchasod voluntariness." Hero tho exporirontal sublet
does not make a sacrifice out of conviction for tho good of tho com¬
munity, but far his own good. Tho subject gives his consent bcccuso
he is to receive ocney, cigarettes, a mitigation of pwnishuent, etc.
There axiy bo isolated eases of this nature chore tho person is really
a roluntcor, but as a rule it will bo different.

If one compares-the actual risk with tho advantage granted, one
cannot actalt tho consont of those "voluntary prisoners" as legal., in
spito of all protective fores thoy have to sign, for those can have
boon obtained only by taking advantage of inaxporionco, inprodonco,
or distress.

Looking through codicil literature, ono cannot escape tho grovdng
conviction that tho word "volunteer" whore it nppoars at all, is used
only ns a word of protection and oraouflago; it is hardly lacking sinco
tho struggle about this problur, has bocomo urgont.

I will touch only in briof on what I have oxplainod in dotnil in
ny closing briof. No ono will contond that hxsnnn boings really lot
thonsolvos be infoctod voluntarily with vonoroal disease; this has no¬
where boon stated oxplicitly in literature. Cholora and plnguo aro
nlso no minor inconveniences ono is llkoly to undergo voluntarily for
a trifle in tho crest of scionco) above all, it is not custcor.ry to
give up children fer experimental purposes, and I cannot boliovo that
In the 13 oxporiaents carried out on a total of 223 children in Dock
117, tho nothers gavo their consont. -TouldnH the mothers have do-
servod tho praiso of tho scientist for tho aacrifioo thoy trustfully
brought in the interest of science, a praiso which is othorwiso liber¬
ally granted to real volunteers in reports on experiments.

Is it not llkoly to have boon similar to tho experiments carried
out by Professor JfcCance, Doc. 937 The Gorman authoritias who condemn
the defendants in a particularly violent fora have no objection to


raise against the orefcr to hand over weakling children for experimental

purposes to a Research Cormission. Tho O'.xrstionnaires which tho Tribunal

10806


IL Jul-A-LS-18 & 19-8-Maloy (Int. von Schoca)
Court Mo. I.


approved for k in order to get further information about this ^att^r
have not boon answers, as superior authorities did not give the per¬
mission to aake such stateoants. This silonee says enough; it is proof
of what is supposed to bo legal today in the line of voluntaries3.

It is shown again and again that the oxporlaents for which no con¬
sent was given woro aefaitted with the full knowledge of the govornoont
authorities. It is shown further that thoso oxporinonts woro published
in professional literature without .looting any objection, and that thoy
woro oven acccptod by the public without concorn as a normal phonca-
onon whon roports about then ap.oar in popular magazines.

This happens at a tine whon the aano pross is stigmatizing ns
crises against huaonity tho Gorman exporiiontc which woro nocossary in
the interosta of tho State. Voluntariness ie a fiction, tho onorgoncy
of tho Stato hard reality.

In all countries exporiaonts on hunan beings have boon porforuod
by doctors, certainly not because they took ploasuro in killing or
toraenting, but wily at tho instigation and under tho protoction of
thoir stato and borne by thoir c*m conviction of tho nocossity in tho
struggle for tho axistonco of tho pxioplo.

Tho German doctor who actod in confomity with tho Goman regula¬
tions cm be punished no aoro then tho African dec tor who conpliod
with tho roquosts of his state in tho way which is customary tho re.

Justice is indivisiblo.

To what oxtont is the dofondant Karl Brandt inplicated in tho
nodical oxrorictnts?

Tho Prosecution says in alnost all, and ref ora to his position and
his connections. Thoy stato that he was the highost Reich authority
in tho nodical sphere; there, ho»?vor, thoy arc aisled by an orror of
the. translator, for Karl Hrandt only had tho powers, regulated in a
general way, of an "Cfeersto Reichsbobordo" (Supreae Reich authority),
but the oxocution of those powors was restricted to special eases.

This ap cars free the three known degrees and free tho explanation


- 10606 -


Hi Jul-A-ap- IS & 19-9-Maloy (Int. von Schocn)
Court He. I.


thereof .'given by the witnesses. Moreover Karl Brandt was not ^iven the to
functions until 19Uk, when these experiments wore practically' finished,
is is shown by tho tire schedule submitted to the Tribunal for conpari-

ao n.

It has boon proved that tho do fondant Karl Brandt himself in a
brocdcaso publicly called hia position as Reich Condssioner a "Differ¬
ential." In fact, Karl Brand't task was not to order bet to adjust; it
was a task designed to fit hia character.

Wo have clso loarnod froa tho prosonNation of ovidonco that tho
defondant Karl Brandt did not hnvo the machinery at his disposal for
issuing orders which was nocossary for a highest Roich authority; ho
lackod tho staff and tho moans. No ono who is acquainted with c gov¬
ernment administration will think it possible undor those circumstances
that tho defendant Karl Brandt night hnvo been able to onforco hia
point of vioV'agninsViho rosistanco of th> old agonoios; no ono will
oven think it probable that anything would havo been dono to facilitate
such an attempt of tho "new raster."

Consoqvontly, Karl Brandt's position was not such ns to Justify
tho conclusion dram by tho Prosecution about his general knonlodgo.

Thorc was no official channel by which everything had to cooo to his
knowledge, fa* ho iras not tho superior of other authorities.

It is true that tho defendant Karl Brandt was supposed to bo in¬
formed about fundamental natters, that he had tto right to intorvonc,
otc. But tho so woro only possibilities, not in conformity with con¬
ditions in practico. Wo hove soon that Conti opposed him and that Hini-
lor prohibited direct contact with Xarl Brandt within hia sphere.

Therefore, Karl Brandt can bo broucht into connoction only with
the ovonts in which ho participated directly.

Hero it is striking first of all that the defendant Karl Brandt,
vrho is supposed to have toon tho highest authority, appears only very
reroly.

Thera are -iiree so-called troop oxix>rir».nts, tho testing of drink¬


ing water, concontratcd food, and an ointment fcr bums.


lii JUly 2i7-A-»xTT)-20-l-?rinoau (Int; von Sc bon)
Court Jfo, 1


Further, three medical experiments relate to the defendant Karl
3rendt: The Hepatitis experiment, which he is said to have sue 3 os ted,
was rot carried cut. ThUe that research was continued during the
following years, Karl Brandt who is said to have sponsored it particu¬
larly, is mentioned by none of the nunorous witnesses and experts, and
his none is not oentionel in any docunent. Is, therefore, the explanation
not plausible that Orawitz confuaod the naaoa?

The second case is the request to hand over 10 prisonars for two
days for an experiment which is not naeo.'. This cannot rofor to a truo
medical experiment, for such experiment cannot be carried out in such
a short tine with the necessary tests and observations, The speedy
return of tho experimental aubjocts indicates that tho experiment was
not dangerous.

Finally, tho defendant Karl Brandt is connected with the phoegono
oxporinonts of 31ckenbach, which caused tho death of four Oomons
sentoncod to 'loath. But precisely hero Bichonbach's affidavit shows
that tho defondant Karl Brandt was outsido of tho wholo framework of
tho oxpericont in Hisnlor'a sphore arxl that ho was norely approachod
for modiation. Tho order cane from Hiaalor. The oxporinonts had to
soon innocuous to tho defendant x arl Brandt slnco Bickonbaoh wantod to
carry then out on hisaelf.

On tho other hand, there was tho Baorgoncy of the State and tho
orcnuDus importance of tho discovery that the taking of a foe Urotropino
tablots was to givo tho ardently desired protection for all against tho
oxpoctod gas attack and, as tho result of the experiment shows, actually
did so.

Now the prosecution endeavors to establish a connection of Karl
Brandt with the other experinonts via the Reich Resoarch Council. It is
true that one can establish such a connection theoretically on paper,
but the links of tho chain break when one examines then closely. Only
tho head of the specialised department (Fachspartonleiter) Judged the


- 10803 -


Ik July li7-,^ID-20-2-Prinoau (Inti Von Scion)

Court Jfo. 1

ao-oailad research assigmenta and he only investigated whether the ain
was necessary for war, not bow the exporinent was to be carried out.

Ha could not inforn others of natters which ho did not pet to know
him elf.

The defendant Karl Brandt ia charged further with not having pro¬
tested in one case when ho hoard about deaths causod by expert.nonts on
persona sentenced to capital ixlnishnont in tho well-known looturo on
sulfcnalarido. I nust point out that evon if this expori’sont had boon
ina<tdasablo, silonce W5Qld not be a crino for assont after tho act
is without importance in criminal law and one can bo oonnoctod with
plans and enterprises only as long as they havo not cono to an end.

tho joaocution has introduced in its dosing briof tho now
chargo of hol'ttnr' the defendant Karl Brandt roaponsiblo for nogligonco.
In this respect I should 11 ko to point out fiat rx> indictaont for
nogligonco has boon brought in and that tho concept of crime against
humanity comittod by norjli. onco oannot exist.

It, thorofore. rill bo sufficient to <nphasito that tho protonded
negligence depends on tho oxictonco of an obligation of supervision
and tho right to give orders through other agendos. In ovory Stato tho
i pharos of conpotinco are noperatod and it is i»t possiblo for ovoryono
to interfere in everything bocauso ovoryono is rosponsiblo for every¬
thing.

Tho prosocution says that tho dofondant Karl Brandt ought to havo
used Ms influcnco nni have availod hinsolf oT his lntimato relations
to Hitler to stop tho oxpcrlivnts. Even presumin'- that ho was nwaro of
tho facts as crises, his »uilt would mt bo of a legal but only of a
political or coral nature.

Till now nobody has boon held criminally responsible for tho eon-
diet of a superior or a friondj tho question of criminal law, towovor,
is tho only one tho Tribunal has to oonsidar.

3ut in fact theso close relations did net exist; tho defendant
Karl "raivlt was the surgeon who had to be in attendance on Hitjer, Dr.

- <#cm . ar.


- 10309


Take TO

Hi July U7 -k«^TT>* *-3—?rlsoau (Int. von Schon)

Court :fc« 1

!Ioroll, the latter* s personal physician, 3cc*i tried to undcraino the
o^nfilonco placed in Karl Brandt so that he was charged with corn&ssions
which roaovei hin furthor and further fron tho sphere of his nodical
activity.

Tho allowed intinato illations ware eventually crowned by tho
dictation of a death sentonco against Karl Brandt without his having been
fronted evon a consultation on the chareos advanced against hin.

If one sure up all that relates to tho medical experiments and
follows to a largo extent the charges of tho Prosecution, it is an
established fact that it is not shown that the defendant Karl Brandt
participated in ary way in oxperiaonts on prisonors of war and feroignors
of that ho ws co'nirant of then. Thor of or a, no war crlno or crino
against humanity has boon couaitted, and consequently purdshnont under
Law No. 10 is oxeluded. I offor in this raspect to tho logoi arguments
in =y dosing brlof.

Tho socond problon is Euthanasia.

Tho authorisation cf 1 September 1939 was Issued boforo tho tine
of tho no.licol oxporlmonta at a tino when tho dofondant Karl Brandt was
still clccoly attachod to tho Fuohror*s headquartora and to Hltlor as an
acconpanying physician.

In ry closing brlof I havo explained in dotail that tho dafonctant
Karl Brandt did not participate in tho Action Hr f 13 with tho "special
trootnont" of prisonors in concentration oan, occurrences whioh woro
given tho nano of Euthanasia only horo in tho trial.

Neither did tho Jofondant Karl Brandt tako any part in tho axtorni-
nation of Jaws in Auscbwits, which again has nothin? in cocrwn with tho
idea of Euttanasia.

I have shown furthor that the 30 -called "wild Euthamsia" which was
carried through sinultaneously with an± imediately after legal
Euthanasia is not due to Karl Brandt. Tho stopping or Euthamsia in
August 19U1 has been proved and therefore the end of tho defendant Karl


Hi ly U7^«f.TI>-20-k-?riricau (Int ton Schon)
Court :fe. 1


Brandt*o duties; for what would have been the meaning of this cassation
if aftor it an incroasod activity was to set in*

The contacts of Karl Brandt after the stop have boon clarified os
tho consequence of his activity in evacuation for air protection. Where
tho nano of the defendant Karl Brandt is nentioned othorTise it
obviously aorr» only as naans of advertisement with uninformed peoplo,
who never saw or heard anything of him thanselves.

I shall deal hero with Euthanasia only insofar as it is officially
provided undor the Ordinance of 1 September 1939. In rospoct to tho
"Roieh coanittee" I refur to ay closing brief.

By the prosontotion of evidonco it has boon established that tho
defondant Karl Bmvdt actually had no "aidnistrativo and nodical
offico," fron wfcoro tho rholo or{;aniaa’4on night havo boon adainistarod*
On tho conyrery* it is a fact that Bouhler dodared hinsolf alone
rosponsiblo for tho prcooduroj this is tostifiod to by docunonts which
loave no doubt,

fbr has any regulation or instruction becono known which vwis
issued by Earl Erandt. Mot a single document was signed by bin. Ho made
no spooches and oonductod no discussions.

But what did ho do and what was his duty?

His duty was not to carry out Euthanasia but ho was only to be
inforood in special casos in order to be able to report to Hitler, this
was in conformity with tho practical conditions, the sojourn and tho
simultaneous attachment to tho ?\diror»s hoadquarters and to Hitler.

Only once was Karl Brandt soon active, and that is in tho negoti¬
ations with Pastor von Dodolschwineh, which lod to tho result, anaiing
for us, that tho rtofoofcnt Karl Brandt von Bcdclschwinsh«s sympathy
and that eftertho collapse in a radio interview tho latter said that
he wa3 an idoalist but not a criminal.

But tho defer, cbnt Karl Brandt toe* rcto of tho interrogatory forms,
ho in3pootod a regiatrar*s office, and ho co-eigned tho authority for
physicians to execute Euthanasia.


- 10811 -


li: July U?-n-».TIV-2C—>-Priaoau (Inti von Scbon)
Court Ho. 1


Tfbat could the defondant Karl Brandt learn from tho forns?

The Prosecution thinks that Jews and foreigners were to bo affected
in tho first instance. By the affidavit of the director of tho Jewish
lunatic asylin in which all insane Jews of Goraany wore concentrated,
it is proved that this was not dene.


Tho prosecution says that all parsons unfit for work wero to be
killed as useless eaters. But it is ascertained that oven worichcusos
waro requested to rive information onl; about cases of really gravo
insanity.

Wbnt did the defendant Karl Brandt know about tho proooduro?

He knar that tho authorisation which ras issued was not an order
given to the doctor, but only conferred on hia tho right to aot under
his own responsibility with the nost critical consideration of tho
patient*s o-nditlonj this was a olauso inserted in tho ordinanoo of
1 Sopttnber 1939 on Karl Brandt*s initiative.

Tho defendant Karl Brandt know that tho specialists whon ho did
not know nure choson by tho : Unis try of tho Interior and that tho
axports ware ordnont non in their apodal ty.


- 10812 -


V* July 47-»-JlED*21-l-Frimcu (Int..vcr.a 0 hcn)
Court M nm 1


Tho dofondent Earl Brandt alio toow thrt tho authorities oonoornod
•cw no reason to objaot to th* oxooution of tho mosuro and th t oven
the chief jvwiots of tho Eoioh doolarod tho legal foundations to bo
irroproeohr.ble, after having boon informd of tho foots.

hlthln thlo frenework tho dofondant Karl Br-nt opprovod of offic¬
ial Euthanasia and eupportod It,

but tho proeooution oollo over, tho Euthanasia thousand fold
nurdor. la thoir opinion tharo is no forscl Low, «r.d it io allogod
thet tho export Vr. Lemurs oonfimod this,

Too, but ho also at-tod th c ovon an inff-rml ordinonoo wea valid,
Even an order issued by tho Puhror had tho foroo of low, as tho unan-
biguous off oats of such orders onto porfootly oloor, in particular to
o forolgnor.

But for tho defendant Earl Brandt it is of no ioportanoo whothor
tho Orcinonco of 1 Boptoaber 1939 was cotually valid* tho only important
thing was that ho had reason to boliovo it was valid and that ho oould
roly on this opinion.

Gorman Courts have olroady donlt with oasos of oxooution of Euthun-
esia) but those oasos ooourrod oftor tho offioiol proooduro hod boon
stoppod, like Hcdomr, or porsena hod Ik on killod who oould never hnvo
oot» under tho powors oonforred In the ordinanoo, or othor orisns woro
conedttod.

It la to bo • beorvod that those sontonoos always onphaslse tho
beso motives of the offor.ders. On th# othor hand, tho so oourta wore
ooncornod with tho question in reepoct of publio law only insofar as
they stete thet no fornel law was suhrdttod, Ir. ono oaso tho oourt
restricted itself to inforna ion giver. by a asnber of the Prosooution
staff in the trial bofere tho International Kilitary Tribunal.

The real objections to Euthanasia are not based on a fornel
point of view but rather on the sane reasons whioh =ro advanced
against tho adnlsscbility of the nedioal oxporimnts.

Even an insane person of the lowest dop-oo my not be killod, it


- 10813 -


1+ July t7-*-SSD-2l-2-PriaDCu ( let ., vonfohon)

Court So. 1

ia acid. So hiaac boing rry proaua> to kill rnothor hu«m being.

iut the right to kill in war i« ecoeptod in intornnti«nol law,
and publio lew cllowa the suppression cf n revolt by viclonoo.

'••hot prover.ts tho State froa ordorir.g HI ling r a well in the
aph«ro of Euthanasia?

Tho answer ia th't thoro it no ootivo which night justify or.
action of thia kind.

Tho •oor.odo rctivo of olisdr.ating "uaolosa actors" ia oortainly
not auffiolont for auoh rxr.suroa. Suoh a active was novor uphold by
tho dofor.dant Karl Brnndtj it wai appnrontly mntionod by othorn
a a an nooonpanying phono do non and lctor tekon up by tho oounter-
propaganda*

Tho rwvo cf pity With tho pttient wrs oonaidorod by tho dofondant
Karl Brandt as doolslvo. Thia rctivo ia t-oitly ooooptod for Euth-
ar.oaia on tho doathbod, and doctors in all oour.trios inoro'isingly
profoaa to it#

In foraar tiaos tho onurts wore oonoorn.d ropa*.todly with horJoldoa
oomitted out of pity, and in acnar.ti nol trials juries found offondore
not guilty who frood thoir noarest rolrtivea fren tho tornont cf llfo.

.iho would not hove tho dosiro whilo in good health to die rather
then to bo forood by all tho roaouroos of rwdiO'l eoionco to oor.tlnuo
llfo dorracod to c boost's axistonool Only sdaundorstood oivilitotion
keeps auoh boln/a allvoj in tho norsnl strugglo for oxistunoo llnutro
is a'ro oheritcblo#

But tho legislator has hithortc roft-ninod fros giving tho authority
to kill in auoh cases. But ho or.y rosolvo tho problor*. if ho -"ants to.
The reasons for hia roatreint era oxcotly those which led here to
diaguiao theso. aiesuros and to koop thon secret. It ia tho four of
foul anohirations in tho aphoro of inheritance, tho psychio burdon
laid on tho relatives, oto. Iho individual does not want to boor
thia burden, nor ia ho able to do so. It enn be tokon ovor only by
tho State, whioh is icdopondent of tho dosiroa of those concerned.


- 10314 -


14 July 47-A-MSD-a-5-?rio8au (Ir.ti.vonSohon)
Court I


That suoh is the will of the reponderont mjority of those who
really cjt Into touch with these problers w-* shown by the result
cf the Inquiry conducted by Professor fitter, which h*s been ''Tored os
evidoroo. It was ocrricd out by hie rnny years ago to pet an argument
e -eir.st iuthanesis or.d its prinoipal supporters. Binding end Hcche.

Ho rot the reverse of whet he hid oxpectod himself as an expert.

But I soo a third active whlah unoonnoiously -lays an ir^ort'int
parti it ie the idee of seorifice. t

a lunatic any oeuae the psychio and eoonedo deoay of o fardly
and aleo ruin it =»rally.

nhon aoind huaon boir.-s bring great sr.o ifioee for tho ocmrnunity
and irwvlrte thoir livoe by order of tho State, tho insane, if he
ha*' the oepcolty of n cental rosurrootlor. r.nd of deoision, would
ohoosu a elaller scorifies for hiaself.

Why ehould not the Stte be olltmod to enact thie enorifioo from
bin and is?ose on hla whet he wauld want to do hlrself?

Shall the Steto bo forbidden to oarry out Suthenaeia until tho
wholo world is e hospital, whilo the oroaturoa in nature toep atainlose
thanks to whrt la bolloved to bo tho brutality of NnturoT

Tho deoision whothor such an ordor glvon by tho 3*ato is adndssiblo
dopvr.de on tho oonoopticn of the lifo of srnkind in socioty and la
thoroforo a political dooieicn.

Neither tho dofondant Kcrl Brmdt ncr r.nycno oleo who po-tioipated
in lorclisvd euthanasia would ov^r have killed a hurnn boing on thoir
own authority, and in fcran sontecoos tho Monologs fara»r lifo of
tho persons stigantirod aa ncss-raxrdore is always oaphnsisod.

This is a warning to bo ocutlous. Cid thoy roally oomndt brutnlitios,
or wore thoy sontonood only bocauso thoy woro not in a position to swim
against the tiko cf tho tine end to oppose to it thoir own judgnnnt?

• Christian believing in dogna will turn away in pity fron thie
way of ‘hinkir.g. But if the ordor to uso Suthcnosio to tho forosoon
lirdt<-d extent wee really in such contradiction to the oomandnont


- 10815 -


1 . July i7-i»-HSD-21-U-Prir»2U (IntiivonSchcn)

Court I

of God th-'t anyoso oould aoo this, it is ecracohonsiblo why Hitlor,
who a/'«-r withdrew lYor. tho Chur oh, was sot excczauniccted.

This oust ronovo tho burdos of guilt which ono sow want* *o pilo
up, Than hu-unity would havo p^rcoivod clearly» Is this devilish
strugglo r.o ran oar. bold his own, for God stands for Justioo,

If thoro ero tffondora thoro ere rosy oo-offondors, one’ ono under¬
stands tho sa-isg of Fr-stor Hoinollori "i»o oro ell guilty."

Ihla is a coral or a political guilt, but tho burdon onnnot bo oon-
voyed to a single person as orininal.

dorowitb I hero shewn tho fundnnontol linos rooordlr.g to which tho
notions of tho defendant Karl Brandt have to bo judf-od,

tor the lo ul judgnsnt by this Tribunal the prlmry consideration
is that no prlsor.ors of war or foroi^ers ore submitted to Euthanasia
with tho fcr.owlod,o or tho will of tho dofondont Kf-rl Brandt.

Thus the dofer.dast Karl Brandt osnnot bo punishod undor Law Ho*
or. this count oithorj what happonod botneon Gormans is not aubjoot
to the decision of this Tribunal,

Finally, tho dorondant Kcrl Brandt is also ohargod with having
bslongod to the organisation of tho SS whioh has been doolcrod orisdnol.

Evidence that tho dofondont Karl Brandt know of a orininal oin of
this organisation and approved of It must be brought by tho Prosooution.

• reference to tho general assertions In those, proouodinrs is not
suffiolwnt to bring this proof, for preoisoly boro tho prosooution cannot
prevail rith their assertions in ror'-rd to Earl Brandt.

to tho details, I r-for to tho statononts cwdo in ry oloslng

brief,

Tho feet th t tho dofor.dact Korl Brandt was tho only aonbor of the
SS who a-, tho lane tiro retained his position as a Ucdloal Officers of
tho shows that his honorary rank in tho SS was really only formlity
and that ho was no true Torier of this organ!tstion.

Vnon tho dofondont Karl Brandt f«vo evidence horo ca a witnoss
that ho wore tho uniform of tho SS with prido, this only shows that ho.


10815


Ik July ^7-A-13L-21-5-Pri»au (Int.,vcnSehon)

Court I

llfco tho rajority of tbo SS aon, Vr.ew nothing about crininr.l .-.ins. In
-in- tho organization of the SS tho International Military Tribunal
aoa aw, re only of a snail part of tho whole, looking, so to spunk,
through a koyholo into a dark oomor,

Uor could tho dofondcnt Karl Brandt have any porsonal knowlodgo
of h'lsndor's soarots, for Eiccler rojectod him porsonolly, ns is shown
oy a nucbjr of affidavits. Sine® oron in his own sphoro, Msdloioc, tho
dofencant Karl Brondt oould not obtain lnformticp, how ia ho to hrvo
obtainad knowlodgo of othor natters?

I do not wont to ropott tho affidavits vhioh give informtion
about tho fcasio ottitudo of tho dofondont Karl brundt and show that
ho took up a position whioh was irrooonoilablo with tho -oontality
supposed to bo typioel of tho SS. In this oonnootion I aoroly
rofur to tho atato^nta n'.do by Paster Bodolsohwingh, Lt. Oorstonmior,
Mayor-Bookhoff, Philipp Frin* of hoaso, and others.

If I cs tho Cofor.so Cour.sol oonsldor Karl Brandt's oonduot
oa o wholo and soo tho wounds ho has roooivod in tho struggles of
lifo, I cust ookncwlodgo tbt ho li o mn and not o orinlnol.

For tho ^ibunol's dooision, howoror, tho only oonolusivo foot is
thtt tho dofondont Kcrl Brandt did rot distrub tho oirolo of intor-
notiunal law, for ho oorrdttod no wor oriwos and oo.nsoquontly no
orir.-s against humanity. I thoroforo osk th t dofondont Kcrl Brandt
bo ooquitod.

THS rBSSILES.'i Before preec.ding to hear tho ar-unonts subnittod
cn boholf of dofon’ont uar.d loser, tho Tribunal will take a short
roooss.

(A rocoss wos token)


10619


14 July l*7-A-l£SD-22-l-Cook-lnt.,3rown
Court I

0

MARSHAL* Parsons In tho oourt rocn with please be scetod.

-ho Tribunal is 5in in session,

?Ri3IL2.'Ti tho Tribunal will now hecj^ counsel for tho defendant

Eacdlosor,

£S. BELTS. For tho defendant, Sondlosor.

Ur. President* please perrdt m first of all to draw tho Tribunal's

attention to those passages in rtf closing brief which I oannot bring

hore orally for lack of tiao. •

*.H£ FRESILETTi Co unsol for tho dofendor.t, Hendlosor, and all other
0

dofonso oour.sol, my bo assured that tho Tribunal will givo tho nost
careful attention to tho briofs which they will file or hnvo filod on
bohalf of tholr rospootlvo clients.


10118


14 July ii7-A-KSD-23-l-3ro5S ( 3rowt $
Court Ho. I


*.a. ISLTEi kr. President, your Honors, I regrot oxooedingly
thrt r.ono of tho representatives cf tho Prcaocution nro prosont, who
this morning treated tho defendant Hondlosor in o rathor pooullnr wty,

I‘ 18 i=Fortant to sa right at the beginning of ay presentation to answer
what the Frosooution this morning said regarding the similarity between
the derer.se for Handloser and the defense for Keitel. Apparently by
this parallel the impression was to be created that Handloaor's oase,
that is to say the feota in the Handloser oase, are sioilar to the
foots in the Keitel oase before the ISO. A person who takes suoh
an assertion either is not familiar with the doourants put in in the
nrr trial or in drawing suoh a parallel he is pursuing as partioular aim.
This can be seen, and I nay assune that tho Tribunal as oloorly reoog-
nites this ain as I do. If, however, the Proseoution has brought up tho
ghost of the Keitel trial then I aist be permitted to point out the
followingi

The Frosooution has stated, I quote, eooording to ry notosi "In
his defense Handloser refers to tho foot that he, as Chief of tho Viehr-
caoht Uodiosl dorvl oob, hsd r.o right to issue orders." And Koltol made
the sane statements in his trial before tho IMT. From tho opinion of
the IlfT, fron the Judgasnl against Keitel, 1 shall road os followsi

"Kaitol had no power to issue ordors to the throe branohos of tho
erntd d*rvioos". Ihus, the Jiff oonflra-d tho oorrootnoss of Koitol'a
allegations on this natter. It oust bo assumed thwt the Proseoution is
familiar with this judgaont of the IMT and, therefore, know that tho 1UT
had sot down in its Judgment thst Keitel had no right to issue orders.
Nevertheless, however, it has hore assortod tho contrary. There is,
however, one oircunstar.se that aakos this comparison botwoen Hondlosor's
and aeitol's easo interesting. In tho case against Koitol the Pro-
scoution oasod its charges or. an inoroditably large nuebor of doounonts.
There wore aore than 2000 docuaonts boaring Keitel's signaturo. Tho
Frosooution or^hasited at that tiae tho oonvinoing naturo of th«t nature
of the ovider.so and it was on this that the IKT'a judgawnt was based


10819


1U July i*7-A-ttSD-23-2-Gross (Brown)

Court I

which deduced Keitel's porticipation in Bar orioos. And no* your Honors,
take the 19 doouaent-volumoa put in in this proceedings by the Proa-
ooution. You will find theroin no single dooumnt that boars Handloaor'a
na-» as a signature or as the porson responsible for tho orindnol faots.
This is an extraordinary faot but it is true. And, only this foot
can explain vh/ the Prosecution found itaolf under tho obligation to
do what I bare Just described their doing.

The Proseoution has ohsrged Professor Handlesor with spoolal
responsibility for, and participation in. tests which were oonduotod
in oonoontration car^a on involuntary oxporinor.tsl subjoots eontrnry
to rooognixed rules of aodioal soienoo.

Tho lndintrant is directed against Professor Handlosor norsonolly.
in his oopooity and on aooount of his functions, rights, and duties,
as Inspector of the Ar.-y Uodiotl Sorvioe and Chiof of tho hohrrooht
Nodical Servioo.

By this, tho Indiotnont rises to an ieportanoe whioh oxooods tho
frar* of a porsonsl indiotiaant. *ho atntoonts of tho Chiof Pros-
e cut or aro e oollootivo indiotaont of Germn physioions end, in
Hcndlosor's oaso, of tho physicians of tho flohraaoht, but tho Prosocution
has not adducod oor.oroto ovidsnoo for this in tho oourso of its subsiiss-
lon of ovidonce.

This oollootivo tondonoy, it soaiu to no, is a danger for tho objoot-
ivo dotormination of tho truth, for, in rotrospoot, singlo ovonts whioh
aro without innor oonnootion and dispersed ever years, oan oaslly be
n»do to app-.ar as tho workings of a plan. This tondonoy oan bo rocog¬
nised for instance in tho quostion of tho Chiof Prosooutor (pago 23
of tho Scglish tronacript)i

"Are tho oxporiaoats a oontinuous list of atrooitics, or has tho
entire group something in oo r s on t"

Tho Pro scout ion secs this "ooaecn thing" in the faot thf-t tho

oxporinents hod a "public oonnootion" with the battlo in the air and on

tho bcttlofiold, as woll as with tho rest ioportant diseases which had

"to bo conbattod by tho Gerasn foroos end authorities in the occupied

10820


IU July U7-^-USD-S5-3-'5ro5s (Brown)

Court I

oountrios."

:h * prsoocution boliovo that this explains! "tho roason why tho
••ohrnsoht and espeololly tho Luftw«rr. ««ortod in tho oxporiwmts

From thsru it ii only o smell stop to tho srotosnnt ofton ropontad
ir. tho Individual foots that tho cxperinonts wore oarriod out "in tho
interest cf tho uohrrmoht". bo th-t, ocaording to tho old axiom
"oui bono", tho hohrneoht, i.o. tho nodical service of tho TCohrrroht,
oould bo pointed to as tho guilty party.

In on interrogation with EF. Fiaohor I have dealt with this quest¬
ion lr. oonrootion with tho fulfanilealdo ex per! rents in Pjvcnsbruook.
ividon :o has shown quito clearly that tho liodlor.l Sorvioo of tho
Yiohrnnoht did not parti oipr.to ir. tho so exporisonta in any way. Luring
tho cross examination by tho rrosoauticn, lr. Fjaohor oonfir i>d th't
tho sulfar.ilamido problem wes an ir^ortant probloa for tho Gorram TSohr-
auobt. Thot is oorreot. Tho f ill truth, however, is that tho sulfnnil-
aodu protlon wes on ver-all probloa, ono thct is of oquol interest to
tho oivilirn rad ailit-ry authorities. In tho nx-wntlrao ovon lnyraon under¬
stood that tho gigomtio, soiuntifio txttlo botwoon ponioillin and aul-
foriltnid-.s «i on admirable competition for tho h.nlth of humnity.

1-. Fisohor confiraod that in his onswor to tho question of tho
Proaooucor ho did not want to say th't this probloo wm of n puroly
militrry n't are, but th t it wos c problon for ell physioians.

Tho samo olso applies to all opidonio troblons, rhioh show ovon
aero clorrly th:t the ontiro population, front lino :md sono or inter¬
ior, occupied territories and prisonors of war, hovo tho right to de¬
mand that nil authorities responsible for sanitation nurt tnko stops
to oorbet epidonlos effectively. The w : ds "in tho intorost of the
Tiohrmnoht" ore, os such, neither a proof nor an argument.

In tho indiotmont and during submission of ovidonoo by tho pro-
sooution it w s not assortod thrt tho experiments woro carriod out "on
bofcalf of tho Gorman ho hr •Mcht" . Luring submission of ovidonoo, tho
prosecution has expressed, or, ot any rate, tried to mico it apponr, th*


10821


lii July i*7-A-M3D-23-^aros5 (Tro^n)

Court I

the ..chrsooht had caused or pronoted the so oxperinsr.ts, bocauso it had
nr "interest" in then,

Z<-. noting objective intorost in research with illo-ol exporlTaonts
in this fiold is r.ot evidenoe, but “. n invalid construction, unloss
causality is proven.

The prosooutior. not only hod to prove, as it did, that Professor
Handlosor and his offiocs had on objective intorost in suoh rosor.roh,
but that thoro was o spodial interest has by no jnenra boon provod
erolnst Profussor Handlosor in ary ai.i-lo irstenoo.


10822


14 July-A-3&-24-l_L*oaard (1st. 3 r ovn)
Court Fo. 1


This subdssion of evidence by tbe prosecution, baaod on general
reasoning In the case Eendloser, Is misleading, because It connects
things which rxe> generally valid and perrdtted with individual facta
which were cot ^rcptosatlc, but exceptional occurrences.

There is no country end no army in the world which never hrs carried
out testa rr.d experiments in the sane fields. In this proceedings
it hrs also becoee evident thrt research in all countries applied
the sane nethods, including the experiments on human beincs.

Kr. hcHrney stated explicitly, page 5532 of the Oernan rad page
5465 of the English transcript, that the defendants in this trial
are not being recused because of the experiaents on human beings ns
such, and that these experiaents aro an approved nethod of aedlcal
activity. He then continues:

■Tho crimes (of the defendants) are in their majority connected with
the use of non-volunteers for the experiaents rad also with the lack
of care of knovlodgo during their experiments and things siailnr to
these, which we can characterlzs rs illogrl actions.* (Page 5465 of
the English transcript).

The field of research in Oercray was colossal. Universities,
academies, cedi caUsc lent if ic inetitutlons, laboratories of the
big pharor.ceutlcrl industry, cedicol institutes (R obort Koch In¬
stitute, Institute for Experimental Therapy, Frankfurt), medical
scientific institutes of the individual branches of the Vohrnacht,
and finally the research institutes o:* the SS. All these institutes,
conducted medical research in all fields during the war, especially
about problems which appeared urgent, directly or indirectly' as a
result of the wax.

If we c or pare this entire field with the individual facta Hated
in the indictment, w« mist establish that the experiments character¬
ized as criminal are only the smallest parts of the entire reserrch;
furthermore, that the medical institutes for scientific research


10823


14 J-ily-A-2Z-cU-3_ljoaord (1st. Sr own)

Court to. 1

which were under Professor Handloser's supervision are not charged
with any of the expsrinents which are Indicted here, oven though
nearly all fields of research which are under discussion here were
also carried out in institutes which were under Professor Hendloser 1 s
supervision.

If this is the case and if nose of the experiments carried out in
these institutes is indicted here, then an actual surniee, nanoly
thrt arising fror. a satisfied interest, speaks for the feet that
Professor Renfloser r.s Inspector of the Arcy kedlcnl Service vns not
Interested in these expericents ns they ere indicted here.

In this proceedings the prosecution again and again has talloed
about "responsibility* as if only one specified conception of
responsibility were existing. However, this conception has, ns
I already stoted in ny opening stntement, cany Dennings. (Page
}127 *nd 3128 of the Znglish Proceedings). The prosecution accuses
Professor Knndloser in all charges against hin of "spscial responsi¬
bility for and participation In" the tests and expericents. It

can not be rocognlxed froa the stateaents of the prosecution which

importance with -regrrd to cricinnl procedure the words "special
responsibility" besides ths word "participation" are supposed to
have. One 1^7 assume that the prosecution desires hero to make a
distinction between "general" and "special" responsibility where
apprreotly ths "general " responsibility of a defendant is based
on the office he held or to his aeabership in a. grotp , and tho
"special" responsibility on the participation in a special case.

Whatever the erg* nay be. if in these proceedings n "responsibi¬
lity" is eentioned, only the criminal responsibility can be referred
to. Sucfc r criminal responsibility cay arise if the defendant
instigated, ordered, carried out or persitted the offense or if
he participated in any oth»r manner actively and by thiB participa¬
tion *Rde himself liable to punishment. Therefore, this results in


10634


lU July-A-sr-2U-3-Leoarrd (Int, 3rown)

Court *o. 1


iif feet that the accusation of "special responsibility for rad
participation la" are synonymous and can only near, that the
defendant had participated in the facte of the individual cases
ia r manner for which he ie liable to punlshcent. This finding
•••-* neceeeary, because during the submitting of evidence the
prosecution repeatedly asked, whether one of the defendants would
take the responsibility for the field covered by his office or
for the behavior of one of his subordinates. As here the establish¬
ing of the responsibility nfi n defend/®t for which ho la liable
to punishment is rt stake, the question rriaes whether one can
assuce at all the criainal responsibility for Illicit acts of
another person.

“he assuring of the responsibility for the field covered by an
office exists only within the field of political and nilltery
responsibility. Ministers are responsible to Parliament, military
courandors to the Suprena commanders having nilltary Jurisdiction
without the nucstion of a personal guilt having to be coneiderod
hare.

?or the establishing of the criminal responsibility which alone
is unicr consideration here, only the legal principle that a
guilty person is the very person who violatos a law, who cocaits
an illegal act, can be considered here. The punishment of a person
for the behavior of another person would bo incompatible with this
principle. This also irplies to the relation to the deputy in
office end to the members of the office. Just as there it no
deputising in guilt, there le also no deputising for punishment.

This principle of purely personal responsibility is being expressed
in the sentence of IXT (pages 16502/2) - Doc. HA-01, figure U,
Doc.-3ook Handloter I. page 2. According to this, the fact that
criminal guilt is a personal one belongs to the cost important
generally acknowledged legal principles.

“he International Military Tribunal has clearly objected to the


10826


lb July-A-3Z-2luU-teoarrd (Iat. 3row-)
Court ?o. 1


attempt to transfer tfce principle* of political responsibility to
cri-in-1 law. Military Tribunal To. 2 took the same point of view
in the sentence against Milch, and gave the reasons in a cost apprecia¬
ble rad detailed Banner as follow*:

■It cust be constantly borne in nind that this is an
juiericrn Court of Justice, rpplying the ancient and
fundeeental concepts of A nglc-Suxon Jurisprudence which
h*vo sunk their roots into the XogUsh common law and
havo been stoutly defended in the United States since
ite birth. One of the principal purposes of thoso trials
is to inculcate into the thinking of the Oernan people
an appreciation of, and respect for, the principles of law
which have becoae the backbone of the deaocrntic process,

Ye oust bend erery effort toward suggesting to the people
of every nation that laws cust be used for the protection
i6f people and that every citUon shall forever have the
right to n fair hearing before m lapartial tribunal,
before which all eca stand equal. Ve Bust never falter
ir. maintaining, by practico as well as by preachaent, the
sanctity of what we have cone to know as duo process of
1™, clYil nr;d crlnlarl, mmicipel nnd lit ornnHonnl. If
tho level of civiliiation is to be rolsod throughout the
world, this aust be the first step. Any otbor rood lords
but to tyranny and chaos. This Tribunal, beforo all others,
must act in recognition of these solf-cvident principles.

If it fails, its whole purpose is frustrated end this trial
.'cco'.ca a tsockery. At tho vory foundation of these Juridiclnl
concepts lie two important postulates:

1. Every person cccused of crice is presuaod to be
innocent , and

2 . that presuaption abides with hin until guilt has

been established by proof beyond r. reasonable doubt.

Unlo3s the court which hears the proof is convinced of guilt
to the point of noral certainty, the presuaption of innocence
gust continue to protect the accused. If the facte ns drawn
-rov the evidence are ecuri ly consistent with guilt and
innocence, they must be resolved on tho side of innocence.

Under .-American lnw neither life nor liberty is to bo lightly
trkon rvay, and, unlese at the conclusion of the proof there
is an eliding conviction of guilt in the Bind of the court
which sits in Judgement, the ccaused nay not be damnified.

raying reverent etteution to these snered principles it
1b the Judgcent: of the Tribunp .1 that the defendant ie not
guilty of charges embraced in Count Two of the Indictceat.

These statements have a special and previously Judged elgnifio-

anco for the-ense Sandloaor, because Count *2 against Held Marshal

Kllch referred to the high altitude end freezing experiments and

to the problem of responsibility in hi* Jurisdiction.. Eandlower,

1C&25


lU July-/r-3&-2lt.5-Leon*.rd (Int. Brown)

Court Jo. 1

vhcc questioned by the prosecution, strted that he took the responsi¬
bility vithin the sphere of activity for everything be instigated

• ^

V/ an order, or by a general regulation, (3005/6) Page 2990/91 of
th* Inglisfc. But the prosecution suteitted neither rn order nor n
regulation, nor any other evidence vhlch could be cr. order or c
regulation, with regard to the experlceats as euch, or';to the
participation of one of his subordinates in such experiaents ns
are indicted here.

The sphere of activity of Professor Hmdloser ns Inspector of
the AAny Kedlccl Service is clearly ~nd definitely reculated by
the Any Medical Regulations E Dv 21 part I Section 5-11
- Soc. HA-28*, Zxh. 2 -

In this field he vns the superior of the Arcy Medical Officers
end was corpotent to issue orders, also with regard to research rs
far rs reserreh work cm be ordered ot all. But the prosocution
neither hre asserted nor proved,

that Professor Eandloser as Inspector of the Arry
Medical Service issued orders or decrees to tho re¬
search institutes subordinated to hln - Amy Medical
Acadeey, 3erlln, Mountain Medical School Sankt Johann
Spotted lever and Virus Institute Cmeow-Leaberg
Surgical Special Hospltel of the Supreae Coanond
of the Any in Brueeels - to carry out illicit ex¬
periments on husxn beings, or that such experiaents
were carried out there.

The assertion of the prosecution that sooe Medical Officers of
the Any cane somehow into contact with persona or offices outside
the rr=y Jurisdiction, which are guilty or illegal experiaents on
fcuaan beinrs, w>uld only be laportant if these Medical Officere of
the Any would here coaritted a punishable act or perticipoted in
such ec net end if this could actually be charged to tho ieproper

behavior of the defendant Handloser.

10827


U July-A-OJ 0-2 5-l-3ioloy. (Int. Broun)
Court Ho. 1


The prosecution apparently asaunts that the highest authority
(i.e. chief) of a large sphere of activity has knowledge of all happen¬


ings within this sphere.


Furthermore it does not conform to the actual experience that the

t

person exercising the highest powers of ecu.and within the military
hierarchy of the arny is in scee degree the originator of all orders
carried out by a subordinate in this hierarchy. If an order has boen
issued it oust be determined who of all the supervising chiefs of tho
officee in this hierarchy is the erginator responsible before criminal
law for this order. If no special ordor was issued it must be examined


whether the incriminating behavior was prompted by circumstances, which


llo within the acopo of responsibility beforo criminal law of the dofer>-
dant personally, such as orders and regulations which rendored possiblo
the criminal behavior of a subordinate or appropriate consent, to ccranit
tho criminal offense beforo its beginning or its completion.


In the courso of thdse proceedings, the prosecution would have to


assert and to prove in each case:

a) that tho behavior of tho subordinate constitutes a punishablo
offense

b) that this behavior was tho result of cither

1 ) a special order or general directive issued by tho
defendant as superior, or

2 ) consent given by the superior prior to the offense, i.e.,
emission of a duty-bcund prevention.

Only in this case can the defendant be charged with being an abettor,
offender or accomplice, or participator.

In =y Closing Brief I have dealt with the various details which
have been submitted by the Prosecution in order to doduco Handlooer's
responsibility from the contact of subordinate medical officers with
persons or agencies who arc directly accused. In principle I have to
say — and this goes for the Prosecution'S Closing Brief as well —


that in no case is there any substantiation nor proof of the factual


elements necessary according to penal law.

loees


12 , Julr-A-DJG-25-2-4ialoy (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


Tho Prosecution described the activities of the subordinates in a
general fora, as for instance: Visit Prof. E^er - Dr. Schmidt at
Buchenwald. Visit Dr. birth in Strassburg. Visit Dr. Dohman in Stras¬
bourg, but they left us in the dark how far these activities can be
Judged criminal and on which facts to base a criminal responsibility
of Handlosor.

In no caso tho assertion has been put forward concretely of a
casual activity of Handloser's nor of his knowledge.

It seees as if the Prosecution bcllevo that the contafit of ono of
Handloser's subordinate with a person or agency who is incriminated by
scoo experiment were sufficient to prove: knowledge, condoning and
promoting of those experiments.

This «3uld bo a construction but no evidence of facts according
to penal procoduro.

Furthermore, tho Prosocution seems to think that official super¬
vision over a medical officer would produco tho result that his atti¬
tude and his knowledge could "tomatically bo ngardod os the attitudo
and tho knowlodgo of the highost superior, who would bo Professor Hand-
loser. This would bo inoorrect becauso it is in contradiction to tho
fundamental principle of individual guilt.

If ono desires to arrive at a correct concopt of tho tOrm official
supervision and is tc apply its content to tho problem of this trial
in the caso of Handloecr one mist not rely on a thoorotical analysis
of tho tens, tut one has to draw a visual image of this institution
rooting in facts and in practice.

Official supervision embraces tho right and tho duty within an
aguncy cr channel of command to order all that to superviao it, or to
have it supervised, which is necessary end possible, in order to:

a) secure the execution of orders and directives issued by a
higher agency;

b) guarantee obedience to and execution of orders and directives
issued by his own agency;


10829


li. July-A-OJO-25-3-ifelcy (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


c) supervise obodier.ee to the general principles of military and
modi cal-military service.

Tho crux in this trial, which is a trial of Professor Handloser's
person, is again not the assertion that Handloscr has violated his duty
with respect to tho general official supervision in his capacity as
Medical Inspector of the Army, but the Prosecution se«as — again and
again one can only assume so — bo hauntod of a concept of a concept
of personal and imaodiete official supervision of Professor Handlosor
over all medical officers of the Army and over all agencies subordinated
to him.

Especially strcngly this is evidenced as soon as tho discussion
turns to tho Military Medical Academy and to the medical officoro who
were active thoro.

Exactly "hen discussing this caao of tho Military Medical Acadomy —
I draw Your Honors attention to Decuaont HA 29, Exhibit U, pago 60 of
the Document Book — Profeasor Handloscr clearly oxprossed tho purposo
and atm of this institute, its organisation and its relation to him
in his capacity cs Medical Inspector of the Army. Tho Military Medical
Academy was an independent institution charged with the following tasks:

(a) additional training of now classes for medical officers
(training group A and training group B)

(b) medical end practical advance training of medical officers
and clinical treatment of A raj medical problems and tasks
(tug grp. C). Those problems wero attached and solved Just
as they wore in any other academy, on the academy's own
responsibility.

To ovaluato correctly the subordination under tho Army Medical

Inspector, on., should compare it to the subordination of a University

under the "Ministry of Culture". Froa this it follows, that as far

os treatment and carrying out of clinical tasks are concerned, thoso

persons were responsible for it who had been assigned to the Army

Medical Academy for this purpose. Prof. Handlosor, ca Army Medical

Inspector, could only be considered for an evaluation or decisions of

questions if they were submitted to him directly or through official

channels. Ir. this trial we can only be concerned with questions which

10830


IU (Int, Brown)

Court -Ic| 1

were trcrtod by trr-inir .3 group Q, If problcns arose, whose decision,
according to the opinion of a Chief of tne Institute, should be reserved
for a higher authority, then tho Chief of the Institute subrittod tho
uattor tc his Chiof, i.c., the Coasender of Training Group C. If the
letter considered nicsolf ur-tble to decido then the Comander of tho
Arcy Medical Ac&dcey *ns ccepotent for tho dacision. Only if the affair
esccoded the cccpctency of tho Ccautndor of the Arsy Medical Accdoay,
wrs it broaght to the attention of the Army Medical Inspectorate and
there it c.-oc to the Chiof of the D^pertaent for "Seionco nnd Health
Research". Again only if the letter too, believed that important fund."—

a<.nt«l quesUons were involved, were they suoudited for decision to the
Array Medical Inspector after the Chief of Staff of the „nay Medical
Inspectorate had been inferred.


Court 1


14 July 47 -A-2^-l-A£G-I!eehar. (Brown)

Because of this limitation of cocpetency and working arrangement
it is impossible that Prof. Handloier could have exercised a direct
and personal supervisory authority over Uedical Officers which were
active in the individual institutes of the training group C of the
Army nodical academy.

However the Amy Kedic Academy was only one of altogether seven
institutes which were directly subordinate to the Amy Uedical Inspec¬
torate.

They were located in Berlin, Cracow-Leofcerg, in St. Johann and
in Brucelles. All institutes had the sane military relationship as
the Amy Uedical Institute so that the official business was trans¬
acted in the sane Banner with these institutes.

But theso Institutes wore only a fraction of the units and tasks
which wore port of Professor Handloser's field of activity. If ono
considers now that Prof. Handloser was not only kray Uedical Inspec¬
tor, but also at the sane time Amy Physician and Chief of the Array
Uedical Service in which capacity he had equally important and tine
consuming tasks and (if one considers too) that, as has been proven,
he very frequently went on official inspection trips in front lino
areas aAi only personally present in Berlin during l/ 10 of hia tia0 >
then one can gain the proper point of view for Judging the question
whether the duty for supervisory authority of Prof. Handlosor made at
all possible a personal and direct control of all kray Uedical Officers
activo in units and cotituts subordinate to him.

It could only be the task of a Kedical Officer heading such a

vast field of problems to take care, within the frame work of his duty

for supervisory authority, that the internal late superior officers had

sufficient qualifications for their Jobs and that the nilitary report

and ccocunications 373tco was organized as well as possible. It was

Prof. Handloser's task, in his field of activity, to gain the proper

control of the "overall picture". Prof. Kandloser performed his duty

ICS 32


Court 1

14 July 47 -A-26-2-A3>-Sieehan (Brown)

as supervisor by being nost fastidious in the selection of the subor¬
dinate "Leading Medical Officers", by doing everything possible to
convince hieself personally hew the tasks were being accomplished and
by scrutinizing nost carefully the reports in the field of the Medical
Service, in substantiation of which he has put in evidence Dok. HA-65,
2 xh. 62 .

The Prosecution has produced no facts going to prove that Frof.
Handloser, after being informed of culpable behavior on the part of
one of his subordinates, would have failed to take steps. In view
of this fact, it is not necessary to present proof of this. But it
is nevertheless worthy of note that tho evidence brought forth has
given systematic indication that Prof. Handloser, when ho did have
kncwledge of abuaoa, took care to have then stopped. I refor to the
affidavits of the Swiss Oborstarzt Or. Theodor Brunner and the chair-
nan of the Mixed Physicians Cooaission, the Swiss Oberstarzt Dr. A.
von Erlach.

Tho charges brought against Handloser can bo characterized as
lacking in concrete statements of inc rial nation.

Tho Prosecution has produced no documents and no witnesses to
substantiate its charge of personal particular responsibility and par¬
ticipation in the individual deeds.

Co through the 19 document books and supplementary documents put
in by tho Prosecution and you will look in vain for Handloser's sig¬
nature under an order or directive. One sir^le document (Doc. 1323-
oxh 452) bears his signature, and this document is ono of tho most
convincing docunents in his exoneration.

I say be permitted to ignore the various affidavits by Rudolf
Brandt which the Frosecution has here put in evidence. The value of
this evidence is patented. If the Prosecution feels that it must have
the co-defendant, Rudolf Brandt, confirm associations which the Frose¬
cution cannot itself prove and for which Rudolf Brandt also, according

to his sworn testimony, lacks all concrete substantiation.

10833


Court 1


14 July -47 -A-26-3-Aa3-lieehar. (3rom)

Prof. Handloser was for 3 3/4 7ears (fro: 1 Jan 1941 to 31 *ug.
1944) Amy Medical Inspector. If the Prosecution has not been able
to produce one single document from nearly four years of the defend¬
ant* a activity as Army Medical Inspector that bears on the criminal
experiments and that contains Hand loser's name as signature or as
the person responsible, then this fact refutes prioa facie the nasuep-
tlon of the Prosecution.

Frof. Handloser as Airy Medical Inspector, was the highest nan
in the Military-medical hierarchy of the Ar^. This was an important
position and his staff, the Amy Medical Inspectorate, was a large
organization of which the Chief of Staff was Generalartzt Dr. Schaidt-
Bruecken. This staff was in Berlin whereas Handloser spent 90* of his
time in Headquarters at tho fronts. All receipts , letters, reports,
went through the registry office, the departmental chiefs and the Chief
of Staff. Prof. Handloser received nothing that had not previously
come to the attention of tho register, the departmental chief or the
Chief of Staff. AU conferences that Handlosor had with his depart¬
ment chiefs were also knewn to the Chief of Staff who, as a mutter of
principle, had to be informed of then beforehand . All discussions
with third parties were arranged for by the Chief of Staff; he ouw to
it that an expert was present at such discussions.

If Professor Handloser had conferences with other officers or out¬
side his own offico he was accompanied by an expert in the matter that
was to bo discussed.

The results of these discussions were ?n every case sot down in
some identifiable fora such as orders, letters, directives, file notes.
The orders went darn through the hierarchy to the last office, which
was to carry the order out. The directives wore distributed to a
larger or smaller number of other persons. Ihe circle of persons who,
in Prof. Handloser's immediate vicinity arxi in the larger field of tho
office in question, had to have knowledge of every fundamental or gen¬
eral decision or directive of Prof. Handloser's was very large.

1CS34


Court 1


14 July 47 -A-26-4-ABG-lfeehan (Bream)


Therefore Prof. Handloser could do nothing, order nothing, plan
nothing, without its happening that this inevitably became known in
the outside world and to a specific circle.

The person who inevitably knew of occurences within the Amy Med¬
ical Inspectorate was the Chief of Staff Generalarzt Dr. Schmidt-Bruocken;
the person who inevitably knew of the occurrences in the Office of the
Chief of the ’.-'ehmacht Medical Services was the Chief of Staff Cenoral-
arst Huerfler. The functions of those two Chiefs of Staff have been
carefully described by Prof. Hand’oser in the affidavit HA 29, each.

4 and the two chiefs of staff have confirmed under oath tho correct¬
ness of his description. In this connection the eutally corroborative
testimony is important that within the sphere of Handloser's office
absolutely nothing could take place of which the chiefs of staff could
havo been ignorant, and that they in their official positions nevor
hod knowledge of experiments such as are at issue in this procedenco.

The second catagory of thoso who knew of occurrences was tho lead¬
ing and chief medical officers, since thoy wore the intermediaries be¬
tween top and bottom and between bottco and top, so that every ordor
or directive from above, as well as every report frcsa boloir had to
pass through there along official channels.

From this catagory the defendant has spontaneously boen sent num¬
erous affidavits which I nave put in evidence and which shot that
Handloser never issued orders or directives which violate the rocoe-
nixod procepts of medical practice. The same is true for tho catagory
of consulting physicians, who have confirmed Handloser's exemplary
orientation as a doctor.

Finally, tho sworn testimony of tho co-dofcndants and witnesses:

Prof. Karl Brandt, Prof. Gebhardt, Prof. Rose, Prof. Lmgowsky,
jenoralarzt Vfuerf ler, Generalarzt Schmldt-Bruecken, Generalarzt Dr.

Jaeckel, Frof. Gutzeit, has proved that Prof. Handloser never spoke
with any of these men about experiments on human beings in concentration


camps.


10635


Court 1


U Jal 7 47 -A-2S-5-ABG-k'eehan (Brown)

an extraordinary nan Prof. Handloaer nuat be if he, whether
as instigator, abettor, or participant, had anythin., to do with the
experiments on human beings in concentration camps. Although, as we

have seen, his activities were subject to continuous and inevitable

•

check, he would have had to be able, in an incredibly subtle way, to
keep secret or to camouflage, throughout the entire duration of his
activities as Army Medical Inspector and Chief of the Wehraacht
Medical Services, everything tnat referrod to human experimentation
in concentration ca.-ps. Handloser, as the "man behind the scenes,"
would have had to conceal, in a masterfully fashion, his "true" in¬
tentions and his "criminal" actions from his chiefs of staff, his as¬
sociates, his leading medical officers, his conoultir^ physicians,
and even those who knew of the human experiments, so skillfully that
no one had any Inkling of them.

Is that possible? No, lour Honors, that is impossible. The Proso-
cutor himself said "there is no secret about Handloser" (p*. 3630 Gorman
transcript) These words are important and are valuable in Handloser*s
defense; hia actions, his orientation, his personality, are clear no
day. This is so for true that in his case even that can be seen which
is othenrioe obscure in criminal cases; the subjective aspect of the
facts, his true Intention and his medical, soldierly, and hunan orien¬
tation.

This bee ernes entirely clear fren his speeches before the consul¬
ting physicians and from the prefaces that he wrote for the printed
reporto on the conferences.

The Prosecution has put in evidence variouo excerpts froa the con¬
ference reports frera the consult!.-.- conferences arxJ in order to incrim¬
inate the defeniant Handloser, has referred to hia as the nan in charge
of the consulting conferences. In order to find the truth it appears
important to examine the words that Handloser uttered at a tine whor.

he did not have to concern how Germany's enemies would construe his

10836


Court 1


14 July 47 -A-26-6-A9G-i*eehaa (Brown)

words. If he had been in any way connected with innovating n ai methods
of research that deviated free the previously accepted rules, if indeed,
as the Prosecution asserts, he had provided the incentive for the ex¬
periments in Buchenwald, what would have been more natural than for
him to claim the credit or at least to make his interest known in such
representative addresses. In point of fact, hewrever, Handloser' s ad¬
dresses contain no word that allcwis one to deduce that he even had
knowledge of these experiments on human beings . The defendant Handloser,
also, cites his statements and asserts that no chief of the medical
services of a nation wagi^ war could have spoken differently in es¬
sence.

This brings ae to tho count in the indictment "Typhus Experiments,"
tho only count of tho indictment in which Prof. Handloser is brought
into lamediate association with the incriminating experiments.

The following constitutes the typhus problem in the Handlosor

case:

Tho prosecution states that professor Handlosor, because of the
Army's interest in tho production of typhus vaccine, used tho SS and
its resoarch institute in Buchcrsrald to make use of new methods in tho
matter of artificial infection with typhus baccilli. Those methods
were not in accordance with the recognized rules for medical research.

During presentation of evidence by the prosocution and during
cross-examination tho interest which Prof. Handlosor had in the typhus
problem was emphasized again and again, a fact which was nevor contest¬
ed by Prof. Handloser but which has no probative value in its genoral
aspects, but which is capable of naki^ the finding of the judgment
more difficult.

The' typhus problem comprises:

typas research

production of typnus vaccine

the procurement and distribution of typhus vaccine.

10837


Court 1

14 July 47 -A-26-7-ArC-4(eehan (Brown)


Professor Hand loser never contested to have been interested in
all thoao questions. He definitely denied, however, that, within the
framework of his lin»-of-duty fight against typhus, ho was interested
in typhus research which is solely under indictment here.

It is confusing to derive the assunption that an interest in il¬
legal and improper research existed from a duty-bound interest in re¬
search itself. This would constitute a reversal of the burden of evi¬
dence. Rather it is to bo aasunod becausa of lack of indications and
evidence that a duty-hound interest in dofinito research according to
legal and recognised medical rules was intended i.e., tho normal stato
of affairs is rather to bo aasunod.


10838


14 July-A-/Ir-2^-l-Primaau (lot. Broun)
Coen Ho. I


It is equally incorrect to point to the interest of the A ray in
an atteapt to characterize the general assumption.

Professor Kandlosor, during the critical period (end of 1941, be¬
ginning of 1942) was only aedical inspector of the Aray. He became
Chief of the Army l^dical Service only on 1 August 1942. Not only the
Artsy, hwever, but also the otter branches of the armed forces, the YJaf-
fen SS, the Houe Front, the prisoners of war — that is, the Allies —
and the population of the occupied territories were interested in com¬
batting typhus, (ki top of that. Professor Handloser, as Aray lisdical
Inspector, had the research Institute for virus of the OKH in Krakau/
Lesfcerg under his jurisdiction which produced typhus vaccine Iron the
intestines of Lice and he worked on its completion and on its increaso
of production.

After all, it waa not as if one tad still to invent typhus vacaine.

Besides tho eigl vaccine, which was made f»oa intestines of lice
and which I hare mentioned, there were still the various processor, of
vaccine production from hen eggs and the vaccine according to Durand
and Girouu, for the production of which the lungs of guinea pigs vero
used. Those vaccines had already beer, tried and provod and usod to a
limited entor.t. For these vaccines than only the proof of thoir offi-
cacy on a large scale in relationsnip to the Weigl vaccine was still
missing.

It was necessary to carry out this test in order to achieve tho
largest degroe of certainty.

The normal .method for this was the epidemiological exporinont; that
is, tho vaccination of a large number of people in areas threatened by-
typhus by using the vaccines to be tested, in equal amounts, side by
side. Such a vaccination en a largo scale, howover, has nothing to do
with e.^eriments as they are indicted here. It is a preventive vaccin¬
ation with a tasted and tried vaccine, at least on a limited scale.

10639


14 Juiy-A-FL-27-2~Pri
Court Ho. I


u (Int. 3rcw»n)


In first Place, however, stood as primary and decisive measure in
the struggle against typhus the coobatting of the louse. Ftm the vory
beginning of the typhus crisis all the offices of the Wehrmacht (Kedi-
cal Officers and troop leaders) were recdr.ded, through large scale pro¬
paganda, of the principle: "the struggle against typhus consists in the
struggle against the louse." This sor.ter.co Mas dessioinatod on hundreds
of thousands of posters. Simultaneously, on ths entire Easton; front
bTtn decentralized ar.d centralised delousing stations Mere set up. In
addition, the troops Mere, to a consietantly increasing oxtont, provided
with lousa power.

At the conference of the consulting physicians in May 1942 tho ty¬
phus problos occupiod the center of the otage. Following four basic lec¬
tures thcro Mas a discussion in Mhich 23 apeakors particioatod. Pro-
fossor Haos said, "the basic principle cuat remain 'delousing controls
tophus; on tho front hot air delousing is sufficient” (page 52 of tho
oonforenco roport). Policies for tho cccfccttlng of typhus which wore drawn
up at this conference begin with the eontonco, "tho cocabatting of tho
body louse la tho basis for tho combatting of typhus." That Mae tho si¬
tuation at tho or.d of 1941.

Profocsor ! nndloaor'a interests are cloarly to be soon. They i.oro
(a) primarily tho coebatting of tho louso, (b) increasing tho production
of typhus vaccino. Thus, it Mas not tho problem of typhus roscarch thr.t
stood in tho forcgroisid but tho extension of the struggle against tho
leuso and tho increase in tho production of the reliable Welgl vaccino,
as woll as of other tested vaccines.

This latter problem was tho deeper roason and incentive for tho

latter that Professor Handloser sent to tho Reich Health Loader, Dr.

Conti, Mho Mas competent for the Government General and tho Hocwlar.d,

or. 10 November 1941 (Docu»nt Ho. 1323, Exhibit 452). This is tl» only

prosecution document that bears Handloser's signature and it proves tho

correctness of his orientation toward tho typhus problem. It confirms

10840

i


1— “Oly-A- 7b~2 7 - 3 — Priise&u (Int. 3rown)

Court Ko. I

that the OKK Institute in Craco-Leaborg had been asked to provido
typhus vaccine hut that the Array's requirements could hardly bi cc t
by thir Institute and that increasing requirements acre to be expected
for the Homeland. Therefore, Professor Kar.dloscr proposoa that the pro-
auction of typhus vaccines should bo placed in the hands of the pharma¬
ceutical industry.

• •

Pursuant to this suggestion Staatssokrotacr Dr. Conti, who, as I
havo Just said, a as conpctcnt for tho KomJland and tho Covcrn-cnt Gonc-
ral, ordored: "discussion of production of typhus vaccine by tho phar¬
maceutical industry." Ho orionted tho Robert Koch Institute, which was
subordinate to hLa, the Behring Wo-^s in Marburg, which had alroady
previously ilivorcd typhus vaccine and tho I.C.Farbcn Induotrio, whoso
representatives, Deanitz tnd Znhn, took part in tho discussion on 29
Deceabar 19AI in the Reichs Ministry of tho Interior.

It can accordingly bo assumed that the conference on 29 Dccouibor
19U in tho Roichs Ministry of tho Intorior on tho typhus situation is
to oc attributed to Professor Handloser'a suggestion in his letter of
10 Novvicber 19*1. Ail there can be no doubt that this conforoncc uas to

did concern itself solely and exclusively with tho quostion of
vaccine production and not with tho question of resoaron nothodc such
as wore used in Buchtnwald.

THE PRESENT: Counsel, your tiao has oxpirod.

DR. KELTS: I dooply regret that; boccuso of that I shall not bo
in a position to road the most important passages in ay plea; but per-
haps I could use the 20 oinutos that Handloser would have for his final
3tateaont — 15 to us, in his place.

THE PRESOR T: How long would tho balanco of your arg'W'-nt con-
aiTmu, counsel?

DP.. KELTS: I believe 20 adnut -s would suffice. Your Honor.

THE PRES1DS1T: Wall, you say have 15 minutes at the opening of to-


-iorr<wi af'.crnoor.'s session


10841


U Juljr-A-FL-27-4-Friaoau (Int. 9rown)

NO. I


N<a, » “" l8 Tri<«nal will not be in session toccrrow norning. H«o
Tribunal "ill now bo in recess until onc-thirty o'clock tomorrow aftox^
nocn. Dr. Nolto jay then have 15 ainutes :ihich is not to bo taken as a
precedent by othor counsel. I suggest othor counsel reoeaber to reed the
jore lapor-ant portions of their ar .caents first instead of at the last.

The Tribunal will new bo in recess until orxs-thirty o'clock to¬
morrow.

T«E .1ARSHAL: The Tribunal will be in recess until onc-thirty to¬
morrow aft o moon.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until 15 July 19/.7, at 1715 hours.)


10642


15 July *J7 -A_IjC_15_1-Ctobb (Brown)
Court I


Official Iran*cript of the Anerican Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of America against Karl Brandt, at el,
defendants, sitting at Muraberg, C'srmany, on
15 July 1947, 133C-1700, Justice Baals presiding.


THl KA2SHAXA Parsons in the court roon will ploaso find their


seats,

Tho BonoTable, the Judges of Military Tribunal X.

Killtary Tribunal X is now in session. God sbt the United States
of Aaorlea and thle honorable Tribunal. Thero will be order in tho
court. »


THl PttSinnrr: Mr. Marshal i will you ascortaln if tho dofondonts
are all present in court?

-Hi MAHSHALj May it ploaso your Honor, all the dofondants arc
prosont in the court.

THl PHlSIDkBT: The Secretary General will note for tho rocord


tho presence of all tho dofondants in court.

Counsel for the dofondant Handlosor has boon allowod an oxtrn
fiftoen alnutos to concludo his arguaont. K© nay procood.

m. MALTA for Handlosort I shall continue with ay final“ploa.

The basic assertion in “andlcsor'o caso is his alleged participation
in typhus oonforcnco which tock place on 29 Doccabcr 1941, and whoro, it
is allogod, tho docision was -/.do to conduct typhus oxporlacnto in the
Bucheva Id Concentration C*rp.


Tho Prosecution has not prosed this fact, oultc tho contrary has
boon prosed.

Cn 39 Dccesbor 1941 a ccnforcncc about tho typhus saccino probleas
took place in the H«ich Ministry of tho Interior. Mot oven the Proseeu-
tion has alleged that Handlostr took a part in it.


the note in tho Bing Blary, tho Proaooution
took place on tho caae day about which,
docuacnt hds been subaltted.

by expert opinion and Br. Eogon, that
Diary in the formulation as subaltted hee been


100,3


15 July &7-LJ jC_lc-2_C—c«s (rron)

Court I


falsified, therefore ac probative value can be attached to it.

■either In the affidavit■ Dlng-Schulcr 10-257. Dr. Hovcn BO-429,
and Mrugcwaky HC-423, which deal with the typhus experlacnts in Buchan-
wald, nor in the entire reealnder of the Din* Diary arc Eandloser's
nace end the Medical Inspectorate of the Amy acntloncd at all.

Abowo ar.d beyond thle, thle one testieony of all nllegod partici¬
pant in the conference who are etlll alive rofutce the etatonent that
a conference of the alleged persons, leading to the alleged rosult, ovor
took place.

And finally* Dr. Booo'o testimony undor oath and tho caaonflage
lot ter of Mrugowsky of 5 May 1942 prove tJwit Dr. Conti instlgatod the
experinente.

Aloo, if wo ouppeso tha* Handloeor, in hie capacity ao Medical
Inepector of the Amy, wae proeent at euch a aoetlng, it would bo in
contradiction to all logic and oxpcrlcnco of life that ho vna novor in
Buchotvald, no report about the experioente ever reechod tho Modloal
Inepoctorate of tho Arwy, Handloeer never epokc about tho taattor with
hie Chiefs of Staff, Handloeer never epoko with Dr. Ding.

Handloeer wao Medical Inepector of tho Arqy and Chiof of tho Medical
"orvico of tho Arsv. H W poeition ae Medical Inepector of tho Amy wae
strong and vested with authority to givo orders.

The Prosecution, hcvcvor, etrivco to stress Handloeer 1 e pooition
as Chief of tho Medical Services of the Amy and to enlarge its inportanco
bocauso only thus thoy ern construct a contact with tho Mod leal Scrvlcos
of the Luftwaffe and of the kaffen-SS and thus establish a relation with
the rosearch work which is indicted hero.

The Investigation of the functions, rights, and dutios of Hand¬
le nor in hlo capacity as. Chief of the Ar*od forces Modical Sorvico has
occupied such spece In the argnoent of tho prosecution and tho dofenso.
Thio appeared necessary to the Prosecution because the edicts of 1942,
1544 , and the Service Regulation 1944 gave no indication for the asserted
cosoeterce of Eandloser, and furthersoro, because no evidence of a


108 U


r


» CBrown)

«uu* rcpo„„ Mmy of ^

•xperlaonte or hi* .

Participation In than cbM-gad.

* - — - — -U_. authority to

rrC’ “ ^ - - — ordinance. *

, ™ ' 10 t ~ - - - - -

- - not, . .ho. that J 7,0^7

•djuetnont of ptr.on.ial and nntorlal affair, . uhln

t.c broncho of the Xr-.A t—

th. do ’ " " !d “” e,,! ”* “■ f'r.t oontoneo of

tno docrou 0 f 194 ? y,,v ( . .. ox

° f *“• ■»-« »f MU.. Professor

oondlour v» 3 <±M T rmA „«,v ... . 0Bor

<•« .1th th. conhlnatlon, or a. „

the coordination of -11 aM . „ oh , , V

„ , . Pr ° bl — ,n U "> «»ld « th. W Porco.

«cdlc#.l Gcrrlco.


100.5


15 July 47-A-S*-U-W *« ooa rd ( B rovn )
Court 1


The task of coordination given to Professor Hand loser did not mean
that all problara of the rrdical service, which were of the same nature,
or capable of being consolidated, automatically cane under the juris¬
diction of the Chief of the Medical Service. It was rether his duty
to <3taaine which part of the icnrnse Medical Service was suitable
for coordination. Whenever Handloser thought that a certain department
was suitable for coordination, he tried to reach an agreement with tho
Medical Chiefs of tho branches of the Arwd Porc'is; for, since he had
no powers of commend, tho coordination could only take place in con¬
duction with tho kadical Chi- fa. After the coordination had boon
accomplished, he was empowered to issuo directives in this field t*iich
did not hsvo the charector of an order.

It has become, cl-ar, furthnnaoro, that neither by ronaon of tho

docrer of 1942, which was conpotent for tho period from 1 August 1942

•

to 31 August 1944, nor by reason of the decree of 1944 and tho
Service Regulation, handloser was tho Chiof of tho Ifedical Scrvico
of the ‘ r chroacht branches or the Taff«n-SS, and that therefore ho had
no Jurisdiction or supervisory authority in thooe orgmlr-etions. Tho
test loony of Handloser, Gemkon, Gebhardt, Canoralarzt Dr. ‘toorfler and
the official ronark in the 1944 Servico Regulation havo shown quito
unoauivocally, regarding tho relation of tho Chief of tho Undicol
Services of the Tahrnacht and the Ifedical Sorvicos of tho t fl ffon-S^,
that relations between the ••ehraacht Hodical Service agencies and tho
nffon-SS was confined in tiao and substance to the necessary tactical
subordination for supclying medical service for the taffen-SS divisions
during front lino comitaent. The testimony .further shows that
Professor Handloser had no influence on tho nMical system of the
Tr.ffun-SS, that is, on affairs end scopes of activity of tho Medical
and Sanitation $~rrlce of the *%ffen-53.

Tho research of the Luftwaffe, according to testimony of professor
Schroeder and Dr. Seeker-Preyseng, was not under the jurisdiction, nor
under the supervisory authority of Handloser as Chi* f of Uodical


10846


15 July 47-A-3*-L.-2-Laonard(3rcwn)
Court 1


So trices.

I cone now to the conclusion:

The prosecution defined the National S 5 ciilist ideology as the
source of disregard for human life end thereby of the illogal experiments.
This is one of the ir>ond'rable arguments for the greater readiness to
adopt an attitude which deviates from the general ethical standard.

The prosecution did not submit any special stalescnts on this point,
but merely expressed in a geivral wey that the C* rain nodical profession
os a wholm was "infected by the paralyzing poison of Nasi superstition."

Profossor H-ndloser has stated his attitude toward National
Socialism on the witness stand. Jhiaerous affidavits have testified that
h« consistently took the course of an upright man and that ho opposed
Pnrty influences whenever th«$* wore contradiction to his ethical views.

If you read the opening statctaen. 3 of p rofossor Handlooor in

the printed records of the mootings - pleaso do this — you will

ncoulre a picture of his character as doctor and soldier. They are
the conJession of a man, 10 had devoted the iiol« of his life to a
profession, tho «*>ole purpose red end of *ich is to help mifforing

humanity in its darkest hours, ''hen war comes, with all its horrors,

•

Nounds and pestilences, when non are callod up to kill and dostroy,
it is the doctors who, in the »Ji»e of soldiers, stake their all, under
the ensign of the Red Cross, to heal or it least nlleviato the jxdns
arxl disensos of war. “tvilc tho brutal business of war weakens tho
ethical laws, tho highest nchiev»cont of culture end the soldier on tho
field loses his revoret.ee for human life, tbe medical officer’s task
is increased far beyond the level of peacetime ethics. In tho ethical
chaos of war he is the syrbol of huarn and brotherly love, for he i3
celled upon to help friend nd foe alike.

That the Gere^n doctors of the fehraacht in to to fulfilled this high
task is proved convincingly among otter things by the fact that no
complaints were aa.de about -hat they did, either on tho battle front.


108.7


15 July Z.7-A-S^-li.-3-Looa-rd (grown)
Court 1


on the home 'root, in the occupied tnrritori.* s, in military hospitals,
or in prisoner of wa r cneps. This ethical attitude r.s confirmed alse
by the affidavits of the Swiss doctors Dr. von Erlzch, and Dr. Bruenner,
Professor Handloser will not claim as his merit; for the mass of German
doctors, ~ost of whoa cone froa civil life, brought with thea the ethics
of their profession.

V

But I , as his defense counsel, nay point out that only r strong
character, rooted firmly in the ethics of his profession rnd of humility,
could .T/intain the spirit of the whole medical officer corps on such
a high moral plane during such r war.

You have the opinion of his military superiors and the testimonials
of the leading general physicians under him, the unsolicited affidavits
of the Generalserzte in the Gamisch Pff camp, and of the Genernlaerate
in Munster Gamp The ccnplenantary counterpiece to tills is the testi-
mony given him by the leading general phyaicians under him. The picture
'Which emerges is that of a truthful and sincere doctor and soldier,
irreproachable aa a mperior, upright end honest ss a subordinate. This
picture is completed by the numerous other largoly spontaneously sent
affidavits concerning the nrture of the nan Handloser. I think the plain
examples of Dr. Drexler in his affidavit prove more adeouately than any
words that Handloser acted up fully to the principle of humanity, and
that a person showing these characteristics cannot possibly have had
any connection with and cannot possibly have approved of experiments
which violate the principles of medical ethics. Professor Handloser,

p

however , denied all knowledge of such connections too, and 1 think I .
have proved that this attitude is credibly and why. The testimonies
of the two Chiefs of Staff, the Generalaerctc ^r. iirl‘1 and Dr. ^>chmidt-
Bruecken, given under oath, appear to ae convincing for the professional
side of the problem. !!oreover, tin the last instance it is a uestion of
Professor Handloser's credibility, which may be deduced from an estima¬
tion of his whole personality.


108.8


15 July 47-A-51-14-4-Leonard(Brcmn)

Court 1

There you have a clear picture of the oan before you. At the
interrogations which preceded this trial and in the witness box he has
represented his activity as A ray Medical Inspector and Chief of the
tehrmcht Medical Service with ci«plete frankness. His statements have
not been quashed by the evidence produced by the prosecution but
coincide in every point with the evidence produced by the defense.

I think I may say that the credibility of Professor Handloser is
beyond all doubt. If he ever pursued a wrong road in his lifo — and
who among us has not em'd at some tine — he did not hesitate, as an
horvst nan, to perceive and confess the error of his ways. He would not
have behaved otherwise in this trial either, if he were conscious of
guilt.

In the consciousness of having dene his duty as "ray Medical
Inspector and as Chief of the Hehraacht Medical Service, to his
nation, to the wounded ar*l sick soldi-irs of all nations, to the prison¬
ers of t»ar, and to the populations of tho occupied territories to tho
boat of his ability, in the fira confidence that this High Tribunal
will apply tho principles of Justico that are conAictivo to inter-
notional conciliation, ho awaits your docleion with the coin which
can only co ae free a clear oonscionco.

THE PRESIDENT: I would inquire of tho Secretary if the translation
of the argment of counsel for defendant Rostock has been received in
tho court room and delivered to the interpreters?

Counsel, I aa inforwd that the translation of your argument as
counsel for defendant Rostock has not yet been received.

DR. PRJBI1LA (bofonso Counsel for defendant Rostock): M r . Proaident,
ay closing brief has not yet been translated by the Translation Branch,
hut, through the kindness of the courtintarproters, the short excerpt
fron it that I intend to read here has been translated and the inter¬
preters have one copy of that translation.

THE PRESIEEfT: Do I understand frc*» the interpreters that the
translation of the argument which counsel for defendant Rostock will


10849


15 Juljr 47-A-o%U-5-Leonart(6ro*n)
Court 1


sake is available to then?

INTERPRETER: That ia correct, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDED: The Tribunal *11 now (Mr fren counael for the
defendant Rostock*

DR. PRIBILU: Hr. Preaident, Tour Honor.:

The great Englieh hiatorian end eoctologiet Thoaaa Carlyle once
e*d, Tour life, end -ere you the huefclaat of human being,, ia not a
.Ud drean but a lofty fact." I do «* want to apea* to you in thi.
court rood without flrat recalling thi. .eying and th.mby eaoing before
ny .yea th. picture of the great number of our fellow hum*, being.

life ha. really becone a wild dreu.The fact, on which thi.
trial 1 . baaed, that def.nael.aa huran being, were uaed by doctor,
or ay country for experle, and in part died after .offering torture.,
cannot be denied.! nyealf .mid doubt the clarity of ay judgnent ..

. Demon Juriat if I did not cm, to the recitation that general
huoan right, auch a. the fundamental .t,«.«a anchored in , U clviUMd
nation, have be. violated thereby, kedlc.l acl.nc. ahould bring help
end healing to .offering huwanity. I an proud to eteto that it ear,

' , ° Ct0r ” ° ln th " Urt ccnlorr, caved r.ilUon, of human
being, fmn th. .oat aerioua and f.ui dla.aae, by their reaoamh. let

“ ^ J,0U ° nly 0f “« *■>•«• Koch, brail von During, Paul

Hirllch, Thaodor Billroth, and iuguet Bl.r, or aricine, auch a. Gemanin,
uabrina, W, 1M a, diphteria a.nac, tetanu, ..nun, and cony other.. If
U "ere po.aibl. to achieve such daciaiv. reaulta in any other way, thi.
could only confim th. actual truth, that no one, no rafter ho. highly
placed and no -tier ho. important hie ala,, ha, th. right to lower
ether human being, to th. level of guinea pig.'by f orc .. Ho> wul g .

can venture to diefoa. in that way 0 f the life and health of hi, follow

b ° th65 ' e,cr “ “«■ * "ere to =, that thi. involve, a funda-
--ntal contradiction to th. duty of the doctor, . violation of the


*i?nity of the individual, tmd a


10850


SJS"?


proaivptlon .hid, «,t ramin -ithoot horrible remit,. Th, r .

dOUbtfU1 M “- * h "”  "• bordorlina «*.; but

^ioo of th... qMrtlon . 0M „ toM4 on My mo prUioip!o>

-M 0 h i. that Oil creator.. in hamn ram hor. an equal ri e ht to
llfo and health. TM. 1 aan.ld.r th. d.al.ir. pamt. and 1 .«. daapl,
c;started to loam in th. ccu„. of thi. trial that other ooan-
tri... too. paint. or no. ha., ob.iou.i, arlwn amn S th. mdi.a, pro _
roooioo in th. loot row d.oedos .hid, ...n to ha orro.ono.lablo «th th.
pi*inoi p lo Jut -tr.tad. ir thi. i. ao. than na divination ».t b. mda
" to .hathar aondltion. in daman, or in th. PhUi^ino, or

“ “*"• “ “» b “ 'h. a... or no. nodloinos to

«a.t than an aiah pamon. in th. hop. .r haalln* than, hot na an. am
paraundo - that it aan b. par..,hi. to UT.at hu„ bai„ 8 . „

— — Wlth d “'” ro “* aaona.l , 05n tnto „„

Other .tend, m auah aa.a, th. root, m.t bo inw.ti^tad and th.
libit, ar in. and ri e ht nu.t b. md. al« r to the.. Vo .lolato than.
3h0Uld ° t ’“ ,r ' ,U ' :h ‘ nT ° rtl ^tlon dl.alo,, that ant al.ar

lapi.lr.tlon baar. part of th. ro.pon.ibuit,, .hould it ba di.aomrad
th« the 8 onarol .ttitud. of ntdia.1 ra.onrah TOrkor . „„„ ^

part, or th. -arid ha. baa.no . 1 , too brand on thi. paint. th .„ th0 ,„

fCOt * ’ OUld h " , ° t0 teT0 ■“ ■“» '» io*«mnr, tha runt .r .rr.„„.

.hlah haw bam aamittad. P. r rutura an..., ha.a.ar. it von. to na
that 0lQ * , lty la urgontly noodod.

It «<=. or th. .ur-'orlnr and th. .loti,, .ith .hiah .a ham boo.no
•-adualntod in tha aaurm .r nil th.v trial,. j„.t,aa ol , h t

ham bam Jh. orpra-lon .r indicant harm rcalln*. I„ tha r ana ml
taral and notarial ahno. of th. j»*tvr pariad. .ho .onld horn ..hod
•bather an. Ur. nor. or 1... had baan ortinsul.hadT hut that »„„,d
o=ly haw l.nrthanod th. ahnin o f inJuVia. md ard. M . th.

proa... ar mral oonml..w„ M .hiah w hap. Tor. You, Too, Honor.,
h'.vo .ith rare poi,a and p-ti.na. inrortijatad both th. rant, .hiah

fom tha ba.l. of th. mdiatnant and th. aonpliaatod quaatian of .hat

10351


15 July i7-A-HSC- 1 52-fcclcy“IatHildcsiscr
Court I

direct or indirect responsibility these defendant* have for the
criminal experiments. You have iscersed yourselves in the expromely
complicated network of competency of a totalitarian state at war, with
its big struggles for power and ita antagonisms. The only purpose
of this effort can be that the Judgment which you pas may be as just as
possible. If the expert Professor Leibbrandt was right with his assertion
that the medical profession in all oountries in the world has rolaxcd
its vigilanoe against abuses during the past deoades, then this oan be
changed only by a judgment which really corresponds to the highest
demaais of our profession, whioh weighs everything and oleanly separates
the guilty from the innocent.

Only with such a Judgnen. will it be possible to help humanity to
progress a bit after auoh terrible reverses. Only then can this judg¬
ment beoome a law and a guide for future generations of doctors through¬
out the world, Kover before has there beon such a trial, in whioh
leading doctors of a gread oountry were undor auoh sorious indiotment,
and so a juat judgment of the High Tribunel will oatablieh the limits
and bordora of nodorn medical soienoe. Perhaps in the near future
doctor* throughout tha world will mention it in the sane breath with
the oath of oippooratos, whioh haa boon oontionod so often hore.

If we now, with the knowledge we have gainod from the proaontation
of ovidenoo, turn to the particular caso of tho defendant whom I repre¬
sent, Professor Paul Uoatook, 1 believe that tho extreme thoroughness
of the trial haa in this oaso brought olnrity which will pormit you.

Tour Honor*, to roaoh an absolutely clonr verdict. 1 bolieve that a
picture of this excellent son and doctor has been impressed upon you by
his porsonal examination and by the testimony of tho witnesses. First
I shall bring out the facts whioh oven the Prosecution doos not deny,
nho is Professor Paul Rostock? nos he a dootor in tho SS or even a
somber of this organisation? It has beon provod that he was not.

Lid ho carry out experiments on husmn beings in concentration camps?
so novcr cvon set foot in a concentration camp. Lid Rostook himself
porfora experiments on involuntary experimental subjects? Ho ono


10852


ordored or


16 July U~ -A-K3C-1 oy-Int.,di1dc sira r

Court 1


allogo* t’nat ho did. Ar a there docunents whioh show that ho
oYon suggested such an experiment? After tho end of the presentation of

evidence, we see that thero is no suoh doouant. koreover, the Prosoou-

% •

tion has not subaitted any doouaoct address-d to Rostock or signed by
hia whioh eight Indicate any otbor participation in such an evporiraent
or oven his knowledge thereof? Mow, what did Rostock actually do during
tho war. no wu« the busy head of the big Surgioal University Clinio in
Berlin and also the doan of the nodical faoulty of tho Univorsity of Ber¬
lin. Zvoryono agrees that he was an outstanding doctor and scientist.
This is attostod by his nuaoroua soientifio toxtbooks and othor publica¬
tions and the honors whioh ho obtained for his ability, without any
influonco of politios or wnr. Tho pioturo whieh his associatos havo
drawn froo their oloso aoqualntanoe with hia and whioh represents him as
a tiroloss hoiper of his patients, as adoetdr who did not lonvo the
elinic day or night during tho worst air raids, so that ho oould help his
patients and tho newly adnittod riot ins of tho raids - this pioturo
remains unoontradictod. How did this nan cooe to bo in tho dook, and
what remained of tho Frosooution's supposod reasons for suspicion
after tho presentation of ovidonoo? To sun up, thoro oro throo
wldor fields within which the Prosooution wants to oonnoct the Lofondant
Rostock with tho criminal oxpvrimsrts. First, during tho war Rostook
was a nodical officor in tho Gorman- arsgr rosorvo and hold tho position
of on advisor in tho surgical fiold to tho Inepoctor of tho Arny
Mudiool Sorvico. In this capaoity Rostook hoard tho lcoturo of tho oo-
defondant Gobhordt at a mooting of Consulting Phyaioians in 1S^J, togothor
with over 100 othor doctors. Ho heard a report nboi't axpori-ents which
had long boon coaploted, and, togothor with ovor 100 othor prominont
porticipants, ho hoard froa tho south of such a highplncod non aa"

Prof. Gobhardt that tho logal aspect had previously boon thoroughly
olarified and did not havo to bo dlsousedd. Rostook had no auspioion,
any -core than the othor doctors present that thoro was any quo at ion of
criminal actions.


10853


15 July u7-A-^-15-4-ijvloy-Xnt., Hilda so i=*r
Court I

la a lator part of thia statoaont, when doaling with tho ovidonoo,

I.shall oxplain oxactly that nothing haa boon shown to provo a partici¬
pation of Roatook in Gebhardt's experiments. It will bo shown that ho
hod no logal obligation to intcrvono, ainco hia military and nodical
superiors wur«- personally prosent at the sano looturo,

Roatook oontinuod to work as ohiof of hia clinio, and it must
oo or^hasitod thet thia wrk bocamo day by day acre, difficult, as tho

air raids on Borlin incrcesod In I 9 U 5 -J 4 . Than, at tho ond of 193,

• *

at tho roquost of Karl Brandt, ho sttospts to establish a t*portn»nt for

*

Soionco and Roaoaroh for tho offioo of tho Coceilaslonor Conorol for Mcd-
ioino ond Health. Thia opens tho aooond fiold of indiotraont. At that
tino, it ia true, tho experiments undor discussion horo had for tho
moat pert alroady boon ortcr^d, bogun, and curriod out undor vorloua
outhoritioa. Tho Prosooution thinks, howevor, that tho nowly orootod
offioo of Roatook now must hero obtainod knowlodgo of ell thoso exper¬
iments, which woro soorot and whioh woro onrofully conoonlod from tho
public, hhot Rostook'a notivos woro for tho creation of tho Eopartmont
for Scionoo t\rA Roaoaroh, ho himsolf has oonrinoingly oxplninod in his
uxotaetion. This unoontradiotod tostiaony of hia ia of spooial import-
anoo in judging whothor in view of tho aims whioh ho hnd chosen for his
offioo, it had at all boon posaiblo for him to lonrn dotoils of tho
rosooroh thon going on. Thia was not within tho sphoro of dutios of his
offioo, nor was it posaiblo from tho point of view of porsonnol or tioo.
Of speoicl importonoo horo oro his stetononts obout tho background of
tho Lopartnont for Soionoo and Roaoaroh. *ho occasion for its establish¬
ment was dofonao egoinat cttecka on Goremny'a soiontifio rosooroh

and dootrino by narrow-minded politicians. Tho resulting tosko
*

woro primarily in tho direction of orintaining nnd expanding tho f-oil-
itios for rcsoc.rch r.nd toaching, without intorforing in thoir dotails.
Rostock's offioo bogon its practical activity only in Fobruary I 9 W*.

Ayer*. knows oonditiona in Scrawny at th t tine orn confirm, whr.t
tho ovidonco hrs ol^orly showni that tho attest to ooordinnte and


10854


13 July 1*7 -A-StSD-15-5-Kaloy- Int .,dildcspi=or
Court So. 1


regulate joioneo end rosonrch which was undertaken in tho lost ohnotio

yoor of war boggod down shortly after it began.

Tho third field which tho Prosecution has brought up also docls with

a secondary offioe whioh Rostock undertook in this last war year, I9UU.

Karl 9rcndt for welly appointed Rostook his deputy in tho Fraesidialmt

lgoverning oounoil) of tho Reioh Research Council. Tho picturo given

by the evidonoo mist ege-in bo ox-mined to dotoreino whothor Rostook,

frpn this subsidiary offioe, geinod knowledgo of .criminal oxpor inunta

and thus at least beoaao an aoconplioo of soao experiments to bo Judred

hero. No doouaent or witness wn* presented to prove that Rostook took

any diroct part in experiments through tho offioe of tho Roioh Re-

searoh Counoil, any soro than in tho other fields of lndlotaont.

• •
The Proseoution connects Rostock with tho othor dofondnnts

quite gonorally booauso of his position on tho Gorman health sorvico.

Horn again, in tho light of the ovldenoo, wo oust examine whothor

thoro actually was any suoh connootion.

I. Tho individual oxporimonts with whioh Rostook is oonnootod

by the Frosooution.

1. Helaria Sxporinonts.

1 shall rofor to thorn in tho olosing briof.

2 . Lost Exporinonts (psgo 10 of.tho original

At the beginning Rudolf Brar.dt had stotod in his affidavit (Ho 372)
that Rostook had had knowledgo of those oxporimonta. This statoraont ho
retreated in his affidavit Rxh. Rostock Nr. 8, as well as in his nua-
erous answers during his oross-exasiination. The resoaroh assignments
to Frof. Hirt originate with the Reich Research Counoil. It should be
noted that they wore issued before October I9U3, at a time, therefore
when Rostook hod not yet been appointed deputy for the members of the
Fraesidialret (governing oounoil) of the Reioh Resoaroh Counoil Karl
Trarvtt.


10855


Ij July fc7-..—:S!>-15-6-"aloy-IntA,'-iildcseiis;r

Ko« I


(pa.-o 11 of the original

on far Rostock's kncwlede - asod on the assi.rraont ro : \istor of which he
wr3 in char o - of Ilirt'a roarch assi.raent went has boon clarified
in 'atoll} nrunoly, merely the f,-ct th_t Kirt w,s working on the
Lost problem but not the wa^ in which ho did it, Durlry; the cross-
oxcrdmtion by ICr. ’cKaney document No 692, Pros. Zxh. U57 w r s shewn
to Rostcck. It contains a listj cos^iled by Rostock's staff on U*

Sov>t 19Ui, in wiich of 650 itons U$ rosocrch ^ssimeonts cro .narked as
ror-ardod ossontiol for tho war effort under tho then prevailing war
conditions. This bocm-ant also contains, anon* tho -ssif-monts ; oing
to StrciasNirg, tho rssi nuent to Ha. on, Aickonbach and Kirt. Hoforo
as ’foil as ftor sub mission of this \tocunont Rostock teotifiod to tho
so.* o'foct naaoly, th. t ho h d recoivod knowlodm of thoso assi monts
according to tho list but that ho did not know that they wero in
i\ny way oonnocted with havm oxporinonts. This was also proved by
tho statement by Karlstotter cs woll as through tho affidavit a by
Ho.cruinn and Zottol,

(pa; o 12 of tho original)

Thrt Rostock neither know nor had to know the dotails rf thoso
or.’orlnents Nscaaoa equally ovi-^ont fno tho fact thet tho wholo Hold
of cotibattin" Che. deal 'arfaro Agents was not within tho spharo of ncU
ivitios of the Offlco for Scienco and Research of which Rostock wrs tho
chiof but caao undor the direct coapetonco of tho General Conrdssarat
hLusolf. This tras dearly stated Airirv; tho oxanination of Karl Drandt,
when Rrandt at'ted th. t his collaborators in file -particular fiold
waro officials of tbo Spoor !^inistry, the ..rauvent Testing Office

('faffonpruorun 3ant), and those .ontloaon responsible for air raid

• • •

procautions, and that Rostock and his office were n^t inforaod about
thoso mtters. This *ms furthoraoro proved by t ho ffi b’-vit by
’iiolens, also by testimonies of the witnessos Christenson and
Karlstott:r whe statad that there was no corrosaondenco about matters


.


10856


15 July lx7-..-&6D-15-7-Cialoy (Int4,3ildeseiaer)

Court Soi I


of Chad.cal vcrfare Lr ents. This ms explicity cortifiotl by

Dr. CI iris tons en whan - iurii*; the cross-axnni nation by : ; x. Hardy -
'1o vs asked about a possible correspondence with Prof. Kirt.

This is also valid as retards to the docuncnts NO 1852 which
were shewn to Ho stock (taring tho cross-oxajination by : r. iicHanay.
Here it is a matter of roports .-bout Phos one oxperinonts which
aro a:’.Crossed to Karl n rnadt. Thoso reports are not addressod to
Rostock as ho stated in ids testimony durin; tho -crose-oxanination.


ioroly the fact that Rostock's offico i=a situatod next door to that
of Drandt does not prove - as tho prosecution implies - that ho should ,


havo road all lettors addressed to


ven if ho vas not coi>-


potont in tho subject tho letters doalt with. Every impartial Judpe


oust ads it that this conclusion soens a littlo far fotchod*


10857


15 July L7-..-!ED-l6-l-: cchan (Int.,HildesoiaQr)
Court I


..s, in spite of this the prosecution, during the corss-oxcnination,
hcvo suboitted the so J .ccunents -bout questions of C herded arfaro
•Vents to the defendants Rostock, it has to be stated that simply
none of those documents contains an ever so tiny allusion to Ros¬
tock and his Office for Science and Research. None of tho ebemonts
could chance the iuprossion, which Rostock made and which is. that ho
testified honestly and correctly before the Tribunal.

I shall couo bock to tho Lost oxperinonts in ^ closing brief.

Fron th.so statawnts it bocoucs ovident that Rostock had nothinc
to do >rith tho Lost oxperlRonts on hunan beings, under discussion, and
th-t he did not ovon know anything about then.

3. Sulfonadd :bc ; .ri-onts

Tho prosecution did not contond th t Rostock collaborated in
thoso oxperlnonts. On tho othor hand, !'r. "cHanoy said on 21

e •

jruary, 1?!;/, th t ho, Rostock, "krvjw, or was supposod to I mow about
th<r..» if by this is rv;ant th t Rostock «rs infomod about thoso
oxpcriconts to ofch.r with noro than 100 other prominent doc.tors, in-,
eludinc his then military and nodical chiefs, through a locturo by
Gebhrrdt and Fischer, at tho third concross of consulting phusicians
frou 2U to 26 ICay 19U3, which has boon 4*alt with in dotril horo, then
Mils raist bo aduittod. Dut no punishablo act can bo soon in this alone.

If, on tho othor hand, the rosccution bolicros th t Rostock
Jcnow .-bout this locturo and the experiments carried out by Gnawitz or
obhardt which woro tho basos of his locturo beforehand, they aro : 1 s-
Wkon. Tho error is basod on a stataent by Gobhirit who Airing a
"re trial-examination said that tho locturo including reference nat-
orial had boon submitted to the helical authority who was in char o cf
preparetions for the con-ress. Oobtardt had then assured th-t this

as Restock, as he was tfte chairman of tho special professional section
sur ory.

Hut evidence has proved that it was an executive staff consistinc


10856


15 July ;.-*SD-l6-2-<"echan (Int.,HLldoseinar)

Csrt Ho. I

of aodlcal officer* of the Ajjgr ’todical Inspectorate headed by the

Chiof Medical Officer (Ooneralarit Schreiber) who w-s in charge of

thoao preparetiona. Rostock was not a softer of this couaittoo. Thoro-

fore ti»e previous information wont to Schroibor and not to Rostock

as was certified by OobharJ in his oxaadnation. It is thereforo proved

tlv.t Rostock found cut about those oxparlnonts for tho first ting

on 21* :(aqr 19U3 through this locturo of Oobhcrdt and Fischerj tho

*

oxporinonts had boon concluded whan tho lccutro was etolivored, other¬
wise tho rosult could not h-vo boon re .ortod about.

Thrcwsh tostinonios by Rostock, ffcndlosor, Go hardt and Fischor
it h'sboon unanimously d-rifiod that Oobhardt as an introduction to
:'ischor«s locturo said that those o .pcrLwnts had boon carriod out
on parsons who hrd boon sontoncod to death according to orders and who
then had been pardoned.

Thoro was no reason, noithor for Rostock nor for too rest of tho
audionco to doubt tho truth of thoso intro&ictory statoiwnts, Also,
it wrs not within his coapotcnco to invo-tipito do tail! as to nation-
ality, sox or leal roason and Justification of scntonco. It could
.o as maw d thrt tho persons sontoncc ’ to doath had voluntarily applied
to bo usod for oxporinonts in or tor to ovado death purd3ta.nt, as has
boon stated by Rostock wbon ho was asked about his inprossions of
Qobhardt 1 s introductory renarks. ;ai tostinonios hero prove unanimously
that no infornation hrd over boon received to tho affoct that Polish
vosnon had been tho oxporinontal subjects.

-.vidonco has .roved that "r. ! c Hanoy*s statements during tho pros-
ocuti.in*s case to tho offect ttat tho participants -f the ccnross
had"not only rocoivod infornation as to wh't was happenin ' 1 but
that thoy "had bnowlod o of what went on in the concontrrtion canps"
and thrt they knv.w tho raports over, boforo tho tiieo thoy wore road are
incorrect. Listonine to a loctur- is by no means identical idth tho
participation in csqyorir^jnts which aro tho subject of tho locturo.


10859


1^ July Iocb2zy«Int # .SelA>shoincr

Court Ho* I

•

Thor- "wld also have to bo soco act of participation. This could por-
hpaa consist of atission, if tho listeners hod a le : al duty to act.

Disro- arding tho fact that Rostock hrd no reason to doubt tho accuracy
of Oobhnrdt'a statements, whet could Rostock tevo done at tho nscaont
of Gobh-'rdt»s looturc by way of protest against tho exporirao ts,
which wore already completed? -Hjs iasodinte and suprono military
-nd nodical superiors wor- personally present =t the lecture, and
for that reason no xv.orts to thorn w.ro nocossary.

The Prosecution itself, through >r. Hardy, on 3 April 1&7
acknawlodgod that it res nocossary for experiments ctarhoaon beings
to bo carried out. They acid that in themselves they woro not criminal. ‘
Tho indietront h-.d ' oonaorvod not bocauso of tho human oxporiraonts
tlv.uselToa, but because of tho crrxinal rannor of execution of tho
experiments.

Tho necessary conclusion fron this is th t tho knowledge of oxpor-
iMonts on human beings alono is not punishablo. A* far as tho Sulfon¬
amide oxporiaonts arc concerned, Rostock aor-ly learned a little about
the oxporinonts that had boon finished. He did not learn, however,
that they had ’ oon carried out in a criidnal manor, for example on
non-volunteors. ?or ho had to assuu that tho persons condonno.t to
doath had voluntarily accepted tho chance for pardon, which w.-s of-
forod thorn. Tho Prosocution export, Professor Ivy, oxprossly stated
t!v t ono can hold tho view th't parsons condonod to death can
volunteor for medical experiments. In their final ploa on lh July, tho
prosecution stated through ‘V. :fcHanqy, th t tho Views' of Hr. Ivy wore
not only tho views of an individual, but tho views of tho Unitod
Jtatcs * Thu * th °ro 10 ahargb against Rostock, according to tho
ovidonoo, in tho sulfonarddo natter. Individual Stalls will c«ao
up in ry closing briofs.

5. Sxporiaents for oaking soa-«ater drirttablo.

TIkso oxperiimxits wore carried cut at a tine when Rostock was
tho Chiof of tto Cffico for Sdonco and Roscarch ^ith the C-enoral


10860


15 July -k- eehan (Int.,3eldfi ns heiaer)

Court I

•

Cosrtissioner for nodical and Health. :.s shown on the Chart *to....
.rosecution airht have seen an incrimination of Rostock in the fact
that Sc brooder stated in hi* Affidavit ]J0 uh9 that Rostock had

knowledre about research b eing carried out by the Luftwaffe. The

* •

evidence has proved, however, that Rostock or his office did not
participate in the preliminary conferences to these experiments,
because the list of participants and the minutes of these confereaces
were presented as document No 177. Schroeder in his affidavit, Rxh
Rostock 10, affirmed that Rostock in no way instigated or ordered
those seawater experiments.

The research assigraents distributed by the Hedical Chief of tho
Luft affo in I9ldi were reported to Rostock*s office, and it might bo
concluded from this fact that Rostock therefore got knowledge of the
experiments.

BeokwProysong in hio cross-examination through !’r. Hardy had
Sttrtod that the ’ edical Inspector of the Luftwaffe certainly did not
send cny report on the seawater experiments to Rostock and that he was

quite sure thet Rostock had not been present at the final conference

•

In the anti aircraft shelter in the Berlin Zoo, when ^ei-lboeck
ado his report on tho devolopoent and the result of the experiments.
Again I would like to draw the attention of the Tribunal to this in
closing brief.

All this evidence proves beyond any doubt that Rostock neither si g
gested nor ordered the seawater experiments, .that he did not actively
participate in them nor gave any advice and that he did not oven know
anything about thee.

6. F.xperinents on epidemic Jaundice.

A similar-request for the eevtion of such experiments was put
of ore the Tribunal In the form of a lot. or by Crawltz of 1 Juno 19h3.
’•* fch:t 39 Rostock's offi e Tor J w ience and Research with the General
>:ni3sion3r for r-dic-il and Health Service did not yet exist. Rostock
•'inself stated th t he did not ^et any knowledge of that letter at that


10861


cfujt J » i 7 r’ !6:> ' 16 ’' (Int * HeldMh «l°or)


tins.

Th, Reich Research Coumcll In 19U3 gave a research assignment on
hcepaatis to Prof, Hagen* At that tine Rostock did not yet belong to
the Reich -(.search Council a, a dopaty of n nenber of the Praesidi.lrat
(Governing Council) .

ni. Prosooutlon probably bases the chu-g.a against Rostock on
-Mdolf Prandt's etfidavlt Bo. 371. This statist is contradicted
by the sane Rudolf Prandt, she in his affidavit, Rostock inhibit 7
decUres that ho hd no positive evidence for Rostock's knowledge of
the experiments. In the ro-diroct oxanination through to. Vorwork,
Rudolf Rrandt expressly withdrew his original affidavit made fob tho
Prosecution. I don't consider it necessary to deal in particular with
tho orobetive value of Rudolf toindt'e incrir.ieating evidence. Again
I draw th. attention to tho Tribunal to the remarks in th. dosing
brief.

Consequently, neither in field of so. water experiments did Rostock
have any knowledno of th. allegedly carried out htuwrn experiments and
evon loss did ho instigate, order or participate in thfxa.

7. Typhus "xperinonts.

Tho ovidonco has prorod that an institute for tho production of
typhus vaccinos existed in the Buchormald concentration canp under
./b, Ding and that typhus oxporlaonts koto supposedly carried out
-y Or. Ding in tho ‘Aichemrald concontr. tlon canp tnd by Pr©r. Haaron
in tho IZatzweilor cor.centraticaop. I will deal with each of those

throo points soparately as to whothcor Rostock had any connections with
then.

According to Hrugowsky«s evidence tho institute for production of
typhus vaccims at -uchonwald produced those vaccines for the ^affen
SS and the concentration carcpe. The office of Brandt and Rostock had
nothing to do with tho nodical affairs of the SS.

Mrugowsky has described qcw tho typhus experiments in ?uchenwald
cano about. They xcre ordered directly by riisnler through Graritz.


10862


15 JUly U7-A-?5D-J.6-6-:'cehan flat. Jfcidasheimar)

Court So. I

Rostock had in no way any thine, ‘o do 1th them, neither as an advisor
nor as a participant. ./ the already mentioned third ’looting of tho
Consulting Physicians on 2U - 26 -'ay 19U3 in the Jfreiono Group Dr.

Ding made a report on the results of tho experiments. Rostock did
not attend this conforonce, since ho had to attend conferences on
sur'ical matters that took place at the sano time.

I now come to tho typhus oxporiaor.ts of Haagon in Natzweiler. The
Prosecution prob.-bly basos its charges as to Rostock's participation
in thoso experiments mainly on tho Affidavit of Haagon's secretary,

>dss Eyor.

Tho Tribunal will recall th t tho witness, Syor, a prosecution

V

witnoss, during Ur. Harry's oxamination, rotractod hor statosont and

• •
said that she aado a nistako and thought another Professor from Rorlin,

with tho naao of Zloss, to bo Frofossor Rostock.

Tho typhus rosoarch a ssigrt-ut nhich Haagon recoivod from tho

Roich research council was ^ivon by Saujrbruch. It wrs givonot a

timo, namely in 19U3, whon Rostock did not oran belong to tho Roich

Rosoarch Counsol as o doputy of a *oab>r of tho Praosidialrat.

A report of Haagon to tho Reich rosoarch council was put in ovidunco

•

as document Ho. 138. Phon reading it. Hr. IncHanoy said th* tho
document ascorteinod tho fact that tho top rapresontativos of tho Ruich
rosoarch council had full knowlodgo of Haa:on's work and its criminal
rv-turo. ^ith rogard to "the criminal nature" at loost Hr. ’iacHanoy,
do facto, withdrew his assertion, when during tho cross-examination on
21 February, 19U7, ho said th t ho did not boliovo that Haagon ro ported
on his oxporimonts in tho concentration camp to the Roich rosoarch
council. Thor-foro, ono would not really have to discuss this point
of tho indictment cny longer. However, lostock himsolf stated th^t
it jay have been possible for hin to have read Haagon's report at that
*.iao in tho print.d reports of tho Roich research council. Ho said,
however, itet ho hod noticed nothing special, when reading it.


10863


Court I

15 Jul 47-X-l7-l-iat-Cook (Eildesheiner)

Rostock baa dealt with the natter and I with to call the attention
of the Tritmnal to the detail* within the closing brief. The ease ie
ralid for the paragraph biological Warfare and Polygol 8 .


Che creation and the activity of the Office for Medical Scionce and
Research with the Cccaisaioner General and later with tho Reich Cooais-
•loner for the helical and Health Syetes suet he discussed* more in detail.
First of all, the chart, Exhibit Rostock Ho. 1, Illustrates the fact that
Rostock precared hiaself for the position only froa autunn 1943 and vne
not actively engaged in his Job before the Biddle of Fobrui-ry 1944 and
then only as a secondary position besides his regular dutlee. Servico In
this position deaended only thirty percent of his working tino.

In the opening statenent, Ooneral Taylor said that the Reich Commis¬
sioner for the helical and Hoalth Syatee was to be regardod as Difi
highest Reich authority. The oechasls on this word is confusing and
contradicts the authentic docment HO-82, »*ich states, "In thlo capacity
his agency le highest Reich authority.* , In thla decroe, thon, tho word
"the" is misting. But this le soet oeeentlal. Tor the decree signifies
that it is one of aacy ^highest Reich authorities*, whereas tho typo of
expression chosen by General Taylor suet lead one to concludo that it was
the only "highest Reich authority* in the TepartBent of Hoalth. But, as
evidence has shown, this was not true.

Without a doubt, the croeocution has gained tho wrong lnprcseion
of the extent, actual activity, and influence which the Office for Sclenco
and Research had on other agencies. Rostock has dealt with this (mention
in detail during direct examination. The Tribunal will certainly still
have a recollection of hie stateaente. Rostock actually had r.o super¬
visory authority over research work of the branches of the Vchreacht and
the SS.

10864


Court I

15 Jul 47-A-l?-2-££K-Cook (Hildashelter)

Brandt's, and thus also Boa lock's, coemission eoxnrioed not aU
medical affairs, but only special tasks as. vas testified quite clearly
here ly the witness leasers. The assignment given to Rostock did not
include supervision of practical research.

She relationship of Rostock's agency to the SS bub t be discussed
briefly, for all experinents which clay a cart in these proceedings wore,
after all, carried out in concentration caaps which case under the Juris¬
diction of the SS. Rostock hinself vas never a aeaber of the SS. Ee
also had, apart froo that, no other relations of any kind with the SS.
When the agency of the Coealesioner General for the Medical and Health
Syetea was ordered. Hitler, in the oresence of Himmler, cade it oulte
clear to Karl Brandt that It his (lari Brandt'o) capacity of Coealesioner
General the SS was not his affair. The practical execution of this
directive has been expressly confiraed by Gonsken. Furthermore, tho
decree of 25 August 1944, which lists the agencies to which the Reich
Coeelssloner for the Medical and Health Systea could givo dlrectlvoo,
does afii section the SS.

Gobhardt has testified on 3 May that Grawlts was never subordinate
to Karl Brandt and that Brandt never even had the right to give
directives to Grawlts. Hs testified further that Himmlor wantod to
create a "Science exclusively for the SS" and that university oeoplo
had resisted that attempt. Eoev«r, Rostock oust quite definitely bo
considered an exponent of university scientists. The oroof for the
correctness of Himmler Intention with a "science exclusively for tho
3S" can be seen free a letter which SS Gruppenfuehrer Borger wrote to
the Roichsfuehrer SS on 22 September 1942.

This should furnish sufficient proof that RoBtock had no influence
on research activity within the SS or the concentration canos. It has
already been pointed out, when the individual experinents were discussed,
that he did not even have any knovledgo of them.

In regard to research commission assignments to the Medical Chiefs
cf the Luftwaffe, Schroeder had asserted that all research assignments


10865


Court I

15 Jul 47-1-17-3-iauCoci: (Eildesheiaerl


had to cose through Roetock's office. Scfcroeder has teetified in hi.
affidavit, Ixbiblt RO Ho. 10. that this va. an erroneous de.cription.

Tor it had only bean agreed that a carbon copy of the research coaais-
• ion vhich had been assigned wuld be .ant to Rostock. El. approve1 for
the assignment of the ccaai.eions wi by no scans required.

And now I vould like to turn to the cocplex of probloes connected
vlth the Reich Research Council. Here the prosecution has charged
Rostock vith responsibility because fro. the beginning of 1944 he was
Brandt's deputy in his capacity as a naaber of the Presiding Council of
this body. The fact itself shall not be denied, but the responsibility
shall, aalnly frc a view of penal lav as wall as of .orals. I deny tho
assertion of the prosecution, %fcich has been euanarlsed by Mr. McHanoy
on 10 Decenber 1946, that Rostock exercised a "supervisory control" ovor
tho Reich Research Council, or, on the occasion of submitting a letter
of Rasober about freetlng experiments that "the Roich Research Council
ns a whole is isrpllcated in a crlelnal Banner".

Tho problem of the Reich Research Council has certainly been thrown
light upon during the testimony of Karl Brandt, Rostock, Blooe, Siovors,
us weU ss by the affidavits of Kentxel, the chief of tho Managing Ccm-
aitteo of the Reich Research Council. As the crux in this connection
caerges tho fact that thoee responsible for the distribution of rosearch
ussigrBonts were, exclusively, the sanagers of the Special Sections and
thoir authorised agents and subordinates, who, in turn, were directly
subordinated to Heraann Ooaring. Rostock was not asong then. Tho
ncabers of the Presiding Board had no supervisory duty over and no right
to issue directives to the sanagers of the Special Sections.

Here again I Knild like to call the attention of the Tribunal to
the closing brief:

— Conspiracy:

Sven if the concept of "conspiracy* is rejected in principle, ve
=ust still discuss shortly here for the acts of vhich aen and agencies


10866


Court I

15 Jul 47-A~17~4-IEK-Ccok (Hildasheimer)


Rostock can be hold responsible, i.e. for those vhlch were subordinate
to hla and vhlch he supervised.

He had no subordinates In his oosltlon as Consultant Surgeon to
the Medical Inspector of the Army. He merely vas the "consultant" of
his Inspector and his staff. If this agency had ordered the commission
of cr la Inal deed* to vhlch Rostock in some fora had given his advice,
then one night, perhaps, construe an accessory guilt of Bostock. But
in none of the cases under discussion here the experiments vere ordored
by the Medical Inspector of the Army. In his position as Chief of the
Office Sclenco and Research vith the General Coeciesioner for the

•

Medical and Health Services Rostock had four nedical assistants and
throo or four typists as subordinates for vhose official activities he
bears responsibility. HOno of these persons in any vny, either
directly or. indirectly, participated in the experiments va discuss horo.
Hone of these experiments vas ordered by this agoncy or even suggested.
The peculiar manner of conducting those experiments vas unknown. It
vas knovn neither to Rostock nor to his assistants, as has been proven
by the conforming testimony of all his assistants.

Rostock had no official supervisory duty over and no right to
issue orders to the persons vho ordered and conducted the experiments.

The barriers vhlch vere constructed around the concentration cnxp vero
Just as impenetrable and Just as opaque for him and his assistants as
they vere for the great majority of the Gorman poople.

Also, nothing has been brought out by the submission of avidenco
which vould permit to conclude the existence of a common plan as asserted
by the prosecution, inasmuch as a definite, firmly outlined plan among
a narrov circle of persons which alvays remains the same is understood
by that expression. On the contrary, very freouently during the course
of the proceedings ve heard of the strong forces vithin the leading cir¬
cles of Germany vhlch strove to different goals, as testified by orosecu-*
tion vitnessec as veil as by the defense. With reference to the leaders
cf the i'.edical Services let me only point to the differences betveen Conti

10867


Court I

15 Jul 47-A-17-5-2EX-Cook (Elldeshelner)


and 31oae, to quota as instance. Chore Is no need to go into the
details of this. But considering this special case, let ce enuhaslze

the differences which hare repeatedly been discussed during the sub-

•

aisslon of evidence - I aeon those differences between Conti and Grawitz
on the one hand, and Karl Brandt on the other hand. These, of course,
had their effect on the oubordlm '.a agencies, too. I aleo nt to
point out the opposition of the SS to Karl Brandt's agency.


I do not Intend to repeat the actual text. I only wont to make a
reaark to the Individual paragraph. Article II, 2a. I Bay add tho
following details with reference to the defendant Rostock:

a) Tha prosecution did not allege that Rostock can be rogardod as
a principal of one of tho axperlcents II 6 A - L. Tho ovldor.ee also
shows that Rostock never conducted ono of the experiments discussod horo.

b) Neither was he "an accessory to the coanlsslon of any such
crlxe" ncr did ho "order or abet tho saae”. In every Individual caso
the evidence could show who gave the order to conduct tho exocrlnonte.

As far as they were asslgnoents of the Reich Research Council, It was
sado clear by the testimony of tho defendant hlnsolf os well as by B1one's
and Sloven 1 testinony and tho Kentsel affidavit that Rostock in his
capacity as deputy of a aenbor of the Presiding Board of this body hod

no influenco on the distribution of the research assignments. In addition,
they were all Issued at a time when Rostock did not yot belong to tha
Reich Research Council.

Rostock did not "take a consenting part in" ono of the exDorinonts.

As discussed at great length in the first cart of ay closing spoech, he
didn't oven have knowledge thereof. Of the sulfonaolde exoerlaonte ho,
and nuaeroua other physicians, becaae aware for the first tloe by tho
lecture of Gebhardt and lischer at the neotlng of the military Medical
Acadeay on 24 nay 1943, and this was only after tho axperlcents had
already been concluded. Sot even Interpreting this extensively one con
judge this as "taking a consenting part therein". Moreover, there would


10868


Court I

15 Jul 47-A-17-6-ZHX-Ccck (Hildashel=er)


to no root for such an interpretation, since a crininal character of the
eroerlsents vas not recognisable for Rostock.

d) In no single case we Rostock "connected vith clans and enter¬
prises", as I have already set forth in detail.

a) All the experlaents vere conducted In concentration casus. These
vere under the Jurisdiction of the SS. Rostock never was a moober of the
SS nor did he aaintaln official contacts vith thee. Therefore, Rostock
never "was a sector of any organisation or group connected vith the com-
nleslon of ary such crlae".

Sunning up, ve arrive at the conclusion that not one of the facto
vhich Art. IX, 2, A - i of Control Council Lav So. 10 denands in ordor
to deos a person guilty of r.avlng coacltted a vnr crlae or a crime
against husanlty applies vith reference to Roetock.

Relying on testleony vhich has boon refuted since then, the
prosecution could assert again and again that Rostock by virtue of his
position shwld have known of theso events. This assortlon was never
proven by the proeecutlon. The findings of the trial Judge Bust not,
however, roly on a fiotlon, but only on factually proven events and acts.


10869


15 t'dI;*-..-uJ-16-1-Gr ss-(Hildcshciix.r)-
Coirt 1 .


Conclusions

Ur. President, Tour “oners:

If, at the ccncluai.cn cf =y exaninatien of the evidence, I
appeal onco norc to y^ur aenac of Justice. I do not do so because
I doubt the positive result of the presentation cf evidence. I
shall therefore expressly and consciously not refer to tho saying:
in dubio pro roo, beer.uso I an of the opinion that the presentation
cf evidence has brought absolute clarity in cv*.ry respect in favor
of Rostock's acquittal.

Nevertheless I should like tc ask the High Tribunal to take
into consideration certain cinor oxtomal natters which nay not be -..a
without serious ccnsoqutnccs. Frea all your previous decisions we have
boon ablo to fcol your efforts to be the utacat fair and Just. It
is therefore ny conviction that this High Tribunal will adjust
inequalities "hero it senses then.

It scobs to to that for this Tribunal, which ccoos from a
country with c parlioaontaxy and democratic governaont, it is very
difficult task tc rcalixo how hero in Romany during tho war tho
struggles for -ewer of individual groups developed tc a grotesque
uxtent undor the clcak of ostensible unity. Restock rightly
roforred to this in his exaninatien. Gerrnny wan riled by a suspicious
dictator, who wes a master at slaying one against another. Tho more
deaperato tho situation bccace, the '’ftener he had recourse to tho
nethed of appointing nore and aero plenipotentiaries general, c coals-
sloners general, and sinilar titles. But at the sons tiai ha left tho
existing ccnpotcncics ontircly or in part untouched, so that a chaos
of caapetencios developed. In this respect tho international Nuremberg
trial brought tc light mnarcus examples. Brandt's appointcent as
cccnissicncr general is to be ovaluatod in this sense. Bosido hin there
rmained the ccopetoncies of °cnti and the Chief of the Jfc-dical Service


1C870


15 July-«-GJ-l3-2-Gross-(Hildcshcicer)-

Ccurt 1

ct the Vehrcacht branches. Above all Hitler refrained from interfering
in Hiallar's or Grawitz* sphere. All toe often in tfco Third Roich -
as in this case - a high-scunding title concealed deliberate or
accidental confusion of cccpetencics. '.Them Karl Brandt called on
Rostock for assistance, he did not present him with a clearly
defined program, because he himself had net reccivod ono. Thus
Rost ck, who c.ac from the clear air of purely scientific medical
work, could ossuno that ho could do scoc geed trying to maintain
Goroan medical science and its foundations ever the period of the
collapse. How difficult this decision was for him, which implied
giving up other scientific wtrk, Rest-ck has already convincingly
describod for us. After seeing the cvidenco, wo can believe him and
his associates when they say that he or they had no knowledge of the
crlnua previously cccnittcd in Germany in the field of practical
rcsoarch.

It was possible ovon to indict a lean like Professor Rostock
for conspiracy and the coeaiasicn cf rar of war crimes and crimes against
hunanity only because the Prcsccuticn did not considor or did not
knew the personality of Restock and was n t able to get a true
picturo cf 'll the circumstances. Only very few pccplo, who livud
in Germany during the war, knew the conditions and the divisions
of pewar, the struggles for power and the silent intrigues of those
groups rtic had the whip in the hand, and the numerous iron curtains
bofere agencies and in3ituticns hice all concealed and guarded
thuir work jealously. Hew much acre impossible was it for a foreigner,
when tho indictment was served, to judge correctly those confused
conditions in Hitler Romany. Such a correct judgment would, howvor,
be the prerequisite for an indictment propwrly founded free the- factual
and the legal point cf view. I an of the opinion that the Prosecution
faced a task which was difficult to perform.

hilc the Prosecution has, during this trial, submitted many


10871


15 J-l/-:.-OJ-l6-3-Sross-( r-ildcshcin-r)-
Ccurt 1

documents which testified to the content or the indifference of

authors to the life and fa to of tcher hu:nn beings, no documents
have be_n submitted which show Rostock's work and thought. Since
all archives and documents centers are exclusively in the hands of
the American Prosecution authorities, the Defense is at a disadvan¬
tage here. Tnc entire correspondence of Rostock's office has been
confiscated by the Africans. I may at least point out at this point
that if there were any document there which threw even the slighest
shadow on P.ostock's character, it would have be«.n presented hare.

Thus I can state: Thors is nc such document free the hand of Rostock.
The sispl'i roason for this is that Restock simply had nc knowledge
of any crimes nor did he participate in then in any way. If tho
Dofenso, wore able to present Rostock's files and lott*-rs fraa that
time- to tho Tribunal, we would find therein many statements by Rostock
which would show his ideal efforts in tho service of his scionco and
his pntionta. It would b-cme obvious that Rostock in conduct and
character was cno of us who bolievo in the progross of humanity through
kindness, mutual respect, and tolerance.

Only tho.detailed presentation of ovidcnce in this trial has
brought lcarity. ka 1 have oplaince, it has shewn the complete
innocence cf tho Defendant Professor Rostock. Thu unjustlfiod
indictment means for hie the cost serious defamation in his position
in society and in science.

I should horo like to call the attention of the Tribunal to
cno point in which view point and effect on tho public in America
and Germany differ. In contrast to tho American procedure, in Gorman
criminal procedure a trial is opened for such crimes as arc under
indictment here only when th- prosecution material has already been
examined by a court officor. This is the institution of tho so-called
examining Judge, who, in major cases, decides when a court trial is to
be eponed. For all crimes thcro is also a judicial examination of the
prosecution material before the ccurt trial opens, and only when there


10872


Court So. 1

15 Jul U7-i*-l8-li-SHS-<}rcss (Hildcshcincr)

are strong grounds for suspicion is the trial opened for Judicial deci¬
sion. This procedure brings it abcut that the public can assume in
such trials that the indietmen* is, with a high degree of possibility,
based cn fact. This Beans that for a nan who has once been involved in
such a trial it is later extremely difficult to find honor and respect
among his follow citizens. The defendant Rostock would therefore be
grateful to you. Your Honors, if in the fcrmlaticn of your judgnent
ycu could help to taakc it pcssible for hin to resume his place in tho
circle of rospectcd persona.

With the pride of a clear conscience and with confidence Rostock
awaits tho Judgnent of this T r ibunal. according tc tho results cf the
presentation of evidence, I an convinced that it is ny duty to ask that
Profossor Paul Rcatcek be fully aetjuittod.

THE PRESIDENT: Before proceeding with further argument the
Tribunal will be in rocoss.


10673


15 July 47—A_TjC_20-l-Haloy (Hildesheicer)
Court I


TEE KABSHJL: "ho Tribunal la again in session.

THE FRISimi'T: The Tribunal understands that the translation of Dr.
Soldi 1 a argument, aa attorney for defendants Gebhardt, Ticchcr and Cbor-
hauoer, are all prepared. The Tribunal will new hear free Dr. Seidl as
attorney for the defendants named.

DH. SIIDL: Dr. Seidl, attorney for the defendants C-ebhardt,
Oberhausor, and Xischer.

Mr. President, your Honor, if I ray draw you attontlon to the index
of tho final ploa for the defendant C-ebhardt, you will find that there arc
31 points. The first three pointo doal with the count of Indlctinont 1,
which is comon plan or conspiracy, A 0 tho Tribunal hac alroady arrived
at a docislon aa to these parts, I will not doal with thlo part of ay
ploa, and shall cosc straight to thlo point.

I would llko to draw tho attontlon of the Tribunal to pages 11 to 16
bccauec I have cxnnlnod there the factual and logal offcct of a document,
which io Protocution Exhibit 460. It is the ordor of Hls»lor, 15 Mpy 19*4,
undor which a special assignment was given to tho dofondant Karl Gobhardt
within tho Medical Sorvico of tho V*ffon-SS.


I now turn to point four which begins on page 26.
(4) VAR CRIMES AHD CP-IXES ACAIHST HWAHjTY


MM*


In the Indictment the redical experiments carried out for tho bonofit
of the Goman Vohrna.ct roproeent an independent group that hao nothing
to do with tho other actions forming the subject of tho lndictmont. Tho


dofondant Karl Gebhardt is charged with being especially responsible for


theso experiments and with participating in then.

Tho hoar leg of the evidence has proved that the defendant Gobhardt evi¬
dently had nothing at all to do with zone of theso experiments. v ith
regard to other experiments, the Prosecution submitted oobo documents which
do not lot us dlscora any immediate participation of the dofondant Gebhardt
in these experiments, but which shew that he learned of then after they had
been carried cut.


10674


15 July 47—i-JjC_20-2_M«ic y (Eildeahclncr)
Court I


Che foe*! point of the lndletacnt and evidence, In 30 far as thoy con¬
cern the defondan* *ebhardt, arc the oxpcrlaonts which were carriod out
In tho concentration ca=p Havcnsbruck In 1942 and the ala of which was
to determine tho offoct of tho ao-callod aulfonaaides In connection with
wound Infection*.


it-II Qi iafllcteMtt. *rt. 6 spctlga E and

Jlrat of all, I wlah to rcrark hero that tho assertion of the prose-
cution, Hat this tate of nff«-s had playod a part in tho Haaburg trlale
agalnot oclldlruaki tnd Trcitxhi la oaaenttally Incorrect. Tho accuaatlona


whleh were sedo Id thoao proooedings against the defondanta have nothing
oaaontlal to do with the subject of thla trial.

Tot all nodical experlaents foralng the subject of tho lndictncnt,
tho exporinento for testing sulfcneaidos woro undoubtly tho aoat dlroctly
connected with tho war. The uroblca of wound Infection in orory war and
o*poclall 7 In aiodorn varfaro, la one with which every nation at war must
concorn ltaolf. This problem la not only ono of groat iaportanco to tto
llfo and health of tho Individual wounded aoldior but It cay havo a
doclalcn offect cn tho atratoglcal poaitlon and on tho outceoo of tho war
Itself through tho res'lltant gaps In tho ranks. Alroady tho flrot world
war ha 0 ohown that the aajorlty of aoldlcra do not dio on tho battloflcld
itself and that In scat Canos doath is net the direct result of a wound,
but that tho hoary losses sunt >0 attributed to infection of wounds
rocolrod. Ihoao experiences havo been confiruod In the eocond world war
and tho special conditions prevailing in Bussla and tho climatic- condition*
due to the vintor there haTo shown even acre than In tho first world war


that wound Infection was a aodlcal and tactical problea of tho highcet
Iaportanco for tho troepa and their hbalth. As regards details, I refer
to ,tBtea «n^ =odo In thla connection on the witness stand by ceroral
defendants in thoso procsodlnca In answer.

Consemionfcly it could act coee as a surprise that


10875


15 July V7-UMC -21-1-Meehan (Silfieehoiaor)

Court I

In this war elwo efforts wore aade to deal with wound infections not only
by using surgical censures, tut that a way was sought to prevent the
formation and the spreading of bacterial ir#octiona or at loast to con¬
firm thou, within reasonable lisito, by using chonical preparations.

Such efforts fleeced the sore called for as the war in the Eaet not
only meant an immense strain for the resources in material and personnel
in general, but also in view of the faot that especially the supply of
the army troops and the Vaffen SS with nodical officers and, above all,
with trained field surgeons became sore and sore difficult. Had It been
possible to assist the field nodical officers at the front and at tho sain
dressing stations, with a reliable and effective cheno-thorapoutic prepa¬
ration against bacterial wound infection, a progress of vast inportance
would have been achieved.

On the other hand, however, it could not be ovorlookod that the
introduction of a not safely operating cheeo-thorapoutlc preparation In¬
volved a certain asumnt of danger for an effective nodical care of the
wounded and consequently for tho war potential of the C-orman Vohrnacht
and its striking powor. In his lecture on tho choso-thorapy of wound
infection as delivered before tho first conferonce hast of tho consulting
specialists on 18 May 1943 and which I submitted as part of tho report
doaling with this conference, i.o., as Exhibit Qebhardt Ho. 6, Professor
Dr. Rostcck referred to the great danger of choso-thorapy, l.o. tho
possibility "to Induce neglectful physicians to ho caroless in tho surgical
execution of the wound drosslr^, since they say place a certain trust In
chose-therapy".

This warning was all the sore in order since, at that time, not only
a ccmplste uncertainty existed as regards the effects of sulfonanido, but
also because there wes a divergence in tho opinions as tho efficacy of this
preparation. It has been clearly shown by tho evidence that, in spito of
close observation of the effect* of sulfonaslde in peaco times and In war,
it wea Impossible to answer this question. ?he opinions were very such
divided. Vhile cose wore convinced of tho efficacy of these preparations

10676


15 July 47—A_TjC_2l~2«Meehas (Sildesiwiaer)

Court I

•

In connection with wounds infections end ascribed extraordinarily good
results to then, others were of the opinion that these chonleal propasa-
tions could at the best be used supplementary and that they, if usod by
thonaelToa, did not havo the properties to prevent bacterial infoctiono
resulting from combat wounds. *lth regard to the details I rofor to the
statements of the defendants Earl Brandt, Bandlosor, Bostock, C-obhardt and
Fischer and to the Sxhfblts C-ebhardt, S 0 s. 6, 7 and 10 as submitted by no
during the hearing of the evidence.

In this respoct, it is highly interesting to review tho scientific
discussions of the consulting specialists as contained in the report on
tho first conforoneo last on 10 and 19 May 1942. Those discussions which
took placo prior to tho sulfonamido o*pori=«nto coepriolng the subject of
tho lcdictnont giro a true picturo of tho situation as it was at that tlmo
with regard to tho offlcacy of sulfonamides.

In this rospoct wo aro ablo to distinguish threo sharply dofinod
groups. In tho group, which rojoctod tho chos©-thoropoutic treatoont of
wound lnfoction, Gohoimrat Professor Saucrbruch was loading. H o emphatic¬
ally voicod tho opinion that theso chemical preparations tond to obocuro
tho surgical work and to load to porfunctory treatment. Ho demanded that
tho preparations ohould bo critically tectod, that ic to say, tho toot
should bo made by surgoiona 6xpcrionccd in general eurgory.

In tho other camp thcro woro surgeons who claimed to have obtained
oxtrp-ordinarily favorable results in tho chomo-thoropoutical treatment
of bnctorially infcctod wounds. Aeong them was B. Krucgnr, tho Berlin
prefossor for surgory, who claims to have obsorved a favorablo offoct of
sulfonaaido in an many ns 5COO eases.

To tho third group finally, bolongod tho surgoOas, bacteriologists
and pathologists who took tho view that nothing definite could be said as
yet as tc tho effects and tho efficacy of sulfonamides as agonts in the
fight against bactorially infcctod wounds and that further tosts along
thoso lines would have to be made.

Th-ic it can be said that after the experiences of the Bussian winter


10677


15 July 4 7-i-T JC -2 l_3_Me than (HiIdeshelter)
Court I


c a mpa ign of 1941/1942, the fight against the bacterial wound infection and
the question of the efficacy of the sulfonraidos had bocoac a cilltory-
aodical and aedlcal-tactical problon of first importance! about which
opinions differed widoly. A solution of this problen wa3 the noro urgent
ns en answer had to be found quickly, and on tho other hand the fact was
not to bo disregarded that the experiences gained during noarly ton yo»>rc
of peace and war in clinics as well as in laboratories were insufficient to
answer this quostion,

(6) Ship Srdar.Iflx tfag *aadiai 2 i .tests.

Tho evidence has shewn that tho ordor to ascortaln tho effectiveness
of tho sulfonaeidos in oxpcrlscnts on huaan beings, was given diroctly
by tho Head of tho Stato and Supreme Coesandor of tho Hchraacht. Httlor's
ordor wns not subalttod at first by Hicnlor to tho dofondant G 0 bhardt, but
to Dr, Orawits, Botch physician of tho SS and Pollco.

Howovor, tho cvidonco showed furthor that another circunstanco
arooo which at loast froa tho point of vlow of tiso causod tho ordor for
thoso experinonts to be givon, vis. tho doath of tho chief of tho Roich
Main occurity Offico Goneral of tho Haffen SS Reinhardt Koydrich, who in
Hay 1942 was asoasolnatod in Prague. Ac to tho dotalls I rofor to tho
tho Btatoaents aade by Gobhardt in tho witness box concorning this
mattor. Koydrich's dorth is connected with tho oxporiaonto thoasolvcs
only insofar as, at that tico, the reproach war cade, that Hoydrich's llfo
could have boon saved, if sulfonaeido and ospoclally a certain sulfonaalde
preparation had boon adniniotorod to tho wounded nen in sufficient quanti¬
ties. The whole probice of sulfonanido therapy cpbo to the foreground
onco core in this ono caso and that In such an obvious Banner that tho
Head of the Stato hirsclf gave tho ordor to clarify by way of all-out
experiments the question, which for a long tiso already had boon of
gcnoral lcportancc foy the fighting troops at the front.

Hithin tho scope of this evaluation of evidence it is irrelevant to
onter into the dotalls, which brought it about that tbo exporitaonto woro
carried out by tho dofondant Gobhardt hissclf. Against the otrict order


1C373


15 July 47_A_?jC_2i_^ - Hechan (Eildcsheiuer)
Court I


cf the Belch physic!an SS Grnwitx, Gebherdt carried out the oxperinents
not by artificially producing hullet wounds butyby causing an lniection
Under ohserratlon of all possible precautionary noasures.

It was further shown by tho evidence that tho exporinonts wore
otartod with fifteen habitual criminals who had been centoncod to death
and who had boon transferred from the concentration carp Sachsonahuuon
to Bavonobrueck. In vlev of tho fact, that this part of the oxpovinont
lo not a subjoct of tho lndicteont, It eceae to bo unnecessary to ontor
Into this oattor. It should, however, bo kopt In alad that at tho con-
foronce on 1 Juno 1942, at which the conditions for tho oxporimonto wero
dotoralnod In detail - the defendant O 0 bh*rdt hae doocribod thla conforonco
In dotal 1 and I an reforlng to this - It was understood that tho oxpori-
aonts should be carried out with aalo habitual criminals, who had boon
ecntor.eod to death and who wero to bo pardoned In cnoo of ourvival.


It was shown by the ovldcnoo that tho ©xporloontn for tooting tho
offoctivonoso of tho sulfonaaldos woro oarriod out In throo groups^ Tho
first group includod fifteen aon. This group has nothing to do with tho
subjoct of tho lndlctnont and It Is thoroforc superfluous to ontor Into
this oattor aoro cloooly.

Tho socond group includod thirty-six foaalo prisoners, who had boon
members of tho Polish resistance novoaont and who, for thlo roaoon, had


boon oontcncod to doath by tho Gorman Court Martial In tho Govorncont
Gonoral. This socond group was sub-divldod into 3 sub-groups of 12
experimental persons each. Is to the particulars of tho provisions for the
oxperiaente, I refer to tho stateeonts aado by the defendants Gobhardt and
Plschor In tho witnoss box. Contrery to tho first groiqs, contact substances
woro used in this second group to accolorate tho process of infoction. Tho
contact substances wore Inserted Into the open wound together with tho
gonna. Sterilo and pulvorized glass and sterile wood particles woro used


for contact substances. Those contact substances took tho place of earth
and uniform particles and had tho purpose of producing war -1 iko conditions
for tho wounds, without, however,, producing at the sane tino, tho general


10S79


15 July 47-A-J *C_2L-5_Moohan (Hlldcshcimcr)

Court I

dar-gors created by infection of the wound by earth and ports of clothing.

Ac ir. the ceso of the first group, staphylococci, strnptococci, a
gas gangrene bacilli, wore used as agents. But tho contention sot forth
in the indictment that totanua gome wore also used, is incorroct. Cn
tho contrary, the evidence has proved that tho treatment of totanuo did
not cone within tho scope of theso experiments. Thore was leos roaoon for
this as it was rcalisod long ago by Gorman military eurgory that tho sul¬
fonamide preparations arc not suitablo for tho effective prevention rf
transatic tetanus. Hero I refer to tho directives for tho chono-therapeu¬
tical treatment of wound lnfoction which wore lssuod at the first Working
Congress East of tho Consulting Specialists in May 1943 (Gobhardt Exhibit
Ho. 6) - that is; prior to the performance of the sulfonraldo orporioents
consulting tho subject of this indictment. In those diroctivos it is
exproaoly pointod out that the outbreak of traumatic tofinnuo cannot be pre¬
vented by means of the sulfonomldot and that totanuo anti-toxin has to bo
adainistorod as usual.

In the course of the evidonee only the wltnoss Dr. H B c*kn has main¬
tained that totanus was actually usod in one individual caoo. This witnose
did not make her own observations of tho case, but has drawn conclusions
bnsod exclusively on tho pathological picture donootmtod by ono of tho
experimental subjects according to her statements. In view of tho fact
that erron according to the testimony of this witness totanus bacilli woro
employed only in ono individual case, tho assertion of this wltnoss can
hardly be takor. as a truo reproaontatlon of tho facts, for If it had roally
boon tho intention of the defendant C-obhardt to dotoralno tho offoct of
culfonaoidos also on tetanus, one cxporiaont&l subjoct would cortainly
not have boon sufficient, end moro experiments would havo boon necoscary
before a final decision regarding this question could possibly havo been
sjidc.

Tho third group consisted of twenty-four experimental subjects who
were not treated with any sort of contagion - unlike the procoduro applied
to the second group - but only had part of the muscle ligated. Tho


losac


15 July 47—A-JjC«2l—6-Xcehaix (Hildcohel=tr)
Ccurt I


defendants Gabhardt and Pischor haxc gives deteiled ovidcr.ce regarding
those new experiment arrangements, how they originated, which consideration
had to he regarded and what part wee played by SS Beich Physician Dr.
C-rawitx. With regard to these dotalls I refer to the statements =*dc by
the defendants in the witness-box,

The experimental subjects were treatod with sulfonamido in tho way
described by the defendants in the witr.oss-box, A few poreons wore not
treatod vfcth eulfonaaldoa but wero used as control subjects. But that
did not scan that those persons wore not treated at dll. A« the cvldonec
has proved, all experimental subjects wore treated, nnnely by surgical
measures if the sulfonamidos did not provo offoctlvc againet tho lnflama-
tion, Por this reason also tho experimental subjects to whoa no oulfona-
sidoe were applied, and with whom tho lnflaaatlon did not pass away of
itnolf, wero given diroct surgical troataont undor obsorvonco of the
generally rocognlsod principloe of surgery particularly as dovolopod in
Germany by Gebhardt'e toachor Professor Dr. Lexer. This diroct surgical
treatment rosultcd in tho scars, which tho court has soon on tho oxpori-
mental subjects questioned ns witnesses. A« explained by Profossor Dr.
Alexander, the export producod by tho prosocutlon, theso scars arc tho
result not of tho bacteriological infection but of the operations performed
lr. ordor to olialnato this infections *or the caso of tho prosocutlon
four experimental subjocts have befcn called to give evidence. In
addition, the prosocutlon has submitted in Docuoont Book No. 10 a series
of affidavits given by other pereesvo usod as oxporincntal subjocts. The
statements of tho four witnesses quostionod in court coincido largoly with
tho tostinony given by the defendants Gobhardt, Cborhausor, and Fischer
thcasolvos in tho witnoss-box. Bor this reason alone, it nppoaro expedient
and sufficient for the pronouncement of a Just sontonco and for tho
establishment of tho truo facts td base the sontonco exclusively on tho
testimony of theso four witnesses togother with the statements of tho
defendants thcaeclvcs. Thi* is not only in accordance with tho principle


10381


15 July 47-A-jrC-2l_7-echan (Hfldoshciacr)
Court I


of direct end oral proceedings In court prevailing In any aodorn crlnlnel
procedure.


10882


15 July^A-35-22-l-Coolc (X_t. Sildesheimer)

Court Fo. 1

?PAL PLZA TC5 D3. £A3L G g 3 fiAH I*r

and which should not be departed fro= without urgent reason, but
also such htedllng of the ense seess suitable because the statfr-
sents of the four witnesses are Identical essentially so that they
themselves, together with the statenents given by the defondrnts,
can be regarded as a iafe basis for a finding - apart from one point
which I shall go Into later. Add to this that the affidavits sub¬
mitted by the Prosecution not only differ In essential points from
the Mfttenents aade by the witnesses in court, but thoy aro In¬
consistent and contradictory In th»selves os well. This Is
represented, above all, by the fact that In several of these
affidavits quite obviously contentions wore cade which are not
based on personal end factual observation, but hove becomo known
to these witnesses by hearsay. The affidavits, ooroover, fall to
represent the clrcuast«ce In clear chronological
order, which cakes the whole cotter the core doubtful as It wos
proved through tho tricing of evidence that in the Bavensbruock Cnnp
obviously experlcents were also prrforaod by other physicians with
whom the defendant of this trial had no connection.

Considerable doubts also exist regarding the stnteconts made by
the witness Dr. Meczka. Tho Prosecution has eubcitted two
affidavits given by this witness ns port of its documentary book
10. Vhen questioned In court, this wltnoss could not maintain tho
contentions which appended In the two affidavits ns most Incriminate
ing. Under these circumstances, it has to be considered whether-”
the court rerards the statenents of this wltnoss as sufficient
to bo drewn into the determining of the Jud^aent. I want to answer
this question In the negative, and finally not only because eho had
to revoke the most essential points of her previous affidavits, but
because a large part of her testicony was based not on her own
observations, but either on information obtained fron oiher pri¬
soners or also on conclusions drawn by her.


10883


15 July-A-3B-22-2-CooJe (!at. Eildosheiaer)
Court To. 1


7E2 PR2SIDZ3T: Counsel, I cell your attention to the feet that
while you as the representative of thr-’e defendants have three hours
to present the arguments for the three defendants, you have not
three hours for any one defendant, hut only one hour fer each of the
defendants. It would be a little helpful if you would spealc in a
little lower tone counsel.

DR. Slid: Tour Eonor, as all three of the defendants ere concern¬
ed with sulfenonide experieents, in the case of the defendant Gebhardt
I have consolidated the fundaaentrl questions and it will be possible
for ne then in the later speeches for the defendants Oberhrueer and
71 ocher to base ny stateaents on previous rrgursent. I hnvo further¬
more, not reed everything which was contained in ay final spoech
but only parts.

THZ FHESIdKT: Very well, counsel. Tou nay proceed.

(8) The Legal Status of the Ixporleental Porsons

In the second and third group, inne.tes of the RnvonobruocJc Concen¬
tration Coop who hod been sentenced to death by Ocrnan Courts
Martial in the Oovemnents General as neobers of tho Polish resist-
once aovoccnt were employed ns experimental persons. The wltnosooo
questioned in court and all experlsental persons fron whon the
prosecution has suboltted affidavits, have openly professed their
acnborshlp of the resistance aoveoent, to which has to be added
that a one of then exercised relatively inportant functions in the
resistance novenont. If the legal status of the experimental persons
at tho tine of their activity in the resistance aoveaent is cxnnlhed,
the result will be as follows:


The forner Polish State ceased to exist at the latest on 28 September
1939 as m independent subject from the point of view of International
Law. After the entire area of the former Polish State had beon occup¬
ied by the German armies and the troops of the Soviet Union and the


1088L


15 July-*.2£-22-3-CooJc (let. EHdeaheir.tr)
Court So. 1


Poll ah Goveraaent hod gone over into Hunanlea territory under
pressure of the lnvaelon of the Bed Arey on If Septecber I 939 ,
the two occupation powers decided to carry out c plan previously
agreed upon, which wna to eettle all natter* concerning the
•-errltory of the forcer Poll ah State without interference of eay
other powera. Thie wea brought about ty the Gerrrn-Soviet Boundary
and Iriendahip Pact of 28 Septeeber 1935, "Mch I have preaented
ae Ixhiblt Gebhardt Ho. 13. A a to particulars, I refer to the
content* of the pact. It wae on thie day, at the very lateat,
that Poland eeaaed to exist aa a sovereign atate and aa bearer of
right* and dutie*. Due to war, the forcer Poll ah State eeaaed
to exiat aa a atate and therewith aa a subject from the point of
view of International Law.

The territory of the forcer Poliah State, Insofar a* it fell
within the sphere of Soviet Interests, becone part of the USSB, to
which it still belongs today.

The Polish territory which fell into the Qernen sphere of
interests and which is designated in detail in the ^upoleaentary
P rotocol to the Oernan-Societ Boundary and friendship Pact, bocane
either part of the Screen Heich or - end thie concerned the larger
part of the area - wna nade into an independent borderlcnd of
th# Gernan Eelch under the deslgnatioh Governsent General, The
oonetitutlonrl laws governing this territory were based on the
decree issued on 12 October 193the fuehrer and P.elch
Chancellor for the ndninietrntion of the occupied Poliah terri¬
tory. I have presented the decree to ttbe Court as Exhibit Qeb-
herdt Fo. lU. i n Article U of thie decree it ie stated thnt
? oil eh law wee to continue to be valid insofar ns it wns not at
vprienc# with the taking over of the ndninletrp.tion by the Gernnn
Belch. Article 5 give* the Governor General the right to issue
laws by ordinmee for the territory under hi* adn inis trot Ion.


10385


15 July-Jr-3X-22-’-M:oo!e (Iat. Hlldesheioer)
Court ?o. 1


'Corresponding to the generally acknowledged principle* of

internetlocal lav the ordinance* iued by the Governor General

vere binding for the population of this territory. Thi* 1 *

e aped ally true of the ordinance for coabating deeds of violence

ir. the Governnent General, which va* ls*ued on 31 Octobor 1939

•

(Ordlnmce Gexett# for th* Governnent General, page 10 ), and which
also laid the foundation for th* competence of the courts-cartlal.
This ordinance had bceooe necessary because the Mllitrxy Gdvcrnaent
which had been active until 26 October 1939 ceased to exist when
tho fuehrer decree of 12 October 1939 became valid.

In this connection, the following cust be replied to tho objeo-
tion of the Prosecution In their find plea on tho Doming of the
lUth.

first: There did not exist r Polish Governs® t at the tino vhon
these fxperloental subjects were active for the resistance cove¬
nant in 19*10 md I 9 U 1 . The Polish Governnent hr.d consod to oxlst
as an Independent subject under International law. Tho Government
in exile In London under General Slborskl and tho govornnent In
Lublin wore only later on recognised by the Vostem Alllos.

Second: At the tiae when the experlnontnl eubjects In 19*10
wore active for the resistance novo cent no Polish nmy oxlstod
which was still active in battle.

Third: The Prosecution seens to try to express that this
Military Tribunal should not primarily np->ly territorial penal
law but the principle,of the international lr.v. for this very
reason the Frosecutlon has pointed out that the Jurisdiction rod
the Judicial authority within the Govemnrot General were the con¬
sequence of an aggressive war and could, therefore, not be legally
recognised. This concept does not aR)ly. It brs to be pointed
out first that the principles of international law, which have the
task of regulating legal issues during the war, do not differentiate


10886


15 July-A-3S-e?_>_Cooic (lot. Sildesheiner)
Court So. 1


t« In any way as to whether It Is (Q aggressive war or a
defensive war or whether It was Justified at all. That Is sdd
especially In th« fourth Hagu« Convection of 1907, the so-called
Hague Land Warfare Convention.

The objection of the Prosecution Is not Justified for another
reason. The evidence before the IMT showed that the attack on
Poland was carried out by Germany at least In the sane manner ns
it was carried out froo the USSB and that thi* beconco quite
evident from the contents of the GerGai>«Sovlet secret treaty of
the 23 August 1939. nevertheless the USA did not hesitate to
recognise territorially the claims made by the USSR, in the area
of the fornor Folieh Stats. How this recoiltion happened to
take place as well de facto ns de Jure during the conference at
Yalta la Tebrurry I 9 U 5 and at the conference ot Fotsdna on the
2 nd August I 9 U 5 .

The Prosecution therefore today cannot object to this state of
affairs as far as the legal Issues from this attack nro concerned.

Tho ordinance for comb atlsg acts of violence in the Government
General and the introduction of the courte-nartial connected with
it would, by the way, have been permissible, even if tho former
Polish State had not ceased to be, through war, a subject in the
roalm of International Law. Military occupation of foreign
States (occupntlo bellica), too, gives tho occupying power tho
right to take ell the Matures necessary for ths maintaining of
ordsr and safety. It is a generally acknowledged legal concep¬
tion that In this case tho occupying power takes over the power
of the conquered state, not as lte deputy, but rather by*ahthority
of their own laws guaranteed by International law. Tfale right ie

expressly adknowledged in the third section of the Hague Convention

/

for Land Warfare. There can be no doubt that the Introduction
of courte-martlal Is one of these rights of the occupying power.

In feet it seems unthinkable that an oeciqjying power should not

10887


15 Juiy-A-3K-22-6-Cook (iat. Hildeshelser)
Court 5o. 1


be allowed to tefce aessurea for the effective fighting of a resist-
rcce movement, whose only end openly admitted purpose it was to
unde mine end destroy the authority of the occupying power and
the safety of the occupation troops. The right to do this can
eren be less contested in our case. Since with the outbreak of
the 0 « man-Soviet war, the territory of the former Government
General became tho largest military transit area, which has ever
existed in the history of war. The aethods by which the Polish
Resistance aovement tried to attain its goals do not need to be
examined here in detail. It ie sufficient to point out that the
resistance movement was in a position to interfere to a considerable

degree with the reinforcements of the German Armies in

%


Court I

15 Jul 4?-A-23-l-£EX-Gro6s (Eildesheiner)


thsir fight against the Bad Arcy, that this happened through the
blast log of bridges, through transdssicn of important military infor-
=atlon by any other *«ye imaginable. The Polish von on vho vere used
for the sulfonanide experloents vere mecberc of this resistance covenant
and they supported this cc*veaent wherever th«7 caild. However such ve
respect the courage and os triotisa of these votin, ve cannot refrain
free emphasizing tha fact that they broke lave vhlch at that tine vere
binding fdr thasi and which gave the cecupation co«r the right to innooe
adequate punlsbsent upon then. It teens unthinkable that the ne-rbors of
a reaiotar.ee soveaent suet ae the Polish one vould net have been sen¬
tenced to death during the v*r for their activities in this movenont by
any othor state vhioh fou id Itself in a position sinilar to that of
Gorcany at that tine. ?>,< newest devoloooente show that tl\o occuontion
covers which are nov occupying Gereany do not hosltnte to isr^ooe, in
similar casos, the most severe penalties.

For example, the flri rican Military Oovernnent for Oornany in Ho
Ordinance Bo, 1, *4iicl» #ss issued to insure the eafoty of the Allied
arced force, and to tv-establish nubile order in the territory occupied
by thorn, lists, aror*r others, the'following •» crin0 “ PuM ,ha * 1 <’ ty
death:

■(3) Transsifjr on of infornation endangering the aafoty or property
of the Allied Tof;c is or neglecting to report Immediately information

pooB'jGflton Of %*v. A is nrohibited.

■(13) Dls* fur banc e of transport and ccer uni cat ions or of the

functioning of public utilities or supply services.

•( 20 ) i»ny Other offence against the lavs and nracticeo of war or

any wUtM to tfco or ° f A1Ued

Forces."

A c ccpar is on of these regulations vHh the contents of the court
martial. regulations of the Governor General for the Occuoied Polish Ter¬
ritories, presented in Document Book II for the defendant Oehhnrdt, shows
deadly that here generally the sane facts were declared to be nunishable


Court I

15 Jul 47-A-23-2-iSi-Oro«e (Elideshelser)

(

with the death sentence.

Ir. order to exclude any doubts with regard to the legal status of
the exneriaental subjects. It nay finally be pointed out that tho aee-
bers cf the Polish resistance movaaents, at least ot the tine during
which the prisoners belonged to then, did not fulfill the conditions of
Article I of the Hague Convention for Land Warfare of 1907 concerning
ailitla and voluntary corps not affiliated with the arsy and having a
certain nllltary organisation. The Polish resistance movement at that
tine 1) had no leader who was ostensibly at Its head and tas rosnonslblo
for the conduct of the aeabers; 2) It wore no particular badge recog¬
nisable froa a distance; 3) It did not wear their arms openly and
finally; 4) In its conduct of war it disregarded the laws and oracticos
of w. In view of these facts the aeabers of the resistance aovooent
could cot have been treated as prisoners of war evon if at that tlno
there had still been a Polish any at the front. In view of the faot
that the prisoners in aiestion were woaen serving in the communications
and espionage branches of the resistance aovasont. this possibility
was ellalnated from the very beginning. Jurthor objections ralsod by
the crosocutlon regarling the legal status of these experimental per¬
sons I refor now to ay trial brief.


4


IXu^ing the hearing of the evidence views woro repeatedly given on

e

the question of which principles of aedlcal ethics are to be considered
when performing experiments on hunan beings. In ny opening statement
before the evidence was submitted I have already pointed out in tho
case of these defendants that there Is no reason to exaslne fundamental
Questions of medical ethics in these proceedings. Law and ethics aro
measured by different standards, which sometimes contradict each other.
Tho some applies to the principles of general ethics as well as to
those of a particular profession. An act offending the recognized prin¬
ciples of aedlcal ethics does not necessarily constitute a crime. The
unwritten regulations and convictions existing inside a profession cannot


10690


Court I

15 Jul 47-lr-2£-3-ZHk-Groa• (Eildeaheimer)

D4 used as a basis for verdict, but only the cogent praceots of the lav.

Eovarar, it cannot be concluded from thia that the orinciples of
radical ethics and thair practical application vara of no imoortence at
all in these proceedings. These crlnelplea cannot, of course, be apoliad
directly. It the sane tine there is no doubt that the ©rlncioles of
radical ehtics and above all thair oractlcal application in recent
decades can play an indirect part insofar as they have to be taken into
consideration vhen lnteroreting the lav. Eovever, evidence has nov
proved that in recent decades and also even earlier, numerous experiments
on humans vere carried out, and, moreover, on ©arsons vho did not volun¬
teer for such purpose. In this respect ! refer to the stateaents of
the oxcart Professor Dr. Lsibrandt, vitness for the prosecution. I fur¬
thermore refer to the extensive evidenco *.ich the prosecution on their
part exhibited in this Question free vhlch it appears that in numerous
cases experiments vere carried out on huaans, of the nature and degree
of danger of which they could not have been avare and to vhich they would
never have agreed voluntarily. The only conclusion that can be drown
fraa these facts is that during recent decades views on this Question
have changed, in the sane way as the relations between the Individual
and the community in general have changed. In this connection I noed
not glvo detailed reasons which led to this development. It is a fact
that at least in Europe the state and the community have taken a dif¬
ferent attitude toward the individual. However differently one may write
about the change in these relations in detail, one thing is certain, how¬
ever, namely, that the state has core and aore taken possession of the
individual and limited his personal freedoa. Evidently that is one of
the accompanying facte of technique and aodsrn state mass. It must be
added that the development of aedicine in the course of the last decades
has led to differentiated auestlons trfiich can no longer be solved with
the means of the laboratory and the animal eroerinents.

The evidence has shown that not only in Germany, and oerhaos not
even in the first place in this country, the reorganisation of the


Court I

15 Jul 47—A—23—4-ZEX—Gross (Hildasheimer)

relationship between community and individual has resulted In nev
nethods In the sphere of sedlcal science. In nearly all countries
experiments on humans have been made under conditions %fcich entirely
exclude volunteering in the sense of the lav.

Troc this change of radical views, and above all, in the radical
practice, immediate conseouences for the interpretation of the law arise,
since the law, according to Its inner state, is universal and in the
abstract and naturally does not answer the Question as to the Units and
under which sssusptions experiments on huzans are perai6sible and where
the criminality of such an experiment starts. The real practice regard¬
ing this Question has all the nore importance for the interpretation of
the law since almost every law and also the Control Council Law Ho. 10
contain standard rudiaents of case facts, which neane that in a particu¬
lar case it can only be established by a Judicial Judgaent. Ho special
proof is needed that the answer to the auestlon as to whon and within
which limits medical arperlsonts are admissible calls for a Judicial
Judgment, and that this cannot be established without taking rractlcal
experience into consideration, not only in Germany but also outsldo
Germany. The standard rudiaents of case facte aro part of the legal
facts and deal with illegality as characteristic of the punishable pet.
The real medical practice within and outoide Germany, however, has not
only to be considered whon examining the auestlon as to whether tho
actions constituting the subject of the indictment are illegal, but
above all it is fundamentally important when answering the further auen-
tion as to whether the actions constituting the subject of this pro¬
cedure establish a criminal offense. Considering that criminal offense
is not likely to be a permanent psychological fact but a standard com¬
puted fact in the sense of a personal reproach, the court will not also
for this reason overlook the fact that particularly during the last
year8 even outside Germany medical experiments were made on huaans who
undoubtedly did not volunteer for these exoerioents. Tho unity of law
sni the indivisibility of the idea taken as basis exclude Judging one


1CS92


Court I

15 Jul 4?-A-23-5-*EK-GrOB8 (Eildeshelser)


ftsd the sane fact according to different legal principles and standards
simultaneously.

^o the question as to whether the defendants in the carrying out of
the experiments which constitute the indictment have first of all 'been
acting in their capacity as physicians or whether their conduct - if a
just decision is to be rendered - aust no longer be regarded from the
viewpoint of war service as medically trained research wcrkers, I shall
give ny opinion on at soae later opportunity.

I shall now deal with the reasons for the exclusive of injustice
and guilt, which according to the result of the evidence preclude the
culpability of the defendant's denean. I as hereby taking into considera¬
tion that the assumption of only one of the reasons for the oxclusion
of punishment *iieh we shall now deal with suffices to Justify the
defendant's demean and to exonerate him froc tho offense in the sense of
a personal reproach because of his commission or omission. Tho indi¬
vidual reasons for the exclusion of culpability are discussed without
taking into consideration whether tho examination of any further sisllar
reasons is superfluous, since the assumption of another reason for tho
exclusion of culpability suffices to secure tho intended success.

Ividence has proved that the experiments for testing sulfonaoldas were
carried out, to begin with, on fifteen professional male criminals who
had been sentenced to death. Had they survived the experiments, they
would have been granted a pardon therefor. Considering that this part
of tho experiment is not a subject of the indictment, I need not go into
detail about it.

Members of the Polish resistance movecent belonged to the second
and third group, who in view of their activity in this illegal movement
had been sentenced to death by German courts martial.

It is a principle of German criminal law that in any case the coneont
of the offender precludes the illegality of the action. This principle
is r.ot only found in German law, but is an established part of practi-


10893


Court I

15 Jul 47-i^23-S-S3C-Gross (Hilda she i»«r)


cally all legal IJlteai. Consequently, the Question is to be examined

whether the experimental persons have given their consent to the

experiments. When examining the Question whether legally effective

$

consent had been given, it will not natter so such whether the experl-
nental persons have expressly declared their consent. However, if
generally acknowledge!principle, are applied, one nay presume that they
have expressed their consent in scee obvious Banner. It is clear that
the consent could also have been given tacitly and by conclusive action.
However, it Is true that all the feeale witnesses examined in


court testified that they did not give their consent to the experiments.
The Tribunal, In evaluating these facts, will have to take into con¬
sideration that these witnesses were in.a special position at that time,


as they also are today. It stands to reason that under these circum¬
stances many things nay appear different to thee today froa the way
they actually happened five years ago. It night be true that the
experimental subjects did not give their actual consent to these oxoorl-
nents. It night even be true that they were not acked before the
experiments whether they consented to the experiments. Nevertheless
this *>uld not exclude the possibility that, considering their position
at that tiae and being certain that they could not escape the execution
in any other way, that they nevertheless did consent to the cxperioonts,
however quietly. This supposition w«ild correspond with the fact that,
for instance, none of the exporicental subjects had ever Bade any
complaint or mentioned to the defendant Jischer, who had regularly
changed the dressings, that they did not consent to the experiments.

Ul) The. Pro sue ed Consent of the Sxperlajntal Subjects as
Le*al j ustification. •


The illegality of an action is not only then excluded if the
injured person agreed either actually or tacitly, but if there could
have been a possible consent. These are the cases where the consent
of the injured person could be expected ncrndly, but where for sooe
reason or another such a consent was actually not given. Numerous


10894


Court I

15 Jul 47-X-23-?-E£X-GrooB (EildeshSiner)

attempts have been Bade In Jurisprudence and alto In Jurisdiction to do
Justice to this situation which to often occurs in practice. Hot all
of these theories need have to be discussed since the decisive oolnts of
view have now been clarified. At first it was tried to settle this
Question by applying the lav referring to unauthorised acting for and on
behalf of a person. Serious objections were raised against this trans-
Biss ion of conceptions of civil law into crlnlnal law. The criminal
idea of consent is to be extended Instead into the so-called supposed
consent. I understand this as an objective judicial judgnont basod on
probabilities, nacely, that the person concerned vbuld have given his
consent to the action frc« his personal point of view if he -ould have
fully known and realised the situation. Vhorever ouch a Judgment could
be applied, it should have the oa=e effect as the Judicial finding of an
actual consent.


10895


15 July-A-DJG-2L—1-Leonard (Hildesheimer)

Court Ko. 1

However, other courts and scientists base their reason for just¬
ification upon "action fer the benefit of the injured person". If
correctly viewed no actual contradiction to an assumed concent could
be seen therein. On the contrary one may say perhaps that this could
be considered as an independent argument for Justification.

In modern literature and Jurisdiction the tendency prevails to
combine the two last mentioned viewpoints by demanding them cumulatively
It is rot comprehensible, however, why such simultaneous oxistence of
two arguments for Justification should be required, when each atgumont
in itself is docisive.

A well-known teacher of criminal law in Germany statod the follow¬
ing conception of this i^ca: "Should the injured person not consont,
tho action in his behalf and for his benefit is to to considered law¬
ful if his consent cculd have boon oxpoctod according to an objoctivo
jud&iunt. The primary Justifying argument hero is rot that tho
injured person has wnivod his right of decision, tut that a positivo
action was perfonaod for his benefit.

Tho practical remit, in spito of tho thoorotical objections
raised against such a combination, exuld hardly bo different. For
tho "objoctivo Judicicl aontcnco based on probabilities, hero eppliod
for, which is dociaivo and upon which tho so-called oupposed consont
would have to bo basod, will regularly result from an action that
under given circuastencea is performed for tho " bonofit cf tho
injured person."

Applying theso general principles tc the tmlfonaraido experiments
there can hardly bo any doubt that tho experimental subjects would
have agreed if they had been fully eworo of their position. Tho
eacporiacntal subjects had already been sentenced to death and their
participation in those experiments was the only possibility for thorn
to avoid execution. If tho Tribunal now trios to assess the probability
that tho experimental subjects would have agreed to submit to those
experiments if they hod had full knowledge of the position and tho


10696


15 July-A-WG-2^2-i<&r^rd (Hildesheiacr)
Court Mo. 1


certainty of their eventual execution thore can be, according to ®y
opinion, very little doubt as to the result of this examination.

Mor can thero be two opinions regarding the question whether,
under circumstances prevailing at that time, the utilization of tho
prisoners for thoso experiments was "in the interest of the woundod".

Tho evidence hes shown that tho other members of tho Polish resist¬
ance movement, who wore sentenced to death by court martial and who were
in concentration camp in Ravensbrueck awaiting the confirmation of tho
verdict i*ich was given by tho Govomor General of tho occupied Polish
district, (l shall refor to these experiments in ray closing brief and I
shall also refor in tho reply to tho closing brief of tho prosocution)
only after a complicated and protracted procedure — wero really shot.
Their participation in these nodical experiments was tho only chanco
for tho condemned persons to save their lives. Their participation
in thoso experiments was not only in their Interest but it also sooms
>o bo inconvoivablc that the prisoners if they had boon fully awaro
of their position and would havo known of tho forthcoming axocution
would net'havo givon their consent for tho experiments.

(12) The State Emergency and bar Emergency as Lord Excuse .

Tho evidence proved furthermore that the experiments for tho
testing of tho offoctivenoss of sulfonamide wero necessary to clarify
a question not only of decisivo importance for tho individual soldior
and tho troops at the front but th t this was also a problem which did
not only affect the care for the individual but was of vital importance
for tho fighting powor of the array, and thus for tho whole fighting
nation, kll efforts to clarify this question by studying the offeet
of casual wounds failed. .J.though drugs of the sulfonapide series —
the number of which, amounts to approximately 3000 — had been tested
for ocue than 10 years, it was i mpossible to form an even approximately
correct idea of tho mest valuable remedies. It was impossible to
clarify this question in peace by observation of many thousands of
people with casual wounds and by circularized inquiries. I.'cr could


10897


15 July-4-DJ&-24—^-Leonard (Hildesoeiocr)
Court f ti. 1


a cl oar answer to this question of vital importance to many hundred
thousand soldiers be feund by observation of the wounded in field
hospitals during the war. In consideration of the cvidenco it is
impossible end also unnecessary to examine details of the problem of
wound infection end its control in modern warfare. I nay assume that
the importance of this qicstion is known to the court and ncod not bo
proved any further as this question did not 6nly play a part in the
German army but was a matter of special research and measures in tho
armies all over the world.

In 1942 these conditions in the German crey and in tho medical
services of tho Uehraacht boceme intensified only insofar as with tho
beginning of the cp^algn against the Soviet Union now difficulties
arose also with rogard to this question. If In tho campaigns against
Poland and Franco it was possible to master the wound infoctions by tho
usual surgical means, the difficulties in tho war against tho USSR
incroasod beyond all measures. It is unnecessary to examine the
reasons for this moro closely here. It is door thnt they rosultod
frem great distances end poor traffic conditions, but they woro also
causod by c l im a tic conditions prevailing thorc.

Tho fighting power of tho Gorman army was affoctod by its aovoru
casualities to an extent which mada iV impossible to allocato a
correspondingly large number of experienced surgoens to tho main dreosin,
stations to control bacterid wound-infocticn by surgical meesuros.
During tho hearing of the evidence tho difficult situation in
which the German crudes found thcosolvos in the winter 1941-42 on tho
front beforo Ifcscow end in tho Scuth around Rostow, was repoatcdly
stressed. Hero it was demonstrated dearly that tho German Wchrmacht
and with it the Gorman people were involved in a life and death struggle.
The lead or 3 of the Geran Wehraacht would hove noglcctod thoir
duty if they, confronted with those facts, had ret made the ettunpt
to decide, at any price, the question as to which chemical preparations
were capable of preventing bacterid wound infection and, abovo all.


10898


15 July-Vv~DJG-24-4-Lecnard (Hildesheimcr)

Court No. 1

gaa gangrene, end whether effective means cculd be found at all. "What¬
ever the answer to this creation may have been, it had to be found as
soon e® possible in order to avert an imminent danger and to throw
light on a question which was important to the individual wounded
soldier as well as to the striking power of the whole nray. After the
failure of ell attoepts to solve tho problem through clinical observatioj
of incidental wounds and through other methods, end, in view of tho
particularly difficult situation end especially of the pressure of time,
thero was, nothing left but to docide the question through an oxporl-
nent on human beings. The responsible leaders of tho German Uohrraacht
did not hositato to draw tho conclusions resulting from this situation,
and the head of tho German Reich who was at tho same timo Cccraandor-
in-Chlcf of the German T/ohraacht, gave tho order to roach c final
solution of this pretolun by way of a largo scale experimentation.

Lot us oxamlno the legal conclusions to bo drawn from this situation
as it existed in 19A2 for the Gorman Hohraacht and tho re fore for tho
German stato — in particular regarding tho assumption of nn existing
national emergency.

The problem of emergency and the particular case of sulf-dofcnnc
has been rogulctcd in almost all criminal codes in a way applicable
only to individual cases. The individual is granted impunity undor
certain conditions when "acting in an emergency arising for himself or
others individually 0 . It is rocognisod, howovor, in tho administration
of Justice and in logal literature that oven the comncnwealth, tho
"state" can find itself in an emergency, and that acts which arc meant
to and actually do contribute to overcome this emergency may be exempt
from punishment.

l) First of all, the question has been raised whether tho conception
of sclf-defcnso, conceived to cover individual cases, can be oxtondod
to l/ielude also a state self-defense, meaning a self-defense for tho
benefit of the state end the cosrcnweclth. The answer to this question
has generally been in the affirmative. 2) The srmo reasoning, however,

10899


15 July-R-DKr-2A-5-i.ecnp.rd (Eildcsheimer)

Court Ho. 1

as applied to self-defenac is also applicable to the conception of
emergency, as embodied e.g. in Section 5A of the German Penal Codo
and in almost all modem systems of criminal law. These provisions,
too, are originally conceived to covor individual cases. But, using
them as a starting point, the literature end the administration of
Justice errivo at a recognition in principle of a national emergency
with a corresponding effect with regard to tho definition of the con¬
cept of an emergency generally given in tho pend laws, the application
of those provisions to the stato, while Justified in itself, can bo
effected in principle only.

lihon the idoa of an emergency is applied to the state and whan tho
individual is authorized to coast t acts for tho purposo of eliminating
such a national emergency, hero as in the case of tho ordinary unor-
goncy determined by individual conditions, tho objective values must
fcc estimated. Tho necessary consequcncod of conceding such actions on
the part of the individual aist be that not only is ho absolvod from
guilt, tut moroovor hie ects aro "Justified". In other' words; tho oo-
callod national emergency, even though it is rocognizod only as an
analogous r.pp] ic'tion cf tho ordinary concopt of ooorgoncy in criminal
law, is a legal excuso. But ^et does "application" in principle to
tho cases of national emergency moan? TThothcr a national emergency is
"unprovoked" or not, whether, for example, the war waged is a "wa.r of
aggression", can obviously bo of no importance in this connection.

Tho oxLstonco of tho emergency only is decisive. The vital intorosts
of tho commonwealth and tho stato are substituted for th- limitation
of individual interests. Suoa'rizing wo can define the so-called
national emergency as an emergency involving tho vital interests of tho
state and the ccencnwealth, not to be eliminated in any other way. .»s
far as such on urgency cuthorlzes action, not only may a legal excuse
be assumed, but a true ground for Justification exists.

How far an erroneously assumed national emergency (putative emer¬
gency) is possible, and to bo considered as a legal excuse, I shall

• 10900


15 July-A-DJG—24-6-Lccnard (Hildcsheiner)
Court Ifc. 1


examine aftorwards. Uiich consonances c rise from this legal position
in the case of the defendant Karl Gebhardt?

1) As proved by the evidence the general situation in the different
theatres of war in the year 1942 was such that it theutfit about an
"actual", that scans an 1—cdlrtely imminent danger to the vital
interests of tho state re the belligerent power and to tho individual a
affected by tho war. Tho conditions on tho Eastern front in the winter
of 1941/42 as they have been described repeatedly during tho ovidonco
croatod a situation which endangered tho existence of tho state, through-
tho dengorousnoss of tho wound infection and tho threat to the survival
of the woundod md the combative force of the troupe arising thorofroa.

It oust bo added that tho pest Itorld Bar II was fought not only with
non and oatoriel but also by aeons of propaganda. In this connection
I refer to tho statoraents of the dofcrelmt Gobhrxdt in tho witness stand,
as far os thoy aro connected with tho information given to him by tho
Chiof ol Offico V of the Roich Socurity Main Offico, SS GmppenfUehror
Nebe, which shows thftt Just at that tlno ths enacy triod to urriaralno
tho t* gid'ng spirit of tho Gorman troops by paaphlots describing as
backward the organization and mntorial of the nodical service of
tho German '..‘ehrmacht, whilo on the other liand praising certain roiacdios
of the Alliod Forcos, as for instance penicillin, as "socrot wonder
weapons".

2) The assumption of a stato of n-ticnal anorgoicy prosupposos that
tho action forming the objoct of the indictment has been taken with the
purposo of removing tho danger. By this is scant tho objcctlvo purposo
of the eftlon, net Just the subjective purpose of tho acting individual.
It must bo askod, therefore, whethor the sulfonamide experiments were

an objectively adequate means for averting tho danger. This, however, doc
net neon that tho preparations really woro an adequate moans by \*hich
to meet the danger expertly. According to the evidence there can bo
no dcubt that those assumptions did really exist.

10931


r


Court 1

15 July 47-*-?&-2&-l~Maloy (Int. Hlldeehlmer)

3) Finally, there must not be "any different tfny*

In which national emergency could be eliminated. Ono
oust not misunderstand this requirement. Not evory
different way, which also, oould have been pursued only
by corresponding violations, excludes an appeal to
national omergenoy. Ihe requirement mentioned does not
mean that tte "way of salvation pursued oust neoosearlly
bo the only one possible. Of oourae, if the different
possibilities of salvation are evils of different dggroos,
only tho lessor ono Is to be choaen. It oust alsl be
nssumod that there should oxlst a oertaln proportion
between the violation and the evil Inherent In tho dangor.
This vlowpolnt, however, does not present any difficulty
In our case. In view of the fact that In the present oaso
many tons of thousands of wounded persons wore In dangor
of doath.

Aooordlng to the evidence there oan bo no doubt
that a "better way" oould not havo been chosen. On the
contrary. It has been shown thatln peace ns well as In
war tines everything was tried without success to olarlfy
tho problem of he efficacy of sulfonamides. Tho fact
ttat for experimental subjects prisoners were choeon who
had been sentenced to die andto be exeouted, and to whom
the prospect of a pardon was held out and actually granted
oan here not be Juiged In a negative sense. This fact can
not bo used as on argument when examining the legal
viewpoint, because participation in these experiments
meant the only chance for the prisoners to escape lmalAont
Execution. In thle connection I refer to the explanatlona
I have already given In connection with the eo-oalled llSely

agreement.

(IS) Special


Court 1.

15 July -17-A-PK-25-3-Maloy (I n t. Hlideshlaer)

Excuse.,

Beside the general national emergency discussed in

the literature of inter nationally

recognizes also a special war emergency.

According to It: "in a state of self-defense and emergency
oven such aotlons are pernltted which would be against the
laws of warfare and therefore against International law."
Different, however, from self-defense and emergency In the
sense of international law Is the "a 1 1 l t a r y
nooesslty of war" (war-ralson) whloh by
ltsolf never Justifies the violation of the laws of
warfare. Vmorgenoy and n<o oesslty of
war however, are d 1 f f 0 r e n t concepts. Tho
emergency duo to ahlch s olf-preservatbn aid aolf-dovolopnont
of the threatened nation nroat ntako, Justlflos, according
to general principles rooognlzod by the national laws of all
civilized countries, tho violation of ovory international
standard, ergo also of the logal principles of tho laws of
warfaro. Vhon applying the concepts of self-defense ard
omorgoncy as recognized by criminal and International law,
tho Illegality of violations ooonltted Is exdludod If tho
nation found Itself In a situation which by the application of
other means could not be relieved.

In this connection the following must be polntod out:

I have already explained before that the experimental
s heets on whom the sutfonomlde experiments forming tho
object of this case were performed, came under German
Jurlsdlctbn, o»an If no holds the opinion that In tho case
0f ?oland it was rot a question of genuine "debellatio" but
-..1> of "ocupatlo belllca". Howevor, of whateger opinion one
~->.t be In regard to this question, there can bo no doubt
‘hat aasuclng anlnternatlonal emergency


10903


Court 1.

15 July 47-A—P!4-25-3-Mcloy (l n t. Hlldoshlmer)


the performance of the experiments would have boon Jsu
Justified oven If at the tine of the dxperlnonts they
still had been oitIrens of enemy nations. For the regul¬
ating of the conditions of suoh persons according to
International law, the "Order of laws and practioos of
land-warfare" Is decisive whloh is attached to tho Hang
Convention of 18 October 1907 regarding tho laws and
practices of land-warfare. According to what has beon
Alld above, however, even a violation of such special
conventions, os contained, for Instance, In tho special
prohibitions of artlole 23*, Is Justified at tho tlno of
a gonulhe war emergency. In vlow of the fact that tho
spoolal conditions oharactorlrlng a real war-omorgenoy are
existent, the objection thst cltlxons of another country
should not have been uood for the oxporlments, io invalid.

(14) The^valuat^of Conflicting Right.s_.fl.nd.

Interosta ns Legal Exouoe.

According to woll-conelderod oplnlono, wo must start
on tho promise that the defendants, both lnprlnclplo and
In procedure, are to bo treld aocordlng to 0 e r m a n
orimlnal law. lhoy lived under It during tho time In
question, and they were subjoct to it. For this roason
I wish to approach one more viewpoint which should be consi¬
dered Independently and in addition to the legal excuses
already mentioned, when Judging the conduct of tho defendants.

For many years the legal provisions for emergency cases
have proved Inadequate. Theory tried for a long tine to fill
the gaps with explanations of a general nature, and finally
the Holch Supreme c ourt handed down Basic decisions oxpressly
recognising an "extra legal emergency". The considerations,
which they were based are known by the term "objective prln-


1090 /.


15 July 47-1-7 jC_2S-4-Keloy (EUdcahclsor)

Court I

eiple of the evaluation of conflicting righto and lniorooto". In tho
logel edalniatretlon of tho 2 e ich Suprcae Court Ind In furthor dlncua-
olona thin principle, to t* nure. In ooshlncd with aubjcctlvo conaldora-
tlonn of courses of action taken by the perpetrator in the lino of duty.
Therefore It in necoonary to diacuas hoth conalderatIona - that of eva¬
luating conflicting righta and lntereata and that of compulsion by
duty - togother cron If we suat, and shall, keep thca dlatlnctly ao-
parated for tho tloo boing.

1.) The consideration of an evaluation of conflicting righto and
lntereata aa Vagal oxeuae la generally foraulatod aa follcarat
"Vhoevor vlolatoa or Jeopardises a legally protoeted- right or lnteroata
of leaaor value In order to aavo thcroby a logally protected right or
intoreat of groator value doea not act In violation of tho la*/

Tho leeaer value nuat yiold to the groator ono. The act, vhon rognrdod
fron thla point of vlov, la Justified, lta unlawfulnoas - and not ooroly
tho. guilt or tho porpotrntor — le cancollod out.

Thla ec-callod prlnclplo of evaluating conflicting rights and lntoroato
first of all a foraal prlnclplo which oatabllshcS tho procodonco of tho
aoro valuable right or Intoreat aa such. T^U foraal evaluation prlncl¬
plo roqulroa on lta part a furthor naterlal evaluation of tho rights or
Interest to bo ccetparatlvoly conaldorod. Thla evaluation again roqulroa
to adopt tho liw and lta purport to the gonoral attitude of n clvlllaatlon
and, finally, to tho conception of law ltoolf. I*ot ua oxanino tho con-
clualono to be drawn froa this lcgel situation In our caao:

Agroencnt and ao-callod llkoly agreement, Juet aa voll aa r matlonal
oaorgcncy and a war onergency, constitute special legal Juatlficatlono,
tho recognition of which allows ua to diepeneo with a rccourso to the
general principle of evaluating conflicting rights and intorceta. The
latter rotalna lta subsidiary laportanco. 7urtherooro, these two epeclal*
legal justifications refer In tholr purport to a fair end oquitnblc way
of thinking aa well aa to tho proportional ieportanco of various typos of
ovils; thus they thenoelvcs includo the conception of evaluating conflict-


« •


10905


15 July jC_25_5_K«lo7 (Hlliesheimcr)

Court 2

lag right* and value. ?or thl reuoa, icon f others, tho following
srjst ho explained In detail at thi* point;

a) 1 national oncrfcncy and a war emergency unmlatakably were
exist in* In 1942. Ivory day tho life of thousands of wounded van en¬
dangered enloaa tho threatening would infection could ho chocked by
applying proper reaedlo* and by olfinlnatlng inadequate ro-odle*. 2ho
danger wae "momentary". Iasodiato help had to be prcrldod. Tho "public
lntorest" demandod tho experimental clarification of thi* quo*tion. Tfco
ovideneo has fc>vn that tho qceotion could not bo clarified by oxporisont
on animal* or by obeorving of incidental wound*.

b) But tho last word on thi* question ha* not yot boon *ald
Ju*t by referring to tho publlo intoroat. Oppoeod to tho public ir-
torost arc tho individual Intercat. The saying "nocolty know no
law" cannot claim unlimited validity. But Just a* little oan tho in¬
fringement on individual lntoreat* in order to onve cthor*, bo outright
considered as "contrary to good moral*".. Tho evidence hao shown that tho
taoobors of tho roilstanco movement of Camp H«von*bruock who woro condoanod
to death could oscapo tho imminent exocutlon only if they *ubnittod

to tho oxporinont* which form the subject of this indictment. Thoro 1*
no nood to examine now and here whothor the oxpoflnontal oubjoct* did
give their consent or whether they


10906


15 July-A-FL-25-ia-Mcloy (Lit. Hildeshelaor)
Court !io. I


pruMaabiy would have conmintcd, if, froa tbiir personal point of view
erd in the full knowledge of tho situation, they could have acdo a de¬
cision within the. .leaning of an objective Judicial opinion based on
probability, '..hat really Betters is the question of whether tho de¬
fendant, open a Just and fair evaluation of the interests of tho geno-
ral public end tho real interests of tfco experimental subjects could
co&- to the conclusion that, ail circuastcnccs considered, tho execu¬
tion of tho axpcx*Lacnts was Justifiable. This question doubtsl-ssly
can be answered in the affirmative. Quito apart from thv interest of tl>c
state in the execution of the experiments, the participation in tho
experiments tins in the real end wdl-considored interest of tb. expe¬
rimental subjects theirseivos, since this participation offered tto only
possibility of saving th-ir lives by way of an act of mercy.


The hearing of the evidence has shown that the experimental oub-
Jocts In Camp Ravensbruock were not select jd by tho defendant Ktivl


Gcbhardt nor by any of the other defendants, but that tho soloction wna
oa<to by tho competent agency within tho Roibh Security Main Office in
Berlin or the Political Department of the Ra.vensbrueck Concentration
Camp.' During tho conference in thj beginning of July 1942, in which
tho conditions for Uw experiments w«ro agreed upon, it was exprossly
assured that tho experimental subjects woro persons sentenced to doa.th
who wore to bo par onod if they survived tho experiments.

In view of tho fact ttat tho defendant Cobhardt did not himself
select tho experimental subjects and that, on the other hand, no com¬
plaint of any kind on the part of tho experimental subjects were over
reported to him, - tho defendant Fischer also was not in a position
to make any personal observations along these lines, - wo now must
examine tho question of tho legal position of th. defendant Gobhardt
if he assumed erroneously the consent of th_ experimental subjects.


10907


15 Jul>-A-FL-25-2a-lfclojr (Int. Hildashelter)
Court So. I


In criminal Lrw it is a generally recognized principle that there
can bo no question of intontional action if there oxistod an erroneous
assumption of justificatory facts. This principle can be found also in
Art. 59 of tho G craan Penal Code. But beyond that, this logal orinoi-
plc may bo considered on; of tho principles which are generally valid
and which ere dortved free tho general principles of the criminal law

of all clvlLizod nations, thus representing an inherent part of our
modem conc-oticn of criminal law.* In application of this principle, -
and oven if tho court docs net consider tho consent of the experimental
subjects as proven and therefore does not provide the prerequisites
for a legal excuse for objective reasons, - we still cannot assumu an
intentional on act cn the port of tho dofondant Qobhnrdt if he acted
under tho "erroneous assumption of an agreement by the experimental sub
jocte."


10908


Iho saae applies if the defendant Gebhardt orronoously assunod
a likoly consent of the experimental subjects* Wo do not moan hero
an erroneous assumption with regard to tho legal suppositions of such
a ono, but tho orronoous assunption of such
facts, which, had thoyudstod, would "hsH induced tho Tribunal
to recognize tho "likoly consont," I an referring hero to uy arju-
nontotion for the logal oxcuso represented by tho "likoly consent,"
which I understand as "an objoctivc judicial opinion based on pro¬
bability and according to which tho person concerned would have

*

consented to tho act fro a his own personal standpoint, if ho had
boon fully awaro of tho circumstancos." Provided that tho dofondant
Dr« Oobhardt assumed tho oxistonco of such circumstancos which sooms
certain according to the ovidonco - and ovon if ho did so orronoously,
tho intont and thus tho crlso in this coso also would bo excluded
according to tho ovidonco - and ovon if ho did so orronoously, tho
intont and thus tho crlna in thiscaso also would bo oxcludod accord¬
ing to tho gonorally acknowledged principle*

(17) The Dofondant* s Erronoous Assunption of an Erargoncy (Putatlvo
Smorgoncy ),

I already aontionod tho circtaastancos which justify tho assunption
of a national omoxv.oncy and a war oaorgoncy caused by tho spocial con¬
ditions prevailing in 19b2. If theso conditions were acutally prevail¬
ing, tho Illegality of tho act and not only tho guilt of tho porpot-
rator rould bo excluded, for reasons cm ora tod before. If tho
dofondant had erroneously assizaod circustan ccs which had they really
oxistod would ha Vo justified a national emergency and a war onorgoncy,
then, c ccording to gonoral principles already nontionod, tho intont
of the dofondant and this his guilt would bo eliminated also in
this rospeOt. Tho ovidonco especially tho dcfon<k»nt's own statements
on tho witness stand, loavo no doubt that when tho oxporiraonts began
in 19U2, ho had assuaod tho existence of such circuastancos, which wero


10909


15 July lj7-A-iED-26-2-Kochan (Int.,HeaaishoIcer)
Coer* 'c. I


indocd tho starting point and notivo for ore' ring and carrying out
thoso experimenta.

(13) Action by Ordor and in Spocial itllitary position.

Tho defendant C^bhardt c arriod out the experiments for tooting
tho efficiency of the sulfonamides by direct ord-r of tho heed of tho
.tuto and Supremo Caaaand~r of the Yfhonaaoht, A^olf IHtlor, aa trans-
sdttod to him by his military chief, Roichafuohror-SS Himler. In
thio case Oobhardt did not aet as a surgeon and chi«.f physician of a
largo clinic, but aa Gonoral Lieutenant and Consulting sur^oon of tho
Vfafforr-SS. ffhon carrying out this oreLr, tho fact had to bo considered
that Germany was in a stato of t.ht, which throe toned and made problem¬
atic tho foundations of tho Goman nation.

Yflion tho ie al consoquoncoa arising free tho feet th t tho do-
fondant Gobhardt acted upon military ordom, are exaednod, tho consti¬
tutional and political condtions prevailing in Ocraary in 19b2 should
not co left without consideration. I shall doal with all questions
arising front thoso conditions whan evaluating tho cvidonco prosontod
in tho cose of tho do fondant Frits Fischor. To avoid repetitions
I rofor to thoso lator arguments which cro equally relevant to tho
case of tho dofundant Oobiurdt. Thorelation of tho dofondant Qoohardt
to tho Roich Fuehrer SS, Himler, and to tho Coamnder-in-Chiof of
tho Wohmacht, Hitler, was in this respect similar to tho relation
which existed botwoen tho dofcr.dr.nts Fischer and Gobhardt.

In both eases acting by ordor and in a specific military capacitu
roprooonts a logal Justification, or at loast an extenuating fact.

DR. 5EIDL: I nwr ahk the’ TWbuflal tb' taKo hot'os of Xuebers
19 to 31. I Shall not* rtr.d thee into tho record, but I should liko '
to point out first in ay dosing brief and cspocioily in tho supolo-
nent in reply to t be Proa ecu ti. on. There -art a nuBb_r of statceibrita
^nich refer to what I have read ar.d that I have allundod to.

Z shall now turn to the case of the. defendant .Herts Oborhausar.


15 J,ly h 7-A-4CD-2 6-3-Mee'nan (Int. He dels hairier)
Court I


still have an hour an a half approximately gaining for your arguments.
Tha Tribunal will now be inracess until 9:30 o'clock tcecrrow


morning.


o


TKI MARSHALL: The Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30
'clock tomorrow corning.

(A racass was taken until 0930 Hours, 16 July 19U7)


10711


16 July 47-'-_TjC_l_l_ToBtcr (Elldeehcircr)
Court I


Official Transcript of the Aaeriean Military
Tribunal in tho rattor of the United States
of Aoerlea against lari Brandt, ot al,
defendants, sitting at Kumberg, C-ernany, on
16 July 1947, 0930, Juetice Beale presiding


TO MARSHAL: Porsons in the court rooa vill please find their scats.

Tho Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I Is now in session. God saro tho United States
of Aaerlce and this honorable Tribunal. Thcro will be ordor in the court.

THi PHiSXDBiTt Hr. Marshal, will you ascertain if the defendants
are all prosent in court.

THA MARSHAL: May it please your Honors, all the dofondants are
present in tho court.

THi FMOIDUT: The secrotary-^oncral will note for tho rocord the
prosoncc of all tho defendants in court. Counsel for the dofondants
C-obhardt, Tischor and Oberhaueer ray prociod with his argunent. Counsol,
you hare one hour ard 40 ninutos roralnin* for the prosontatlon of the
arguaonts on bohalf of ycur throo clionts. Tou a*y procood.

m. SIIDL-(Counsel for tho Dofondants Gobhardt, fischor and Obor-
haueer): Tour Honor, if you would take up now ay final ploa for tho
Defendant Herta Oberhaueer you would find in the index that it consists of
10 points. Point 1, which deals with Count I, I do not hare to deal with
hers after the Tribunal has already decided about the count of the


coaaon plAn or conspiracy. S^pierentinfi what I said about this count,
referring to the Defendant Gebhardt, T should like to add that my final
plea for the Defendant Gebhardt, contains a few statements which deal with
the Law flO of tho Control Council and I would like to ask the Tribunal to


take note of these staterents. I shall peralt myself to add somethin#: to


which I shall submit to the Tribunal,
ray submit the siyp lament he requests,
point 3 of ny final plea for the
deals with the selection of experimental
as a rosult of the evidonce that
10912


16 July 47_H_JjC_L_2_To*ter (Sildesheimer)

Court I

the Defendant Cberhauser bad nothing *o do with the choice of the experi¬
mental subjects, that that va* merely a natter of the organisation of the
Belcha Security Office or at leaet tho political department of Camp
Ravonabruock. Kuaber 5 of cy brief deala with the treatcent of experlaen-
tal persona after Surgical operation and thio point deals with it from tho
legal point of view. The Tribunal will find this on pago 13 of tho
English copy. Although the defendant Herta Cborhauser did not participate
in the carrying out of the operations, aha did attend to tho experimental
subjects undor tho direction of defendants Karl Oebhardt and frits flechor
Insofar as tho lattor did not do thle themselves. The ovidonco proves
that oapeclally tho dofondant fischor In most caaoe carriod out tho post-
oporatlTo troatnent of tho experimental subjocto and oepoclally tho
changing of the bandage* and applications of new plastor casts. Tho
activities of tho dofondant Oborhausor woro llaltod calnly to tho dis¬
tribution of tho various Suifonaaldo preparations and tho administering
of pnliu-rolloving preparations, Sho crrrlod out tho ordoro glvon hor In
this connection and did not dovolop any lndopondont activity In connection
with the post-operative treatment.

*hon roviovlng tho roeults of tho hearing of the cvldonco, it can bo
■eld that tho defendants Gsbhnrdt and ?ltchor as well as tho dofondant
Oborhausor did everything to keep the dam^o to bo expected, at low as
possible and to avoid fatalities. This Is especially true In tho case
of surgical measures, which had to be taken to fight wound infoctlon and
particularly gas gangronc. Those operations and treatments had to be
carried out for ‘tho sake of tho experimental subjects. Thoso operations
vero, thcreforo, not carried out for experimental but for curative pur¬
poses. The dofondant Oborhausor did not take part In these operations,
but merely took over the post-oporative treatment to an extent which 1
have already described. B\tt whet is true with regard to tho post-oporative
treatment Is trua to an even higher d"sroa regarding hor activities con¬
cerning purely conservative ccdical treatment such ps the administration
‘f preparations in the treatment with analgesics and tho changing of

10913


16 July 47-K-I jC_i_3- To star (Slide she laer)
Court I


dressings. lor, tha defendant E«rta Obarhausor, toy taking error tho post¬
operative treatoent after the experimental oporatlon was carried out -
and on which sho had no Influence at all did not accept any responsibi¬

lity for the experiment as such. She would not hare toocn asked to carry
out tho post-oporatlvo treatnent, if bwr ward had not happened to too
noxt to the large operating theater In the hospital of the Bavonsbruock
Canp. Therefore, her actlone can only too Judged according to tho regula¬
tions for professional conduct during curative treatment. The hearing of
tho evidence has given no final proof that tho defondant Intentionally
or caroleesly violated any of the professional rules generally rocognlsod
In oedlclne. It Is correct that In sooo of the sworn affidavits prosonted
by the prosecution In Ifcement Book 10, tho


1091 /*


lo Jul7->fc.3JI-&-l«4,eo3erd (Int. Eildesheluer)

Court Jo. 1

defendent Oberhnussr Is accused of having neglected the
care for the experimental subjects. In cnother connection I have
nlreedy pointed out that these sworn affidavits are nr.inly founded on
conclusions and also repeatedly contain allegations which are founded
rerely on hearsay. But these ellegebloss are definitely contradictory
to the etntecent of the witness 5 s 1 d o and the stoteeent which
wns given by the witness Knrgoreta M y d 1 a In her sworn affidavit
(Exhibit Oberhausrr Jo. I). Especially this latter affidr«lt which
was not contested by the prosecution, clearly proves that the defendant
u b e r h e user did everything within her power to tolp her
patients if possible, and that In spit* of the Dost difficult conditions
•he tried to trert pntlents In accordance with the principles genornlly
recognised In aedlolne.

Tho presentation of evidence has, therefore, given no proof that the
activity which Is specified ns "post-operative trertcent* presents
the set of facts necessary for conviction under nny crlninnl law.

The srae applies to the few deplorable, fr.tol cases which oeourred
In connection with the sulfmllnnlde experlrents. With regard to
the details I refer to the stateoents of the defendant Earl 0 e b-h n
b « r d t In the witness stand and ay own argusents node In ovaluiw
tlon of the evidenc e on this Count In the ca.se of the defendant Karl
& ebhardt, rnd which will be supolecentcd In the closing brief.

Tho hearing of the evidence has shown thrt the defendant Hertr Ober-
hauser cm not be blraed In rny vay f.r these three fatalities. She
reportcdlto her superior cacp physician rnd the loctl aedicrl officer
who never the syaptocs of the disease gave rise to any doubt and also
caused the defendant Dr. Eerl Oebhrrdt or another cedlcnl officer of
the Hohcnlychen hospltr.1 to be called la. The defendant Herta Ober-
ha.user could cot do any sore. If, despite oil that, tone cr.ses
resulted in fatalities it vne obviously not due to anything the
defendant Oberheuser had done or failed to do. In nny case, the henr-
la ^ of the evidence has not given a definite proof for the presence of


10915


Is July--3Z-2-2-teon#rd |lnt ; Eilaeehelaer)

Coart So. 1

such a c«ra el connection, nor has the evidence given any fr.cts which
vould prove that the defendant acted carelessly and therefore
crlalnally.

The importance of Count 4 of cy brief seres to ae to cake it neceesn-
ry to read this p-rt into the record.

It is the preliminary examination of the expericentrl subjects which
rlso was carried out by the defendant Oberhfuaer. I would ask the
Tribunal to look for this on page 8 of the original.

The evidence has shown - and the defendant ednitted it herself as
witness on the stand - that she carried out the preliminary examination
of the experimental subjects before the surgieal operation and thrt she
determined whether or not they vers fit for an oporotlon. Of what did
this preliminary examination consist? ?ron the defendant, Hertn Obor-
hruser's own statenent it ern be seen that the exrrlaclon consisted
of ex-cination of the experimental subjects for skin diseases and of
a check-up of the henrt end lunge. Furthermore, X-ray photographs
were taken. However, the defendant Obcrhauser had nothing to do with
the evaluation of these. The examinations carried out by the

N

defendant Oberhauser consisted thrrefore of nothing elec but the
application of exaninotlon not hods which nre customary boforo every
ourgical operation, even the scaliest.

*c have to add here that all theso operations necessitated pdninistrn-
tion of a narcosis and, for this reason, this preliminary examination
•ecccd cost necossary.

Froa those frets the following legal conclusions can bo drawni In
the evaluation of the evidence in the erse of tho dofendant Karl Oeb-
hardt I have already explained the reasons which inevitably bring
about the adoption that for the legal consideration of the defenda-nts*
actions only that law, which was valid at the tire of tho deed, can be
replied. They lived under this German law and were bound by the regula¬
tions of this legal systes. If these b»sic legal principles are applied,
Khlch generally confirm with the principles of the penal law of all


10916


io Jiily-H-5K-2-3-Leoncrd (Int. Eildcsheicer)

Coart 3o. 1

civilised nations, the conclusion should be drawn that the prelininory
Examination, qb curried out by the dcfendcnt Oberhauser couldronly
te considered crioinel if she had the intention to tuptort these ex-
perinents vith the exarlnatlons. This question cast bo answered in
the negative. The teak of the defendant Oberhauser consisted ex¬
clusively of the exeainrtlon of expericental subjects selected by
mother office, rhd to separate and return those who, according to
her nedica.l conviction, were not fit for even rn insignifleant surgical
operation. Ir. view of the foct that she did not take port in any of
the preliminary discussions nor was she lnforced of nay of tho
nodical deliberations in connection with these experioents - also
proven by the evidence - it e.ppeers quite improbable that she herself
vented those experinents or that she hod the intention of supporting
theao exporlrents in any way thr-t could be considered cftdnal. Accord¬
ing to the results of tho evidence and especially in view of tho
coinciding stateoents of the three defendants thensclves it oust bo
presumed that the Intentions of the dofendrat Oberhnuser regarding
thoie preliminary examinations were concentrctod only on the doslre
to elirlnate people who were physically unfit. This nnd only this was
her intention. Vfcerc it wne not poseible to find such physical Udfocts
mi to prove then objectively and to return the prisoners on the grounds
of these findings, the defendant had no influenco upon the further
procedure. According to the coinciding statements of the defendants
and especially the defendant Oberhauser*a own teeticony it oust further
V presumed that she did not want to have anythin to do with the
experinents as such, for the sole reason that she had core thrn enough
-o -o with her own patients, who required extensive specialised treat¬
ment, end she could only have the one :sire not to be burdoned vith
'arther duties in addition to her original assignment,
according to the facts it rlso appears completely out of the question
n trx defendant Oberhauser supported in any way whatsoever the


1C917


16 July-K-3£-c-U-Leourrd (Ir.*.. Eildcsheiner)
Court Fo. 1


decision to carry out these experiments, neither in the case of the
defendant Karl Gebhardt nor in the ce.se of any other person connect¬
ed with these experlaents, thus that any psychological cssistcnce
for the purpose of hacking the intention of the principal defendant
existed. The result of the evidence in this direction is completely
unristokehle and I refer particularly to the statenent of the
defendant Karl Gebha.rdt in the witness stand.

In these circunstences it is difficult to understand what exactly
should constitute a "pronotion* of these experiments. Tho defendants
had no"intent"-to promote the principal crlne and she cctunlly "did"
not procote it. The charge of attempted aiding nnd abetting in the
aeruling of the Oernen Crininnl Law nust be eliainatod for lock of
nn "intent" to that effect.

But one arrives at the sane conclusion also if one applies the
Participation Clruscs of Control Council Law To. 10 to the conduct
of tho dofendnrt Oberhauser. Eere too a coranitslon or osnlssion
can only bo considered legrlly important insofar as tho participant or
or assistant was guided ty the lntont to support the crlne of tho
principal crininnl or to proaoto it by ray other Deans. If this
intond was lecking the actions, too, are legally unimportant oven
under application of Control Council Law Ho. 10. In Judging the
action of tho defendant Oberhauser the Court will also have to tnke
into consideration the fnct that the sulfoncnide experlnonte in the
Havensbrueck Crap were not carried out by sone unknown doctors,
but that a physician of the caliber of the defendant Kcrl Ocbhrrdt
was responsible for these experiments. 7be defendant Krrl Gebhcxdt
va.s r rofessor of Surgery and n doctor who was highly respocted far
beyond the boundaries of the Oersm Reich. Beyond this he was the
physician in charge of a largo clinic which woe located in the
lnaodieto vicinity of the a>vencbru''Ck Crap nnd although the defend¬
ant Eerta Oberhauser a.s specialist for skix>- nnd venereal disea.ses


10918


lo Jaly-K-3&-2-5-Leosrrd (In* . E'ldesheiner)

Court ro. 1

had no special knowledge of the lending doctor* in this field, it is.
on the other hend, cleer beyond n doubt, - from the presentation of
evidence end especially from the testimony of the defendant Ober-
hnueer herself, - that the defendant Earl Gebhardt wee for her n
redicnl ruthority of the first rank; and, if it were only for this
reason, it oust be held completely impossible that she in any legnlly
i^ortant wry could even have considered to f ortify or strengthen
the decision of the defendant Earl Gebhardt, to carry out thsso
experiments which he hiaself conducted only in coapliance with
ordors given him, By examining the experimental subjects she merely
carried out her orders and did nothing which could rightly bo called
r consequential pronotion of these experiments. Her position in the
Crap and in conmetion with the experiments wrs so inferior that
the Intent to promote these exporinents through personal decisive
activities cust be ruled out coopletely.

Add to this that any doubts about the legality of these oxperinento
-ust have faded out before the reputation of the defendant Earl Oeb-
hrrdt an a. physlcl-n rnd surgoon, when tho defendant Hertn Oborhauser
obsorvod that tho defendant Knrl Gebhrrdt started to carry out and
sup<rvioe these experisents personally and thrt he did not entrust
the continuation of these to ono of the doctors of the Rr.vcnsbrueck
C-rrj but to on* of the best doctors fron the hospital in Hohcnlychcn.

I now cccic to noint #6 of my plea, which is on pare 16 of the
original. It deals with the scientific evaluation of the experiment
and the report .on the result of the experiments as riven at •-the
meeting of the Consulting Specialists in B 0 rlin in Hay, 1943 .

•ho jresontation of evidence hrs not only proved that the defendant
Oberheuser was in no wry connected wit'' the prepr ratoxy discussions
of these experiments and the decisions which lod up to the sulfonamide
experiments, but, furthermore, that the defendant Oberheuser had
nothinr to do with the scientific exploitation of the experiments
ant* with the ixiblishins of the results, The scientific utilization


10919


16 Jnly-K-3£-2-S-Leonerd (Iat. Eildeaheincr)

Court Vo. 1

of the result of the experlcent wee done exclusively by the defendants
K^rl Gebhardt end Tritx Tischer. ^he report on these experiments
v*.s el so nede exclusively by these two defendants. The defendants
H< rtc Oberhauser wi not even present at tha session of the consult¬
ing specirligts in Berlin in Kay I 9 U 3 and only learned about this
report rftcrwrrds. These facts also clearly reveal that it was
only by rccident that defendant Oberhauser participated in the
sulfonamide experiments end that her actions were not prompted by
eny scientific or other interests she nay have had, but were exclusi¬
vely caused by the fret that she was working in the Havensbrueck
emp r.t the tine when these experinents were carried out.

(7) Acting on orders .

I have already stated that with the lawful consideration of the
attitude of th* defendant Horta Oberhauser in connection with the
eulfonroide experinents, ell the reasons for the exclusion of injustice
end guilt should also be taken into account, which I have rlrondy
«:one into in the esse of the defendant Karl Oobhrrdt. This applies
perticulerly also to the reason for the exclusion of injustice as
fry as the consent of the cxocrloentrl subjects is concerned and
the reason for the exclusion of guilt in the erroneous acceptance
of such a presuned consent. furthermore, nil those facts have to be
considered which Justify the r.ssucption of o state of wpr emergency.

The defendant Oberhauser cr.n in particular allege that she ir.d rcted
on orders, pnd that for this reason her cm duct would either not
be punishable ct all, or that it would b e at least Justifiable to
acknowledge this fact ns aititrating to a considerable extent. Defend¬
ant Oberhauser did not find herself the object of military subordina¬
tion. However, a few aonths after Joining the adninistrntion of the
Concentration Cncp Havensbrueck as ccap doctor, she was sworn to
duty by decree of the coepetent nuthorltiee 3 . The fact ef this
compulsory service called for a much stricter condition of subordlnc-


10920


lo Juiy-K-3It-^.7—Lconrrd (Int. Elldeshelser)

Court So. 1

tion end obedience thm the principles of the general labor low
had been rp liod. It oust be added that the type of organisation
in a concentration ca=p differed only very little froa that of a
nliltnry service. Defendant Herta Oberhauser was not lees bound
to the orders she received then pay other aeaber of the SS or of
the administration of the cam at thh Concentration Cnnp of Rrver.a-
brueck; consequently - Just bee ruse she was e woonn who naturally
could assert herself even less than a am the reason for the
exclusion of punisfnent or for aitlgation of punlehscnt should
at least bo recognised to tho snae extent ns In the case of
defendant Irits Fischer, since she acted on orders. I shall deni
■epnrrtoly with the legal <*iostions arising froo those proceedings
when evaluating the evidence for the case of the dofendnnt Frits
Fischer.

I should like to ask the Trlbunrl to trJcemotooof nunbors 8 and
10 . I need not go into dotril rbo»t point 9 now, -ns tho prosecution
in thoir closing brief took thrt into consideration against defend¬
ant Obcrhausor - s to participation in aterllli&tlon experinents.


10921


Court I

16 Jul 47-H-3-l-iFX-tfalcy (Hildesheiaer)

I now cose to the cate of the defendant Dr. Fritz Fischer. The
index to the plea on behalf of this defendant shows that ay statements
contain eight colcti.

Foint 1 dealt with Part I of the indictsent, coanon design or con¬
spiracy. At the Tribunal hat decided to withdraw thit charge, I do not
need to deal with the point.

I should like to ask the Tribunal to take note of Counts II and III
and alto Points 4 and 5, and 1 now cose to Point 5, which dealt with the
Justifications of the defendant Fitcher, at well at the defendants
Cebhardt and Oberhauter, acting on orders. This point it on cage 7 of
the original docuaent, on cage 9 of the Inglish copy.

The defendant Fitcher participated in the erperlnents for testing
the effect of tulfanilaside upon orders of hit sedical and silltary
superior Karl Cebhardt. It it recognized in the Penal Code of all
civilized nations that action upon orders reoretenti a reason for oxesp-
tion froo guilt, even if the order itself is contrary to law, but binding
for the subordinate. In examining thit legal question one troceeds from
the principle that the Court disregards the reasons of Justification and
exemption froo guilt out forward ty so in the case of the defondant Karl
Cebhardt and considers that both the order given to the defendant Karl
Cebhardt hlaself, as also the passing on of this order to the defendant
Fritz Fischer, are contrary to law.

The adherence to a binding order, even though it bo contrary to law,
on the oart of the subordinate creates for bin a reason for exemption
free guilt and, therefore, renders hits also exeopt froa winishnent. This
question is disputed only Insofar as eose consider the action of the
subordinate not only excused but even "Justified". Further exaainatlon
of this question at issue seeac, however, not necessary in these proceed-
lngs, since the result is the sa=e in both cases, naaely, the perpetrator's
impunity.

She decisive action in the case on hand is, therefore, whether and
in how far the "order" for the sulfanilamide experiments was binding for


10922


Court I

16 Jul 47-*-3-3-I3Wtaloy (Hlldaeheimer)


the persons carrying It out. Ia view of the fact that, In orlnelole,
the lav la force at the tlse is applicable, as the defendants lived
under thle lav and it vas blading for thee and the application of a lav
vhich became effective later would violate the Drinciple "nulla ooone
»lne lege", the Question la therefore to be exaalned within the frame¬
work of Article 47 of the German killtary Penal Code.

I draw the attention of the Tribunal to the point that I shall come
back to this in the supplement to my final statement.

According to the Paragraph 47 of the German Penal Code a subordinate
who obeys Is liabla to be "punished as an accessory, if it Is known to
him that the order given by the superior concerned an act vhich has for
its purpose the ccaslsslon of a general or military crime or offense."

and of my quotation.

However, it Is not correct, as is oometlnes accented, that Article
47 of the German Killtary Code itself settles the question In how for
military orders are either binding or not binding. This Is a question
of public and administrative lav. But It must always concern on
"order regarding service matters", the same as in other military con¬
ditions, that Is to say, something which "is Inherent to military ser¬
vice". These assumptions are immediately present both in the case of
the defendant Karl Gebhardt enl in that of the defendant Frits Fischer.
Both were medical officers of the Vaffen-SS; therefore a unit of the
German Hehrmacht In vhich esoocially the principle of obedience -as
strongly pronounced. Karl Gebhardt was Frits Fischer's immediate
superior; In matters of duty his order to assist with the medical exoerl-
meets to be undertaken was a binding order for the young medical officer
Fischer.

In the investigation of the legal questions resulting from these
circumstances, we will secarate the case of the defendant Kerl Gebhardt,
where the "order" was issued from a very high authority - namely, from
the head of the State and the Ccesender-ln-Chlef of the Vehmacht -
from the case of the defendant Frit* Fischer, in which there is a quos-


10923


Court I

16 Jul 47-4'-3-C-LE*-KaIoy (Hildesheicer)


•ton of an especially close relationship to his immediate nilltary
superior. Later I will return esoecially to the general Questions of
public lav concerning the ccosand of the Fuehrer.

a) The evidence has ahovn that the order for testing the effectivo-
-eas of sulfanilamide oroceeded from the highest authority, namely, from
•he CoBsander-ln-Chlef of the Vahrmacht personally. The reasons of
Justification of the orotable acceptance of the wartime state of emer¬
gency and the balancing of interests, as discussed fully already in the
investigation of the case of the defendant Karl Gebhardt, gain looortanco
independently first in the person of the defendant Frit* Fischer. But
they have influence, of course, on the legality or illegality of the
order. The investigation of this auestion has shown that the given order
as such legal. Ivan if one wculd not want to take this for granted,
however, for a subordinate even an illegal order of binding nature Is of
eoaent.

Article 47 of the German Military Penal Codo, ao alroad;. observed,
leto the punishment of the subordinate stand if "it vac known" to the
latter that the order of the superior "concerned an act which had for
its purpose the cccnlssion of a general or ollitary crime or offense."

In all other cases the cunishaent touches only the commanding superior.

Just as in most military courts of other armies, the administration
of Justice re Article 47 of the German Military Penal Ccdo also shows
the tendency to a vast limitation of the oenul responsibility of the
subordinate. That this tendency has grown free the purpose "of guaran¬
teeing the performance of the duty of obedience obligatory to the sub¬
ordinate, in the interest of military discipline and the Vahrmacht 1 b
constant readiness for battle," changes nothing in the fact as such.

Here it is a matter of evaluating the legal position at the time the act
was committed.

Article 47 of the German Military Penal Code establishes a oenal
responsibility on the cart of the subordinate only if it was "known” to
him that the order concerned an act "the wxrooso" of which was a crime or


1092 .


Court I

16 Jul 47-M-3—4-Z£K-halcy (Eildesheiner)


as offense. The German administration of Justice dema n ds in addition a
•definite knowledge" on the part of the aoting subordinate; accordingly,
cases of cere doubt (conditional intent) or sere obligation to know
(negligence) are expressly excluded. Seither is the idea satisfactory
that the performance of the order resulted objectively in the committing
of a crime or an offense. On the contrary, the superior must have
intended this, and this fact oust have been known to the subordinate.

In applying these principles there cannot be any doubt that these
suppositions were not fulfilled either in the case of the defendant Karl
Oebhardt or in the case of the defendant Frit* Fischer - to say nothing
at all of the defendant Herta Oberheuser. Both of these defendants
regarded the order given then by the head of the State as a neasuro of
var which was conditioned ty special circtnstances caused by the war
itself, and by means of which a auestion should be answered which was of
decisive importance not only for the wounded, but beyond that, should
furnish a contribution in the struggle for the foundations of life of the
Oersan people and for the existence of the Reich. Both defondar.to wore
convinced at that tine that the order given then should have any other
purpose but the cccaitting of a punishable crine.

b) Then, in regard to the particular position of the defendant
Fritz Fischer, the Banning of ar. order of the "immediate military
superior* is to be investigated. At the beginning of the experiments,
the defendant Fritz Fischer had the rank of a first lieutenant. He took
cart in the experiaents at the direct command of his Military and medical
superior who held the rank of general. In view of the surpassing authority
of the defendant Earl Gebhardt, as surgeon and chief of the clinic
Kohenlychen, and his high military position, a refusal van completely out
of the question.

On principle, no other points of view but those already discussed
apply here either. Whether the order is a direct or an indirect one
offers no reason for difference. In the case of the defendant Fritz
Fischer, however, the following is still to be considered: whether it


10925


Court I

16 Jul 47-«-5-5-icX-il07 (Eildesheier)

*vbb known - etc. to the subordinate it always to be especially examined
according to the racial circumstances of the recant. At the same tine,
of courte, a decisive part it played by the fact that the order for these
experiments was given tc thtf defeaiant Fritz Fischer, not by a military
guporior who would not have been in a position or duly qualified to give
an expert decision of this Question, but by a person who not only occu¬
pied a high military rank but beyond that had Just that particular
experience in the sphere in which the experiments were to be carried out.
the defendant Xarl Gebhardt was not only a recognised and leading German
surgeon, but he had also as consulting surgeon to the Kaffen-SS and as
chief of a surgical reserve coebat unit acauired special experience in

the sphere of combat surgery and in the treatment of the bacteriological

•

infection of wounds. The reason for this order given to the defendant
Frits Fischer by his chief must have affectod him all the more convin¬
cingly as it coincided exactly with the experiences which the defendant
Frit* Fischer himself had gained as medical officer with the First SS
Armored Division in Russia.

In addition, there was the special framework in which all this
took place: Frits Fischer had been released from the combat unit on
account of serious illness and had been ordered to the Hohenlyehen clinic.
Ke was under the immediate impression of hard experience at the front.

In Hohenlyehen he found himself in a clinic which operated in peacetime
conditions under the energetic direction of a man extraordinarily gifted
in organisational and scientific matters. Every building, every instal¬
lation of this recognised model Institute, the numerous clinical innova¬
tions and modern methods of treatment, every one of the many successful
treatments of Hohenlyehen was inseparably bound up with the name of the
chief physician Earl Gebhardt and gave unconditional and unlimited value
to his word and his authority in his entire environment.

For all these reasons the defendant Frits Fischer can nave had no
doubt at all but that the performance of the order given him was from
the medical standpoint a requisite end permissible war measure.


10926


Court I

16 Jul 47-*-3-6-Sy.-Kaloy (Eildesheiaer)


Precisely the open carrying out of the individual experimental neasuras,
with the exclusion of every duty of secrecy, as veil as the reoort of
the results vfaich was provided for in advance aai also executed before a
critical forua of the highest ailltary physicians, were esoeclally suited
to nip in the bud any distrust of the Justification of these experiments
in the aind of the defendant Trite Jiecher.

Sven if the defendant Fritz Fischer still had any last personal
doubts, his opposition and subseouent refusal vould under the circum¬
stances have been Just for hia neither practicable, nor could it be
expected of hia.

The defendant Trit* Fischer has hieeelf in the witness box explained
his attitude towards ailltary orders. The oersonal ailltary service of
the defendant in the front line, and his own serious wnr injury, aro
proof that his Idea, that it is necessary in wartiae to subordinate tho
individual to the cosaon interests and the unconditional submission to
ailltary orders, is not an eapty phrase to hia but his sincere conviction
and coral standard.

There is also an undeniable difference between the cold Juristic
view of an abstract ailltary order, and the personal attitude of a nan
vfco had quite recently in his own experience seen thousands of young sol¬
diers die for their fatherland while obediently executing a ailltary coa-
nand, and who is also in his heart prepared to nako tho sane sacrifice
for his fatherland. If we, furtheraore, consider that in our case a
29 year old first lieutenant and assistant chysician was confronted with
the strict order of his superior general who was at the sane tine a
scientific authority la the SDeclal research field, and who, on the whole
vas a strong personality with unusual influence, wo cannot expect that
the defendant. Fritz Fischer could have ouoosed and refused the order.


10927


16 Juiy-l-FL-4- 1-iieehan (Int. HildesheLasr)
Court \o. I


In judging these facts of the case no must not proceed without stating
that the action of the Defendant Fritz FISCHER was not the essential
reason for executing the facts with which he is charged in the Indict-
sent. If the Defendant Fritz PI5£HSR had for one reason or another
r.ot been prepared or able to cooperate, the research pro gran once or¬
dered would nevertheless have been carried out Just the sane, Karl
GE3HARDT would not Ijjve had any difliculty in choosing another assist¬
ant out of the number of his assistant-physicians in the clinic Hohen-
lychen. Ck\ account of the great respect in which Karl CS*A®T was
held at this clinic, probably everyone 01 his assistants would have
been wiLllng to dc it, especiaUy as these experiments woro carried out
by orders of the State.

Therefore, the action of the Defendant Fritz PISCER did not constitute
a condition, the absor.ee of which would havo prevented tho octo contained
in the Indictuent, from being caowittod. HSCKER's refusal to cooporate
■ould not havo savod the persons to be usod in tho oxporinonts from
such. Fritz FISCIZR was actually only a tool in tho exocution of tho
ordoro, a tool which could havo boon rcplacod any time; and in view

of the existing strict order to carry out tho experiments, it \?ould
definitely havo boon roplaced.

Them is no rood to state in greater detoil that tho conduct of
tho Do fondant Fritz FISCHER runained in any case confined to tho indi¬
vidual ordors which wort given to him. It can bu oasily concluded that
the Defendant not responsible personally for his cooperation, as
r.is chief, Karl GE3KARDT, gave him only vory limited oart orders ns
his clinical assistant, ard this shows cloarly again tho purely mili¬
tary condition of subordination. As Fritz FISCHER also strictly adhored
to the part-orders given to him and did not show any initiative of
is own, it excludes him moreover free any responsibility concerning
questions which wore outside his sphero of action. It is impossible to
‘ale*. Fritz FISCKSft responsible for questions connected with tho legal

10923


16 July-lf-r L-l- 2 -lkjohan (Int. Kildesheir.er)
Court No. I


ard medical preparation of the directives for the experiments and the
coaaotic aftor-treatmenat.

Apart from this view-point, the special conditions of Public Law,
which existed in Germany at the time of the action, ought to bo men¬
tioned. They woro explained by Profossor JAHPJIZISS in his opening
speech boforo the International Military Tribunal in the procoodings
against Hcroann GCERDiG and otters. Profossor JARRREISS tteroby repre¬
sented the foliating point of view:

"State orders, whether they lay darn rules or dccido individual
casus, can always be measured against the existing written and uiwrit-
tun law, but also a-ainst tho rules of international law, morals and
religion. Someone, even if coly the conscience of the person giving
tho ora-rs ordered something which ho had no ri^l.t to order? Or has
hj formed and published his order by an inadmissible procedure? But an
unavoidable oro-lom for all declination lios in this: Should or can it
grant the members of its hierarchy, its officials and officers, tho
right - or evon kiposo on them the duty - to oxaaino at any tiao any
erdor which demands obedience from them, to dutoraino whether it is
lawful, and to decide accordingly whotter to oboy or refuse? I’o dom i¬
nation whic h has apnoarod in history to dat e has given an aff irmative
a nswer to th is qu estion . Only certain soevera of tho hierarchy wore ovor
granted this right; and thoy wore not granted it without limits. This
was also thu case, for instance, under tho extremely democratic cons¬
titution of the G-man Reich during tho tioiasr Republic and is so to¬
day under tho occupation rule of the four great pewters ov„r Go many.


In ns f ar as m ch a right of examination is not granted t o .BBST
Ours of tte hierar chy, the order has lo. f t al force for th:a .

All constitutional law, that of modorn states as well, knots acts

♦

of state which must be respected by tho authorities ov-n when they arc
dofoctivo. Certain acts of laying down rules, certain docisions on in¬
dividual cases which have received logcl force, are valid oven when tho


10929


16 July-lf-FL-4-3-i£-'-nan (Int. Hildoshoiaor)
Court No. I


person giving tho order has exceeded his competence or has made a mis¬
take in fora.


If only bccauso the process of going back to a still higher order


rust finally co*j to an end, orders must exist under every government


that are binding on the a«_mvcrs of tho hierarchy under all circuastancos
and are therefore law whore the officials arc concerned, oven if out¬
siders nay see that they aro dof^ctivo as regards content or for*....
.Tho result of thu development in the Reich of Hitler wao at any


rate that HI7I2R beenae thu supreai legislator as well as tho supreme
author of individual orders. It was not least of all under tho i.a>ros-
aion of tho surprising successes, or what were considered successes in
Germany and abroad, above all during tho course of this war, that ho
bcccjwo this. Perhaps the Gorman people arc - even though with groat
differences botwoon North and South, tfost and East - oarticularly easily
subjected to rctucl power, particularly easily led by ordors, particu¬
larly used to tho idea of a superior. Thus tho whole process may hnvo
been aado easier.

Finally tho only thing that was not quite clear was KITUSl'a ro¬
le tionship to the Judiciary. For, even ir. Hitlor-Gcmcny, it was not
feasible to 1:111 the idea that it was ossontinl to cllcw Justico to bo
cxvrcisod by independent courts, at least in matters which concern tho
»id- masses in their everyday life. Up to the highest group of party
officials - this has beon shown by some of the spoechus by tho then Reich
Justico L-oder. Tho defendant. Dr. FRANK, presented hero - thuro was
resistance, which was actually not v«ry successful, when Justico in
civil and ordinary crirdnal cases was also to bo forced into tho "sic
jubeo" of th) one *an. But: opart froa the Judiciary, which was actual¬
ly also tottering, absolute monocracy was coaploto. Tho Reichstag's
pompous docLaration about HITLER 1 s legal position, dated tho 26 April
1942 was actually only the stat«uajnt of whet had become practice long


before.


10930


16 -liechan (int. Kildeshcimor)

Court No. I

The Fuehrer*a orders wore law already a considerable timo boforo
•his second V/orld l.’er.

In this state order of his, the German Reich was treated os a oart-
r^r by the othor states, and this in the whole fiold of politics. In
this connection, I do not wish to stress tho way (so impressive to tho
Gcraan people and so fatal to all opposition) in whioh this took place
in 1936 at tho Olympic Gaaos, a show which Hitler could not order tho
delegations of foreign nations to attend, as ho ordered Gormans to tho
Nucrnborg party rally in tho case of his own stato shots. I should liko

rather only to point out that the governments of tho grontost nations

• 0 ^

in tho world considered the word of this "almighty" nan tho final do-
cisicn, incontostably velid for uvory Gorman and based their decisions
on aajor qiwations on tho fact that Hitler's order was incontestably
valid. To mention only the most striking cases, this fact wis relied
open when tho British Prime Minister, Neville Chn-iborlnln, after tho
Munich conference, displayed tho famous peace paper, when he handod
at Croydon. This feet was adhored to when people wont to war against
thj Roich ns tho barbarous despotism this or* men.

No political system has yet pleased all people who live under it
or who feel its effects abroad. The Geroan politico! syston in the Hit¬
ler ora displeased a particularly largo and cv^r increasing number of
people at hone nd abroad.

But that does not in any way alter tho fact that it existed, not
lastly becnuso of tho recognition from abroad and bocouso of its cf-
fectivuross, which crused a British Prime Minister to make the now world
famous statement at r critical period, that democracies need two years
longer th-n tie totalitarian governments to ntt- in a cortain goal. On¬
ly one who has lived ns if expjllod free arongst his own Dcoplo, amidst

% ®

blindly bo lie via: Ksacs who idolized this men as infallible, knows
how 1irmly Hitler's power was anchored in the anonymous and innumcrc'olo
following who b-lieVed him capable only of doing what was ri 2 ht *


10931


16 July-i^-.-iWi-5-Mechar. (Int* Kildeshoiaer)

Court No. 1

They did not fcuw him personally, ho was Iran thoa what propaganda
r of ..in, but this he was so uncoaprcmsingly that everybody nho saw
hin iron close to cad saw otherwise, knew clearly that resistance was
absolutwly useless rnd, in tba eyes of other people, was not even
martyrdom.

b'oeld it thoroforc not bo a self-contradictory proceeding if both
tnc following assertions were to be realized at tho some tiiau in tito
rules of this trial?....

.The functionaries had neither the right nor tte duty to axasdno

tto orders of the ■or.ocret to determine their log-lity. For thorn thoso
orders could not bo illegal at all, with one exception of th-sv cases
in which the aonocrat placed hLaself - according to the indisputable
values of our times - outside every human order, and in w..ich ft rod
question of right or wrong was not put at all and thus a real ur.-jaination
was not dturndod.

HITLER'S Mill was the ultimate authority for their considerations
ai what to do and whot not to do. Tho Foohrcr's order cut off every dis¬
cussion. There'ore: A person who, as a metioncry of the hierarchy
refers to an order of the Fifchrer's, is not trying to provide p. , round
for being oxoiptod froa punishnont for an illegal action, but he denios
the assertion that his conduct is illegal; for the order which he coo-
plicd with *.ias loyally uncssailable.

Only ft parson, who has understood thi*., can have ft conception of
tr.o difficult innor struggles which so .uany Gorman officials had to
fight out in those years in face of .many a decree or resolution of Hit-
l.r's. For ttoa 3uch cases were not a question of a conflict botftoon
right and wrong:

Disputes about legality sank into insignificance. For the.n tlxj
problom was ono oi legitimacy: as ti^ went on, huorn and divino law
opposed each other over non. strongly art -ore frequently.

Therefore: Vnirtover tfx, Charter understands by the ordurs which it


10932


16 July-M-FL-4-c>-^chan (Int. Kildtshoioar)
Court No. I


svta -side as c*. ground for cx^jaption free punishnant, can the Fuohrcr'3
jrdvr be scant by this? Can it coax, within the meaning of this rule?
Must one not ncccot this order for what it was according to tbj inte¬
rior Goran constitution as it had developed, a constitution which had

• • •

been explicitly or implicitly recognized by the cocounity of statos?.,.
....The one suprerje will became, quite simply, technically indisoon-
aoble. It became the mechanicel connecting link for the whole. A funct-
ior-ary who .’.ot with objections or ever, resistance to one of his orders
from other furctionaries only needed to refer to an order of the


Fuehrer's to ot his way. For this reason aany, very many, an one those
Germans who felt Hitler's regime to be intolerable, who indeed hated
him like the devil, looked ahead only with the greatest a.odoty to tho
tine when this nan would disappear from the scene: for what would
happen when this corumcting link disap .seared? It was a vicious circlo.

I rvpo.its An erdor cf the Fuehrer's was binding, - and ind eed le¬
gally bi nd ing - o n the -wrson to whaa it was given, evon if tho^dir ecty
ive was con trary to international law o ~ to other traditional yaluos."

Sa far too stateoents of Prof. JUKBL8& before the International


Military Tribu al. The development presonted horo seems to to particu¬
larly relevant for the case of the defendant Fischor, since ho himself
in the .fitness box described his attitude towards the Fuehrer's command
in a way which, because of his very youth, his idealistic conception
of life and duty and his manly corfossion, was particularly convincing.

It is tx-uo that in the face of all this reference will bo iado to
Article 3 of tho Charter for the International Military Tribunal which
roads? "The fact that a Defendant actod pursuant to the --ior of his
Govoro-ont or of a superior shall not free, him from responsibility,
but may be considered in mitigation of punishment if the Tribunal do-
t .redoes that justice so requires.■

Accordingly, Law No. 10 of the Control Council, Article II, para¬


graph U reads:


10933


16 July-tf-FL-i-7-lichan (Int. Hildcshelter)

Court No. I


"b) The fact that a persai acted pursuant to the order of his Gcvorn-

.a/nt or of a superior does not free him free responsibility for a critas

but aay bo cxisiderod in mitigation."

In the face of this objection the following is to be pointed out:

At tha tiiso of their actions the defendants wore subject to Gcr,:um

law according to uhich the degreo of their responsibility was dotor-

•

ained ar.d, oven to day, must Justly bo referred back to that moaont ,

• 1 1 1

The following should be emphasised, hooover, in case tho Tribunal should
not apply the logal provisions in fcrco ct tho tiaw of the act, but
should base its Judgpont on Law No. 10 of tho Control Council, though
it represents a manifest


109 %


16 July - 1! - IL 5 - 1 - Coo< ( ---ildesfcieaer)
Court I


violation of the prohibition of retroactive application
of ponal laws.

.van from the above named provision of the Law of the
Control Council the principle cannot be derived that every
command of a superior should under the aspect of Ponal Law,
be irrelevant under all circumstances. This also applies
to the problem of the exemption from responsibility and
exemption from ponalty. The provision only states that the
existence of such a command in itself docs not exempt one
from the responsibility for a crime; it docs not hov/ever
preclude by any means that in connection v.ith other facta
it tay be relevant for this problem as well.

The guiding legal a.pect underlying these deliberations
is contained in the concept of the so-called conflict of
duties which has been repeatedly mentioned before. This
aspect does not coincide eo ipso ;ith the 'objeotivo'
principle of balancing interests, as discussed in examining
the case of the Defendant Karl G33HA7JT. In addition ono
must insist on consideration of the 'subjective' position
of the person committing the act.

In othGr word3, in order to arrive at a just appreciation
of tha cose, the personal situation of the person emit ting
tha act at the moment of it being committed will have to
be waited as well. This applies particularly to the
personal situation into which the person committing the
act has baen put by reasons of a higher command which is
binding for him and influences him. Besides the general
'objective' principles of balancing interests, such
a special 'subjective' state of coercion can and must
therefore bo considered in his favor also. A 'coraand'
can, therefore, according to the concrete situation shift
the boundaries of culpability further in his favor.


10935


16 wily - - IL - 5 - 2 - COOK ( Int.Bildeshieaer)

Court I

•

Reinhardt F3ANX, the great German criminologist, has with
regard to the problem of the so-called conflict of duties
established the maxim: 'Inasfar as the conflict of duties
has not been expressly regulated the maxim should prevail
that th6 higher, the more significant, the more important
duty is to be fulfilled at the expense of the less high
one and that, therefore, omission to fulfill the latter one
is not contrary to law. 1 *

With good reason it has always been emphasized that

in such a situation of conflict of diversified duties the

decision is, in the end, not to be found in positive law,

but it is of an ethical nature. That is why, in such a

situation, a certain leeway must bs left t<5 the personal

conscience: it is not possible hero to arrive at evorythlng

through the coarse means of an outward penal provision.

This completely •personal' character of genuine ethical

conflicts has also bsen fully recognizod ond emphasized

in the authoritative philosophical literature. Nicolai

SZA3TMUIN, Zthlo (2nd edition, 1935, P/ 421 / 22 ) says for

instanoo, with regard to genuine conflicts of values:

It is a fateful error to believe that such problems can bo

solved on principle in theory. There are borderline cases

in which the conflict in conscience is grave enough to

require a different solution according to the particular

ethos of the person. For it lies in the very nature of

aro

such conflicts that valuos/balanced, and that it is not
possible to emerge from them without becoming guilty.
Accordingly, a man in this situation cannot help making
a decision/ A person faced with this serious conflict,
incurring such a measure of responsibility, ought to deoide
this: To follow the dictates of his conscience to the best
of his ability, i.e. according to his orra live sense of the

10936


16 July - H-IL-5-3 - Oook ( Inti Hiifleshiemer)
Court I


level of values and accept the consequences.'

Ho further argument should be needed for demonstrating
that Just from an ethical point of view measuring of such
personal deoisions by standards of Penal Law is out of tha
question.

I would like to ask the Tribunal to read points 6 and
7 and I would like to come t« the next point of my final
plea which deals with the membership of the defendant
?ritz Fischer in the SS. The Tribunal will find that on
page 31 of the original, which is page 33 of the English
text.

In Count IV of the Indictmor.t Defendant Fritz 7ISC3711
is charged with the membership in an organisation declared
to be criminal by the International Military Tribunal, i.e.
the membership of the Sohutzstaffoln of the NSDAP (oommonly
known as the "SS").

Tho ovidonce has 3hown that Defendant Joined tho

dcitor-SS (cavalry-SS) in 1934. Defendant has when

interrogated as a witness On his own behalf explained in

detail the roasons for his Joining up. They were the same

reasons which, in the years after the soizuro of power by

the National Socialists, forced and oaused many hundreds of

thousands of young Germans to join any of the formations

or affiliations of the Party. The neccessity for such a

step was - just in tho ca3e of young university students -

not only derived fron the fact that granting of privileges

during the course of study and the admission to examinations

was rendered dependent upon it, but over and beyond this,

it -..as, of their duty to Join any of the formations of the

•

Party and to do service there, owing to the decrees of tho
German Studentship as the legal representation of the


10937


16 July -H-IL-5-4- Cook ( Int. Hildeshiomer)

Court I

German Universities.

It is true, though, that membership of the SS wa3 not
precisely prescribed. Membership of the SA, the National-
Socialist Motor Corps, or, the National Socialist Aviator
Corps v;culd have been sufficient. Defendant would have made
his choice much more carefully, could ho have had the faintest
idea that 12 years afterwards this organisation would bo
declared criminal. That the ^efondant Fritz FISCHSa joined
the SS was rather more in the nature of an accident, and
was, last not least, occasioned by the fact that among the
Party formations only the SS gavo him the opportunity at
that time to indulge in horseback-riding.

The Defendant joined a Peitersturm (Cavalry unit) of
the SS in 1934. This fact is relevant in so far, as in the
Judgment of tho International Military Tribunal of
30 Soptcmbor 1946, declaring the SS a criminal organization,
tho so-called .loitor-SS was exprossly excepted.

Apart from this fact, there seems to bo good causo
to consider, from a genoral point of view, the question
of condemning a Defendant for his membership in an
Organization declared criminal.

Tho International Military Tribunal has , in spite of
all its restrictions and exceptions, in spite of time
limits in its Judgment of 3° September 1946, violated a
principle which forms an integral part of modem Criminal
Law and present-day conception of law in general. It is
the fundamental axiom that there can be no punishment
when there is no guilt.

In this connection, the reasons should be briefly

examined which, after the seizure of power by the National

• •

Socialists, in 1933, caused many hundreds of thousands


10938


16 July - K-IL-5-5 Cook ( Int. Hilaoshiemer)
Court I


of young Germans to join th6 Party foraations-apart from tho
pressure brought to beer upon th6m. defendant Fritz FISCH.3R
has explained those reasons in detail in the witness box.
and I cay be allowed to refer to this for the details. It
is a fact that many youngGormans, and last not loast cany
-ambers of tha young student-group, silenced tho misgivings
they had for the very reasen ultimately that they had to
witness tho former enemies of Germany after tho First World

War again and again denying political equality to democrat-

• •

ically and parliamentarily governed Germany, and doing nothing,
in realization of a truly constructive idea, to take into
account the Just interests of the German people. The

misgivings abcut much abuse of National Socialism woro bound

• »

to lose a good deal of their strength, when it was shown,
in the yoars aftor the seizuro of xwer , that also tho other
nations of *Suropo and tho rest of tho world did not hositato
to rooognizo tho National-Socialist State, and, far from
drawing the political or economical conclusions of their
allegedly ideological antipathy - ovon wont as far as to
sond their diplomatic roprosontatives to tho groat
demonstrations of the Party and to bo officially ropresontod
at tho Reich Party Cengrosses.

This stato of affairs is relevant from tho point of view
of the evidence, insofar as it is proven in any cas3 that
with regard to tho bad faith and the criminal intent of tho
individual members of the Organizations declared criminal,
proof enst bo required in every individual case. A general
assumption cannot be considered to be sufficient to justify
condemnation on this Count.

In the case of th6 defendant Fritz FISCH-iR it may bo
said in addition that after the outbreak of war he did not
volunteer for the Waffen-Ss, but was, on accoun' of hie


10939


16 July - iI-iL-5-6 - Cook (Int. Kiiaeshiemer)
Ccurt I


membership of tho General-SS, like every Go roan liable for
-Military service, called up for the Army. With the exception
of his work in the military hospital of Hohsnlychan, defendant
served with the Waffen-SS always at the battle front. During
the whole of the ccxirse of his service at th6 battle front
ho was medical officer with the Divisions of the .affon-SS
which sufferod the greatest losses, which were always
dispatched to thcee sectors of the front where danger was
Imminent, and where units had to bo us3d which wopld not only
fight with admirable valor, but could not be deterrod eithGr
by any losses or personal sacrifices. Durine the whole of
the tine of his momborship of tho Ss, defendant 7ISC'CR did
frontline sorvico which differed in nothing from the service
of a soldier as experienced in tho units of tho «rmy. Ho
has offered his scund limbs for his country and has given
proof of the honosty of his idaas and his views. Such
conduct of a young man rf 26 yoars at tho outbreak of war
oannot now bo declared oriminal. Tho ovidonco has not
furnished any clue as to Jofondant Fritz 7ISCHI* having
had any knowledge of acts which caused tho International
•-ilitary Tribunal to declare tho SS a criminal organization.

In view of tho fact that ha did not Join th3 V/affsn-SS

• •

voluntarily, but was called up for it, that he himsolf
neither coanittod a war crime, nor a crime against humanity
in connection with the war, nor had any knowlodgo of it,
conditions for ccndoolnatioa according to Count IV of the
Indictment do not appear to be fulfillad.

CZITTFIIAT J 07 T1A.SLATI Ot:

9 Juno 1947

I, D.J. Hir.ohliffe, Civ. Ho. Ililitary Permit C26034, hereby
certify, that I am thoroughly conversant with tho English

and German languages and that the above is a true and

*


10940


16 J uly - M - IL 5 - 7 - Cook ( Int.Hildoshiemsr)
Coart I


corr3ct translation of the original document.

3.J. Hinchliffe
Civ.No.Military P3rmit 026034

•Snd-'

In view of the fact that the Prosecution in no caso of
oy clients has made any specific application for sentenco
I shall refrain frc*n any formal application as to the
sontonce.

THI W2SIDH?IT: The Tribunal will bo in recess.

( A short recess was taken )


10941


16 July U7-4WBI>-7-I^eor.-rd (Int.,HildoshGiaer)

Court So* I

THE MARSHAL: Persona in the court roan will bo soeted#

The Trilxinel is egein in session*

TE PSJSTEWi Dr* Mrirx, yew aay proceed with your argunent,
DR. 'iARXi (Dofonso Counsol for (tofoncknt Schrooder)

Your Honors, I now begin the plea for the defendant Professor Dr.
Schrooder*


10942


16 July 47-3*-4ED-8-l-feloy-Int.,vonSchoen
Court I

Today wo are at the end of this trail against German physicians
which has been conducted for many months with greatest care and with
the aid of every conceivable piece of evidence introduced by prosecu¬
tion and defense*

It is now the task of the defense to show whether the serious
charges which were leveled not only against the indicted physicians
of this trial, but also against the entire German medical profession
can be weakened or restricted to a certain degree.

In his opening speech of 9 December 19U6, the chief Prosecutor
General Taylor decla.-ed:

"...The paralysing poison of Nazi superstition spread
insiduously through the entire nodical profession
and in the same manner in which it destroyed
chareter and morals, it blunted the reason....,"

It can be said that such charges oannot be applied to tho ontire
German nodical profession. Tha .majority of the German medical pro¬
fession. The majority of the German medical profession knows itself
innocent of tho charge of degenerating nodical morals, and there
can be no question of a departure from medical othlcs with those
representatives of the ''•onsan nodical profession, “hoy have rather,
always retained their high ideals and concepts of the dutios of
tho medical profession. The German radical profession in their
majority did not know anything of the ovonts which took place in
concentration camps during the war and, when the learned of them,
they turned away with disgust and indignation from actions which
could have no further connection with the medical profission and which
they thecas elves considered criminal.

Can the charges and accusations of the prosecution be applied
to ny client. Prof. Dr. Schroeder? Can it be asserted that the
"paralyzing poison of HuL superstition" crept into the system of this
nan and this rds character a«l his morals rare destroyed by it, if
on tho other hand it can be said that Prof. Schroeder had nothing to
do in the least with National Socialism, that he was never a member


10943


16 July L7“4>ttSD-o-2-4iaioy (Int., VonSchoen)

Court I

of the Party and that he rejected completely its alas. iTould it
be possible to bring such a man in connection with criminal aims, a
=*R to when all Ribordinato medical officers looked with high asteas,
for whose noble care the Gorman Nursing profession always hss been
grateful, to whfxi learned can cutsida of the Wehraacht showed ooi>-
sidarable respect and maintained their faith and consideration oven
at tils moment, when he being under the :»st serious char;.os has to
fight for his honor, liberty and life?

The Defense hopes to prove that Prof, Schroeder is not guilty
and that his shield of honor as a hpysician and an officer remains
uahlreal shod.

The Prosicution speaks in the first place of a TimInal planning
and conspiracy for the elocution of war criaos In which oven loading
acn of the nodical corvica of tho Goman ehraacht and, amounst than
the defendant Prof, Dr, Schroodor, allo^odly participated.

If ono spoaks at all of a crininal oonspiracy, and if ay ollent
Prof, Schroodar in particular can bo accused of participation in such
a conspiracy, thoro ought to oxist cortain facts Justifying tho
suspicion of his participation in crininal plans.

Tho Prosecution was not in a position to present ovon ono
singlo document shoving Schroodor*s personality in connection with such
plans. For a conspiracy thoro nust bo a.group of non acting on tho
basi* of a conaon understanding, having cocaon ideas, being in connect¬
ion with one another and driving at a cocoon aim. They aro usually
directed by a c entral office.

The Prosocution seens to > oliavo that a connection ousted be¬
tween Prof. Schroodor in his capacity as chief of the Luftwaffe r od-
ical Sorrice and his subordinate oificors for such a comon plan.
9ecau3o tho as.erti « of the Prosocution that seven aoro defendants
who wore members of the Luftwaffo and subordinate to Schroeior cannot
bo understood otherwise.


10944


16 July i*7-iWED-8-3-iialoy-Int.,voaSchoexi
Court So* I

It was pointed out hovcvor that the relations between Schroodor
and the seven othor dofondants of the Luftwaffe were neraly of an
official nature, and wore the saao as totween Prof. Schroodor and the
Choif of the ffehraacht Medical Service, his co-defendant. Prof, Hand-
loser*

A look at the defendants dock will further convince you that no
connections existed and can have existed between Prof, ff'hroedor and
the majority of the other co-dofondants. Throo groups of dofondants
arc to be distinguished! 1. The group of tho Kehrnacht and Luftwaf ffo
nodical o ficors, 2. tho group of tho SS doctors, 3. a group thit
doos not consist of physicians, but of higher administrative officia Is
of SS and Party. It is not nocossary to montlon that in view of
Schroodar*s political and ideological attitudo thorj can bo no
connection between hi* and tho other two groups.

Prof. Soaroodor’ s parsonality as woll as tho picturo of his Ilf o
and character will In tho following briefly be described.

Tho maorous affidavits voluntarily put at the disposal of tho
Dofonso, and all tho doemonts concerning Schroodor*s llfo and
professional work, cloarly provo that Prof. Schroodor always put tho
highest deoando to his own professional vrork, to tho nodical Ethics,
that ho had tho highost concopt of tho sorvico and tho stand of tho
officer and, that ho was dooply conccrnod with tho wolfero of tho
suffering mankind.

Prof. Schroodor in a really exo-aplary manner ondoavorod to org-
aniao tho care for tho wounded and tho sick in the host possiblo
way. He had not only the ovidance and the statements, although they
also nantion auch of it, but all tho nusborous field hospitals
built under Schroodor*s decisive influence give proof of his offorts
to utilize tho newest technical and nodical discovorios for the
benefit of his sick and wounded. Tho hospitals of Bruns.dc, Haaburg,
Castor land, VTisaar, Groifsaald, Hall, Prank fur t, Nuambcrg, to men¬
tion only a few of tho large number, speak a more vivid language than


10945


Ifi July liT-M-IBD-fi-^'^loy-Int.^voriSchocn
Court I


sinplo words. Processor Schrocdor was a Iso vice-president of the
Canaan Hospital System.

This is not tho piece to givo a detailed picture of Schroodor o s
personality and physician, it idll bo do no elsewhere. I only want
to deal with ono point being of a decisive importanco for tho judges nt
Prof. Schroeder's life and work, and that is the description of
Schroodor as a soldier.

Your Honors: A nan in his sontinants, ideas and acts, in his
relationships to other non and to his work depends not only on his
character and his innato qualities, but he depends vory aich on Ms
attitude and Ida surroundings.

what wore Prof. Schroodor's surroundings? A glanco at his lifo
history will show. Ho we a soldier from his 19th yocr until tho
collapse in 19li5. Tor 35 years without interruption ho bolongod to
tho ^ohrancht. Bofore world war I ho entered tho ar=y with tho
intontion tohicomo a -jodical oTficer. Ha remained in tho 100,000
con ermy. Joined the new Wehraacht, and in 1935 Jolnod tho Luftwaffe.
His ontire professional lifo was dedicated to tho sorvico of his
pooplo and country, and ho novur decided himself for any political
party. H^s adjutant, Or. Augustinick vory Justly said hora ooforo
this Tribunal of his old chiof: "Prof. Schrocdtr was an unpolitical
man."

Ho *os a soldier, tho modal of tho old conscientious medical of-
ficor. The ontiro country, not a people divided into groups of par¬
ties and intorostc, was tho meaning of lifo for tho soldier, Schroodor.
Ho kept far from political activities. Tho witrv. ;s Or. Hdlschor,
vhan oxacincd boforo this Tribunal characterised the ignorance of
the Gorman officer >dth regard to his political surroundings, recog¬
nising and aprreciating at tho 3ano time his professional achievoncn ts.
Ho t.t.s right. Tho objection end military orders a-do the old officor
a stranger in these matters. Ha accustomed to obey tho orders of
the govorrsnent loaders. He was not entitled to critise them. In his


1096


16 July h7*~>jgD-8— l o y Int.,vonS c l'.oen
Court Ho, I


honesty of convidtion, in the sincerity of his thinking, and in
his fire beleif in the goerment he objected to it.

Then cane the year 1933; the govenraent was taken over by the
National Socialists, the reorganisation of the Wehreacht was begun
and welcomed by the old officer, because near the possibility was
given tc rebuild the fehrnacht for the protection of the country.

The new dutio3 filled t me and thoughts completely. There was no
time left for .erosnal natters, and even le3s for politics or party.

If the officer of the old sohool however, had at first welcomed
the reconstitution of the order, he very soon was deeply disiUusioied,
when he had to recognise that the party continuously became more
radical and that those elements were striving for the leadership, that
from his point of view he could not respect. If in view of his edu¬
cation and his ideological attitude he disagreed with the way of think¬
ing and the aims of tho party, his dislike still increased when he
noticed that there was an influx of elements into tho positions of
officers of tho Wehrmacht, who were, as non and solditrs not suit¬
able for the profession of an officer,

I have now described with a few strokes tho position which faced
an officer of tho old school ckirirr, the last few years, and Prof. Sch-
rooder feund himself in the same position.

One is here confronted with a si -plo Question which appears quite
natural! Why didn't that old soldier draw the simple conclusion
from th.s develop -ont, which contradicted this basic attitude,
and why didn't he leave, so th -1 those men who desired to give an
entirely new character to the German a reed forces could do so freely?
Would it not have been the simplest, clearest and, for an old officer
cleanest solution of an inner conflict to leave the service?

The answer to that question for him could have been only a "no",
for it would have oeant his leaving the field without a battle and
to surrender it to an inner enemy, r ho old soldi r, the old officer.


10947


16 July U?-4WBD-8-6-filoy (Int*,vonSchoen)
Court !fc. I


sensed the unsaind character of the development, but he hoped yet
to be able to give a turn to natters and to bring about a healthier
course of things. Therefore, he did not withdraw frccn the field; he
tried by quiet purpoaful work, by strict perforaance of his duty,
as had been his life for decades, to be an example and a .sodel, to
be joined by a constatnly growing group of liko-mindod people — so
he hoped, so he worked, quietly. Prof ^.hroeder held to theso thoughts
and this attitude aven after he had risen to the highest positions
in the medical circles of the Vahrnacht. He refusod to Join tho Party,
even when membership in the Party i«as open, and can say with pride
that he has only his own achievements to be thanked for his promotion
in the medical so-vico. Undisturbed by any outside influences, Schroodor
wont his way and was a .rodel of loyalty and fulfilment of duty to
tho medical officors undjr him. Such a jan could never have givon
his assistance to a criminal plot.

A s a specially clear proof of criminal plana tho prosocution
dtos tho anrual meotir. ,s of tho consulting physicians of tho Wchrmcht,
tho purpose of wich, according to tho prosocution, was to announco
and to evaluate tho rosults of criminal experiments. In answer to that
I can aayi The minutes of those meetings show vory cloarly that
this assumption of the prosecutioncannot bo correct. Those mootings
show very cloarly that this assumption of tho prosecution cannot be
correct. These mootings were no different frc« similar mootings
of representatives of medical science in other countrios for tho
purpose of exchanging nzn 'odical 'cnowlodge gained in the meantime
in all fields.


10948


16 Juiy-K-3&^-L*eehan (lat. Von Schoen)
Court So. 1


“he sane applied to the nestings of the consultant physicians where
the experience gathered neenwfcile, so inportnnt for the nodical
crre of the Arcy wrs to be exchanged and nrdo accessible to a
larger circle of people.

This can be seen fron the composition of the consultant physicians.
They were the leading nen of Otrsrn nodical sdleace, university
teachers and chiefs of recognixed hospitals or scientific institu-
ttev-'includin^ scientists of well established repute who today,
once noro, are the teachere and leaders at Gemra universities,
hospitals and nodical institutes. It is inpossicle to charge such
sen with crininal lntsnt.

Thus, the prosecution has failed to supply any proof for the exist¬
ence of a crininal group, criolnnl Intent or conspiracy. Sven less
has it supplied any substantial indication for the fact that the
defendant P rof. Dr. Schroeder had been part of n conspiracy, or
fron his character been capable of having been Involved.

It is Unthinkable to connect a can of his professional concopts
and sense of honor wlth^consplratorirl «lns of r. criminal nature,
such re is charged by ths prosscutlon. Conspiracies to consalt crines
grow on r. different soil fron the one X have endeavoured to describe.

Otherwise it would not have beon possible for nen of science who
today -gain hold leading positions vith Onrnra hospitals and
universities and whose nans are of repute throughout the world of
science, for well known clstgynen in high positions to he.v e trksn
his part opmly end without reserve without his or cy solicitation.
The picture they drew was that of a helpful end warmhearted doctor,
a nedlcel officer inspired by exemplary concepts of honor and
professloh, and of e nan filled with love of huaanity and respect
for the dignity of the individual. Prof. Dr. Schroeder'§ life has
been an excnplery one, free of all prejudices of race and clase.

Prof. Dr. Heyer of the University of Teheran has drawn a parties

10949


16 July-K-S£-9-2->Meeh*a (Int. Von Schoen)
Court Fo. 1


ulrrly fitting picture of sy client. Ho ecphaslxed that when he, l.eysr,
•ee a reclelly persecuted arc rad was la need of help. Prof. Sehroeder
grre hie vigorous eupport In thoee troublesoas days rnd rearlned o
loyal friend.

Thu* the eccusrtion raised by the prosecution against Oeram nodical
•cience rad particularly the assertion that through the coatmlnation
of the unholy 5«xi spirit p general lowering of nedlerl ethics end
the sense of responsibility expected fror. » doctor could bo notod,
cm certainly not rpply to Prof. Dr. Sehroeder. Sever did he abandon
the fundrcentol principle of his work as a doctor: to help red to heel
md to avoid anything that would lead to pemanent injury.

In detail, Frof. Dr. Schrooder has been lndietod for participation
in, or knowledge of the following huorn experlneats in the concentrrv-
tion crept high altitude experlcents; freeting experinonts; sulfonrjJlde
oxperlnents: yellow fever experiments; typhus experlcents; experlcmts
concerning hepatitis, epideclca and sor-wntor experlcents.

Before going Into the relevant details hers, X wish to cake the
following basic renarkst

Tour Honors, a clear distinction mist be nade between the periods whon
Frof. Sehroeder was not yet chief of the Kedlcal Services of the Luft-
wnffs rnd the tine when he held that office. Ve are concerned here
with the period froa the beginning of 19k) to the end of 194j.

D urlnr that period Prof. Dr. Sehroeder wee the leading Medical Officer
of Mrfleet 2, end as such continually on service outside of Oeramy.

It was only froa 1 January I9UI1 onwards that he held the position of
Chief of Kedlcal Service of the Luftwaffe.

"his shows clerrly that Prof. Dr. Sehroeder can not bs held responsible
for all experlcents In concentration cacps which were carried out prior
to 1st Jan. 19^4. His sphere of duties wr.s confined to the nodical
cere of the nlrfleet units under hln and he was without any official
points of contact with the Kedlca.l Inspectorate unless the latter was

10950


lS Jul y M-M Q ^ -Meehan (Iat. Ton Schoen)
Court So. 1


cocpetent for hl« position as an Airfleet doctor.

To give a picture of Prof. Schroeder's duties at that tine, I draw
attention to the feet that the personnel strength of Mrfleet 2
-nounted to 200,000 to 300,000 sen.

When dealing with Frof. Schroeder's responsibility for the high
altitude erpericents in Dachau, the prosecution hed .eoverlooked the
fret that at the tine in question. Prof. Schroeder was Airfleet doctor
and orint-lned that during that tine he was, after Frof. Dr. Eippke
the Medical Chief, the second highest Medical Officer of the Luftwaffe.
Tron that clr cm stance, the prosecution drrws the inference that Frof.
Schroeder , re the second highest Kcdicrl Officer, was the obvious
deputy for HI v;ke and therefore hrd to know about the aoet loportont
events concerning the Medical Inspectorate.

The defendrx.t Irof. Schrkeder hre in hie defense proven beyond doubt
that he wae not the cost senior Medical Officer after Hippko rrnd there¬
fore not Hlppke* s deputy. As Oeneralorst md Qenerelstabsarst hs
•inply had the rank next to that of the Xedlael chief as did the othor
five A lrfleet doctors. Above hia in rank were two Generrlotc.bsrcrsto,
nanely Oeneralstrbsrrst Dr. Seunueller and Dr. Blaul. The forcer tod
his office in Dorlln rnd wns in fret Hippko 1 e deputy if rnd when
nccossary.

Frof. Dr. Schroeder fcrs rleo refuted the further rssunptlon of the
jrosecution thrt his relations with Prof. Dr. Hippko had been partic¬
ularly close, for which reason Hippko hrd inforoed hln nbout tho hlgh-
nltltude experlcents. In particular the witness. Dr. Augustinick,
Schroeder's personrl rdjutrnt, during his senrice as an *irfloet
doctor, hrs confircsd thrt relations between Hippke and Schroeder were
extresely tense rnd unpleasant and that they confined then selves to
discussing only the necessary things on the occasion of their highly
infrequent official nesting*.

Thus the assertion of the prosecution that by virtue of his official

10951


16 July-jv-3S-9-li-Heeken (Int. 7 on Schoen)

Court To. 1

position, Prof. Schroeder had to be lnfonaed of the high-rltltude
expsrinex.ts, la without foundation.

Let ce add here that the high-altitude experlnents in Dachau were
of no Interest to Airflest 2 because the unite of thot ^irfleet was
unable at the tlce to fly at the altitudes which forced the basis of
the experlnents.

?or the sax-e reason Prof. Dr. Schroeder can not be charged with
responsibility for the frees lag experlnents In concenttatlon canp
Dcchnu tccruso at that tine he was serving for froo Berlin, with
his Mrfleet in Southern Italy, Sicily rod Africa.

HI* agency wrs not r<pr<sented at the conference on "Sera- and
Vrter—Distress" in October 1°1*2 in ruornbsrg. He therefore did not
receive r direct report about Prof. Holloehners lecturo.

The conclusion reached, by the prosecution froc the fact that the
pnrmhlet ■ 8 er- md Vinter Distress* which was sent to Prof. Schrotv-
der's e. ency In I 9 U 3 that it showed In Holsloohnor's lecturo contain¬
ed thorsln of what nature the experlnents carried out were, has also
been clearly rofuted by Dr. Schroeder. He could roly here not only
on the eworn tostlr-ony by witness Augustlnlck, but also on his own
eteterente. Prof. Schroeder understood Holsloehner's report to
the effect that these were experlnents nade by Prof. Holsloehner with
Oernan pilots rescued froo the sec at the *scue station Yissrnd which
he had established. The ten: "Rescued fron the water" Justified hin
prrtic ul~rly in his nssunption. To Schroodor, ns an Airfleet doctor,
the lrportcnt thing was the final result of the experlnents, that Is
the speedy ro-wrrnlnof pilots who had crashed Into the sea rnd were
still alive. This acaat 0 change of the old nethods of r slow re-
warning and hr.lped to avoid death by he~rt failure, whAt Is known
as "Rescue-Collapse". The new discovery here was that the tenperr*-
ture of people rescusd froo the water sinteSy about four degrees,
which fornerly had in sumy cases led to death. It Is obvious that


10952


1- Iefcon (Xnt, Von Schoen)

Coart Fo. 1

Prof. Schroeder rt t hrt tine wra leapt extrenely busy cs c Leading
Physician with the duties of the African Theater, that he did not
hpve the tice to bother cbout the details of the report nnd thet he
wra intereated only in final reault.

The sulfonenide experinenta also took place during the period of
tine when Prof. Schroeder wna serving in Italy as rn Alrfleet doctor’
The sole incrlnineting point produced bthe proeecutlon, in regard
to thcae experinenta. wna participation ct the neetlng of Consulting
Phyaicirna in 19 U 3 when aulfononide experiments in the concentration
coop Rr.vensbrucdc ware dlacuaaed. In actual fact. Prof. Dr. Schroeder
vcb not preaent et th~.t seating. Ve had hero a niatake on the part
of co-defendant Dr. Fischer who haa aince corroctod hla cistako on
direct exriinrtion. At that tine Prof. Schroeder wr.s permanently
ct hla agency in Itrly na wna confirmed by the wltneaa Dr. AAuguati-
nick, he waa indispensable thera and had hia honda full.

For did any ropreaentrtlYe of hla agency take part in the I 9 U 3
naetin.:. Tha cocaultant surgeon of Alrfleet 2, PProf. Buorkl*y>de
la C-rp, had bean a' marked for attendance at the oeetlng it la
true, kit had boon prevented fror participating for the Banc roasons
aa Prof. Sc brooder hlneolf. Aa consultant surgoon he had to ronain
nt the elbow of the Alrfleet doctor.

Trot. Schroeder furthermore haa been brought into concoction with
yellow fever, hepntltia epidenlca and typhua exuorlnaata.

The acne applies to theac experinenta oa well. Schroeder la unable
to reeognlxe any reaponalbility for theae experinenta inaof-r aa
they took place in the period of tine prior to January let, I 9 UU.

It would therefore rppe-r unneceear.ry to deal with theae event a
during that period of tire but the following renorke ought to be
Bade,

Prof. Schroeder never received e con-unication about yellow-fever
experinenta during the period of tine in pestion. He wee not in-


10953


16 July_*C-:?£-9->-K«e ban (Int. Von Seboen)
Court Fo. 1


forced or consulted by the Xedlcal Inspectorate about then, nor
did he order each experiment., nor has he taken pert In then In
*ny wy. Prof. Schroeder merely knew that n yellow fever encclne
wre to be nenufactured. The prosecution does not assert that e»-
perlaents were carried out on hunrh beings with yellow fever
vrcclnos. They were undoubtedly not carried out, all that happen¬
ed was that tho vaccine was manufactured. The Alrfleet doctor
hcd nothing to do with Its nraufncture which was up to the
agencies and rosenrciv-worScers nt hone. The Kedlcel Inspectorate
of the Luftwaffe had, m ^Ua/hj. ordered Prof. Bnagen, in Strnso-
burg, to ncnufACture yellow-fever vrcclno, but this assl*Bcent
was cancelled after the end of the Africa. Conpnlgn.


10954


16 July-{:-iAJ-10-l-Coo»c(*on Scr.oen,
Court I


Frofeasor Schroeder had nothing at all to do with this assignment
which confined itaelf to the roduction of vaccines in tho labor¬
atory. This was within the coccetence of the L'edical Inspectorate
from which Frofeasor Schroeder noreover was rather far removed in
space.

Further, the Prosecution accuses Professor Schroeder of having
participated in Haagen's experiments with epidemic jaundice. The
statements of the Froaecution do- not indicate what the naturo of
tils participation ehould have been. Here also it oust be pointed
out — even if we suppose that Haagen received an order from tho
L'eideal Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe— that i rofessor Schroedor
personally is not incriminated thereby because this order was the
sols responsibility of the then Chief of the kodical Services.

In order to give a clear outline I may bo per,ittad to point
out that though Professor Haagen was Oborstabsarzt in Reserve of
the Luftwaffe and Consulting Hygienist of the Air Force Reich ho
still kept his civilian employment as a director of tho Hygiene
Institute of the University of Strassburg and in this capacity he
was nbt subjected tothe hhannel of ccnnand of the Ledical Inspec¬
torate. Haagen, in his capacity as Director of the Hygiene Institute
and will known virus research worker, knew how to obtain research
assignments, or to be more correct, research subsidies in order to
cover the expenses coanedted with his researches.

According to Professor Schroeder 1 s knowledge Haagen never re¬
ceived a research assignment on hepatitis epidenica, neither during
rrofessor Hi ke's tern of office, nor when Schroeder was Chief of
the Uedical Services. Ke did however receive such a research assign¬
ment froo the Reich Research Counsel, but this was exclusively in


10955


16 Jul>-iU-10-2-Cook (Von Screen)

Court I

In Mb edacity aa Director of the Hygiene Institute Strassburg.
iiic rosOarch assignnent was designated as Top Secret and was to
be dealt with accordingly. a connection with the Chief 6f tho
KedicalSSerrice of the Luftwaffe didn't exist at all for Professor
Schrooder; Kcagen wasonly responsible to his civilim supervisory
egency.

Since it was, as aforesaid, a Top Secret, Haagen was not even
allowed to report this research assignment to the Chief of the Iledi-
chl Sei-rico of tho Luftwaffe, since secrecy wasaade a strenous duty
according to Fuehrer Decree Ho. 1. He only could, and was alloyed,
to resort to ouch agencies vtfio had sons connection with the discharge
of Me tael:. This was. in tho first place, the i^ency who iesuod tho
nocignaoat, vis. the Reich Research Council.

Prcsa the fact, that within the fnmewerk of Professor Haagon
projoctod. work for the Reich Research Council ho contactod vurlous
rosoarca workers in Gornany whoso work on epidonlc Jaundico wao re-
coguised and. that the on*- or tho other of thoso people was u Consult-
ing Physician of the Luftvaffo. One cannot draw the conclusion thoj
thus ho hud. collaborated with the hedlcal Inspectorate. Vhat count-
od for Hcngoa exclusively was tho scientific qualification of tho
physicians aud research vorJto; a consulted and ho coleOtod than ro-
gardlosc of which branch of the araod Porcos the:- nay nave bolonged.
to.

llorooror, exldealc Jaundice experlnents on huuons were never
under Kuagon brought under under way. Tho witness Ddith Schaidt hca
testified io this fact under oath before this Tribunal.

Prof os. or Schroedor, therefore, is also not incricinatal as
regards the xroblec of Hepatitis xfcidasica, first, because he took no
port ia the issue of an asoignsent, second, becauso the Kedical In¬
spectorate never issued a research ssigraent to Eaugen, because


10956


16 July-,-J-l0-3“Co&e- (von Schoes)
Court I


Eahgoa hod his research assignments free the 3eich Research Council
la his capacity as D1 roctor of the Hygiene Institute of the Uhivor-
•ity of Strosabourg, and finally, because osporisonts on. husicns wero
neyer conducted, at tho cost, thev nay have been plannod.

?ui*thoraore, professor Schroeder is charged with participation
in the haegen typhus eajxerineats in the Jatswelle? Concentration
Coup. Hero again the Prosecution rolies *n aaaortlons without be¬


ing oblo to prove this serious charge.

gainst this, tho defense Bust it« a;

Profesoor Schroodor denlos all responsibility for any asaign-
nonts for the carding out of eaperinonte in the field of typhuo
for his persxn, slnco on the basis of his position at the tlno ho
had nothing to do with any such ©xporinente and his official dutios
woro liuitod to hie work as air Porco Physician 2.

Only oftor ho took ovor his position as Chlaf of tho Medical
Serrico of tho Luftwaffo did he loarn that in 19-12 tho then Modi-


col Intricctor of the Luftwaffe had lseuod an asaignoont to Professor
Kaagon in Strasbourg to produco typhus voccino on a largo scalo.

Jo egporlnaatsoa huuan goings in any fora wero included. Profosaor
Schroodcr obtained .axowlodge of this oroductlon assignment, *hich
was outslda of Me own period of offico as hodiel Chief in 19-12,

»4xon Hang 0 ^ allied for an extension of tnls production assigmont
and for tho grant of further rosoarch subsidies ia 19<4. Tho tosti-
nony of Professor Haagen proves that he, Profossor Ea^en, did not
conduct any o^xeriBonts on butto n s with this vaccine.

Professor Schroodor, therefore, is only concerned with tho
activities uhleh were connoctod with Professor Haagen of tor 1 Jan¬


uary 1944. .

Horo the Prosecution rolies on a letter of Professor Haagon to
tho liodieal Inspectorate of the Luftwaffo in vhich the outbreak of
a typhus oiidccic in Hat swell er in nentienei. But froa this ono


10957


16 J uiy-i Co ok (To a Scr.oen)

Court 1


cannot lncriiilnate Prof oh s or Schroeder, and 6 till loai free the
let;er uhlc-i answered Professor K-ageas letter just nentioned on be-
half of the i.ediosl Inspectorate.

In the first place It must be pointed out that this letter
doeca«t hear Schroeder 1 ! sign^ure, but sac signed by his Chief cf
Staff, Zuhnt. jX that tine Professor Schrodder was on an official
trip, Further, the contents of this letter show that the Chief of
Staff, Zchnt, didn't croc know what the place noudd Hat swell er neant
otherwise It couldn«t be explained that a high nedical-officor In
Dr. lohntU rank would hare astueed to a* much a question. If
Zahnt line Unown that Hatsvellor was a ccocentration c«p, he would
not hare beai pemitted to aek such a question since no reoort about
the haipenlngs Inside a concentration c<#p was ponaltted because this
wac tho sole coapetonce of the SS and the SS had ordered soreroot oo-
crecy. further it apoears fro« the contents of the letter that Xaagon
certainly could not hare contacted apy crlclnsl e^jerlnents on coi>-
ceatratioa cap lrcates because otherwise ho would not hare oude a
retort to the Chief of the Hedical Inspectorate -fcoso Ideas of his
dv.tioo uere known to hia and the secrecy imposed on hln would lioro
boon rouson onough not to say anything about the natter.

llorooror, Professor Schroeder was not in Berlin at tho critical
tiao but on an official trip, a fact Uiich has boon afflrcod b;*
uitnessee.

Professor Ha-gen aa a witness testlflod before this Tribunal that
he nerer e:;perlcented on hue ana with typhus rirus, but that he vac
concerned with co«battlng a eerlous and wide spread typhus «nid««ic
In the Hatsvellor Can? which broke out la February 1944 end was
brought la frosL the Bast by s«e locates....-bout the sproad of the
spl&anic tho witness Orandjean testlflod that ho alone with a aursb
looked after 1200 typhus oatients when ne was an iroate nurse. -.o


10952


15 J'aly-h-tfw-l 0-5-Cock (to a Sehoea)
Cou*t I


cot? physician had requested the help of the hygiene Institute Stress—
hours to fi&it the epidmic. Haag<c c^e with all the ceone at his
diir>osjl.

Professor Haugen denied, under oath, that ho experiaentei on
husaa beings. The eridonee of the witness 2dith Schnidt is not re¬
liable, since she obtained sane knowledge by fu-tiwely looking into
the records of Professor Easgen's assistant, hiss Crodol. The vitnoso
has .10 Sipert knowledge; therefore it is altogether possible that she
has .inds a uistake. also the parseail Yorscity of the witnoss iniot
be doubted very ouch since she was a noxphine addict. Her srido.ice
is refuted by the rather credible testimony of the witness tyvorski,
who unlike the witness Schaidt, knew all of Profeosor Haggen's acti¬
vities free her own obserration and icrfc; sho wnssure of herself
when she declared that there were no experinents conducted on hu aa a s
and that the \iiole work of Profeosor E<u*en in Hattweiler was’the
fl^t against the typhus opideoics.

It has not eren been orovsd that Professor Kaagen conductod e=-
porlxients on husans with a crisinol lntont, let alone that Profoocor
Schroeder is responsible for tfcs activities of Hasten. The prosoci*-
tion has at tainted to s^ that Eo-gen does not toll tho truth or van
committing c perjury but this tssti&ony Is confirmed by tho tostiuoay
of tho vitnoco Vywiorski and Or and Jean. Too I ask vAy Profoosor Lo
Gruo vac not brought to ths witness stand. Ko was horo, he would
hero geen able to confine Professor Haagan's scientific testimony
fully. ’«kon Professor Schroeder visited in Strasbourg to insooct
tae laboratories of Professor Haugen, he did not hear the least
fro:i Eacgai about experiment■ on human beings; there was only talk
of oniual- eiperinonts axki he only looked at tho oainals and cagos
vdiick had been prepared by Haugen. This is afrlmod by the sworn
tostinoay of the witness jugustinick who was present during the vholo
tiao ikon Schroedor was with Professor Haugen.


10959


ileo, the Prosecution regards it aa incrlninating that tho co¬
defendant Profeasor Pose was hia subordinate in his edacity as 0a>-
oral Phyaician of the Luftwoffo and Consulting H^goinist. Roao, too,
ia brought into connoction with crinlnal oxperlnontB by tho Prosecu¬
tion. a responsibility of Professor Schroedor for experiments v&ich
arc laid to the door of Professor Bose for tho noriod before tho 1
January 1944, cannot bo recognised. Bron during tho tiao whon Pro-
foasor Scuroodor was Chief of tho Modlcul Sorwico of the Luftwoffo
ho hod no connoction whotoror with tho octlritios of Proffessor Hoso
in Bucfccnvnld and thoso octiTitios of Profossor Itoso had nothing to
do with tho Hodico Jnopoctorato of tho Luftwoffo. In this rosi>oct
Profossor Eoso acted in his edacity as Vico-Prcoidont of tho Rob-
ort Koch-Instituto and it bchowos us to point out that this was on
institute entirely doproato and independent from tho Xodical Inspoe-
torato. Oils emanates particularly fro« tho fact that Profossor
Boso first risitod Buchonwald in 1942 ocoeananiod by Profossor Oildo-
ooistor who was Prcsidont of tho Bobort Xoch Institubo at that tiuo.
This risit didn't toko placo oithor in Profossor Rose's capacity as
Hcdical Of floor of tho Luftwoffo nor in his edacity as Consultant
Hygioaiot of tho Luftwoffo, but in coonootion with his position nt
tho Bobort loch Instltuto.

CSio scffc hold good of tho Prosocutions pointor to tho Coponhcgon
▼ncclno. In this diroctlon I Bay bo poimittod to rafor to tho fact,
that Profossor Rose appllod for louro with tho Luftwoffo in ordor
to ro to Copenhagon to obtain se»o Tcccino and nodo this Journey o»-
ly in his capacity os Vico-Prcoidont of tho Bobort loch Institute
and


10960


16 July 17—M5D-ll-l-Gross (vonSchon)
Coart No. I


Consequently all proof is lacking and no connection whatsoever
can bo constituted between Professor Schrooder and the activity of
Professor Hose vhich was ccrplotoly independent and separated from
tho Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe and which was carried out
by order of the Reich Research Council and the Robert Xoch Institute.

And whan Professor \hroodcr is held responsible for Rose’s letter
to tho defendant I'rugowsky this doos not incriminate Professor Schrader
because this letter to Mrugowsky was written at tho beginning of Doc-
aabor 19U3 at a tiuo whan Professor Schroodor had not yot taken over
tho offico of Us (Heal Chiof and was in -he office of tho Uodical In¬
spectorate. Professor Schroedwr did not order any experiments to bo
carriod out on huran boings, nor did ho have knowlod^o of tlion or
did he havo to have knowlodgo of than. No basis is givon for his
participation in thorn. For fchid period of time we do not oven havo
any conclusivo circumstantial ovidonco* so th. t it can bo said that
any guilt on tho part of Profossor Schrooder has not boonc stablishod.
Therefore* tho requo t is Justified to acquit Profossor Schroodor from
thoso counts in tho Indictment.

I an now cooing to tho count of tho Indictmont "Participation
of tho dofondant Profossor Dp. Schroodor in tho coa wator oxporimonts
which wore carried out in tho Dachau concontration camp."

In tho caso of thoso oxporimonts Professor Schroodor*s partici¬
pation has boon ostablishod* and ho has accepted tho responsibility
as far as tho propartation and the planning of thoso oxporimonts are
concorned. Profossor Schroodor h. s vainly boon accusod by tho Prose¬
cution for having perodttod tJwsa oxperisents to bo carried cut in
a concontration camp. Tho Prosecution in it3 case aj^ainst Professor
Schroodor fbrtter stated that theso experiments were not nocossary
at all and it draw tho conclusion that tho experiments had only
been ordered in order to torture pooplo and in order to subject
toon to unnecessary cruelties; it also stated that it was clear
that in no caso ted the experimental subjects been volunteers.


10961


16 July 2i7-U-4SI>n-2-Oross (vonSchon)

Court I

Therefore it is the task of tho Defense to show in the following
paragraphs why fro.: the point of view of Professor Schrocd-r as Chief
of tho Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe theso eirpori-ients had
to bo considered necessary, and just rtiat reasons motivated him
to give his approval for the execution of tho experiments in a con¬
centration caap.

Tho first question thoroforc is - why and from whrt considerations
wore ttor- experiments order at all? It must bo stated in advanco
hero, that as far as tho Chief of tho Hodical Inspectorate Professor
Schroodor was concomcd, ho did not have torfcal with part of tho prob-
lo«. in this caso in examining tho question whether ono or tho other
loothod for making soa wator drinkablo was -ore suitcbloj tho problem
for ilm oxistod in its ontiroty and it could not bo dividod. It was:
Tho rcscuo of ship-wrockod persons tra a dying fren tho lack of wate*
and findii* tho best method r.s a protection against this dangor.

This problem tad already boon handled by various interested agoncios
for quite sodo tlmo, and various indivi&ial questions for tho solution
of this problon tad .'risen. No method for raking soa wator drinkablo
had boon round and it was not clear whrt procoduro should bo rdvocatcd.

In tho course of tho year 19U3 almost simultaneously two methods
for asking soawator drinkablo woro offorod. Ono of tho;*, so called
Wofatit, had boontbvolopod by Dr. S c haofor in collaboration with
I.Q. Farbon. Anottay tho Borka tit acthod, represented tho invontion
of Stabsing ardour Borka.

It would bo quite cloarly rocognisod that Schaofor*s ^ofatit
roprosontod tho ideal solution, bocause this method roaovod all tho
salt from the soa wator and changed it into drinking water, whilo
tho Borka method lot tho sclt remain in tho seawater and only improvod
the taste of the soa wr.tor through tho addition of various su S cr and
vitamin drugs. t» e agree with tho Prosecution and tho expert Professor
IV. Ivy when they state that a che.dst in the course of ono afternoon
could have decided by moans of r short c.-rporimont whether "ofatit or


10962


*


16 July L7-*M6D-Al-3-Gross (vonSchocn)
Court No I


Borkattit was bottor. 'ho participating agencies of tho Ho died
Sorvico of tho Luftwaffo, Professor Schroodor and D-. Bocker-Freysong
realized th t quito doerly. Proa tho chemical point of view this
problec cadd also havo boon sovod in a smplo manner.

^ho difficulty wdeh oxiatod for Professor S.hroodor vdth regard
to this problor, however, r;s within another field} this was tho
shortago of raw acterials prevailing at tho tine, when had boon
brought about in Germany by tho war. This circumstanco made it poss-
idl* for tho Technical Offico of tho Luftwaffo to oppose tho intro¬
duction of tho ifofatit and to consid.r tho Borkatit mothoc^bocauso
tho raw natorials for tho latter method could bo procured without any
difficulty and production could bo startod right away, sinco tho pro¬
duction facilities for tho appropriate amounts wore already in
oxistonco. It was difforont as far as Wofatit was concerned. Con-
sidorablo amounts of silvor wore required for Its production, which
could not bo sot csido for tho production of Wofatit without changing
other production branches which also no dod this motal. Tho Tech¬
nical Offico of tho Luftwaffo thor.fore had alroady decided in favor
of tho introduction of Borkatit on 1 July 19UU. Professor Schroodor,
in his capacity as Chiof of tho 2lodical Inspoctorato, howovor, could
not hrva assumed tho responsibility for having tho units which wore
ontrustod to his professional sxidical caro equipped with tho Borka-
oothod, bocauso tho danj-.or oxisted th.‘t ahip-wrocked aviators,
docoivod by tho ixporvooent in tho tast of soawater would drink it
in L~.rr.or amounts and thus incraaso tho dinger of thoir dying of thirst.
Tho question also had to be clarified, whothcr tho ship-wricked crew
of an airplane ccoplotoly adrift at soa should go without ary food
or water whatsoever or whoth_r thoy should consume a certain amount
of sccwnt.r rather than no wat^r ct ell. This last quostion could
only bo clarified by carrying out an experiment on a human being.

An experiment on animals would not suffice in this respect, 'jocauso
tho distribution of water in tho body of animals differs from that

10963


16 July U 7-lMiSD-ll-4j-Gross (vonSchoon)

Court So. I


a human being. 3y proving ii3 medical objections the Hedical Inspec¬
torate vaild also have boon ablo to make its point—of-view hoard
by tho Technical Office, if the nodical export, Proffossor Dr.

Eppingor, one of the boat-known intarnists not only of Germany, but
of ontiro Europe, had not sided with tho Technical Office. Profosss r
Eppingor in the conforenco of tho Technical Office of 25 May 19Ui ex¬
pressly voicod the opinion, that the Borka-oothod was suitablo,
bo cause tho human kidney during a cortain period of timo could
concontr-to salt up to 3% and bocauao the vitamins which had boon
addad to tho Borka-cothod would bo suitablo for spc-ding up tho oxcro-
fcion of tho salt from tho human organism. This opinion woo also
shared in tho sano conference by tho pharmacologist Professor
li-ubnor, vho is still ono of tho loading specialists in tho fiold to¬
day.

Profossor Schrooder would not have boon able to turn down both

0

methods. Ho then would irvo bo.m roproachod with tho f-ct, that ho
had not dono everything within his power in order to make tho position
of ship-wrockud Oorrr.n soldiers more boarablo and to savo thorn from
dying because of tho lack of wator. It thoreforo oocoaos ovidont,
that those constderations on tho part of Schroedor givo us proof of
his high fooling of responsibility; in r.o way at all was it oasy for
him to give hi3 approval for tho oxocution of such c xperimonts.

Tho furth-r dovolopcont also shows dearly that Schroodor, in
spite of tho fact that ho wa3 oxtroaoly busy rith official matters
devoted tho greatest caro and conscionti usnoss to this raattor. Ho
did not just docido to select Dachau as tho place whore tho ^.xporironts
were to be carried out. Originally ho did not ever, harbor such a thought,
but he intend-d to havo tho axporieonts carri-d out in a troo-oxperimont
in institutes which were owned by tho Luftwaffe. He was primarily
considering tho Luffcwaffe-Hospital at Brunswick for this purpose.

On 1 July 19Ui ho turned to the Chief Ilcdical Officer of this hospital,

109&

... i M mm 1


16 July L7-M-*ED-li~5^}rcss-vonSchocn
Court Ko s I

who ins competent in the natter, who, however, disapproved of it.

This bococos evident free the certificate by Dr. Rnrriohausen, who
ms a Generalartz at tbo tine. Sow Prof. Schroedc-r began to consider
the Hilitnry Medical Acadoqy of the Luftwaffo in Berlin, whore he in¬
tended to use tho young officer condidates in this academy as oxper-
inental subjocts. An inquiry which ho addressed there was also unsuc¬
cessful. The reason why his requests woro turned down in oach case
was, thrt Just at this particular tine tho OKW had issuod a strict
order to tho effect, that all convalescents wore to bo returned inaod-
iatoly free: tho hospitals to thoir units, and thrt tho officer can¬
did ta tv s of tho r.cadooy wore to bo givon a conbat assigrenont. For
tho sane reason, tlw sugostion of Profossor Boiglboock, to carry out
tho experiments at tho Fiold Hospital Tcrvis also ronoinod unsuccessful.

The further possibility, porhaps to uso Goman dvilians for tho
oxporinonts was cccplotoly out of question, bccauso at this tirao it
\-.a not possiblo to find young aon in tho ago groups nocossary in this
caao within tho Garun civilian population, because all of than oithor
had boon conscripted for nilitary sorvico or for Labor sorvico*

Profossor Schroedcr, thoroforo, had no cholco but to follow tho sug-
gjstlon to consider tho Ifcchau concentration Camp for hhis oxpori-
nontal station*

Prof. Sphroedor was in no way inf ox-mod about conditions in a
concontr-tion oanrp. Ho thought tho circumstances in such a corcp wore
no different from V-.oso . rjvailing in a military camp and only tho
names Dachau and Oranionburg wore known to hin as concentration caeps.

In tlxis connection, it any bo pointed out that tho SS surrounded
events in tho concentration camps with an almost iaponotrablo
voil of secrecy. Schroe&jr never listened to foreign radio stations,
in tho circlos of his nodical officers, such events were novor dis¬
cussed, and I any point out here that an express opponent of Hatioml
Sccialisn, one less than the foraor Prussian "inister of tho Interior,


10965


16 July u7-tt-*eD-H-6-Gro3 s-vonSchoen
Cc«rt No. I

Severing, testified os a witness in the DfT trial thit ho had had no
knowledge of the events in the concentration canps and he had differ¬
ent sources of information at his disposal than had Prof. Schrooder.

If Professor Schrooder had had any idea of what happened in concentra¬
tion carps whilo ha was array fron Germany thon in view of his idology
as a faithful Christian ho would havo refused such contact with con¬
centration canps as results freu ordering theso uxporinents. The
decisive point in Schrooder*s favor is that tho experiments wore not
to bo carried out under sup-rvlsion end cocxaand of tho SS Crucp Load¬
ers hip but # cccpl4t4iy:- separate, under the s pocinl loadorship of a
Lufroffe 'fedical Officer and rocogniaod specialist. As a further
consideration. Pro' Schroedor had t, tako into account thrt only
then c uld a useful result bo r.chiovod in thoso experiments, if
they c uld bo carried ut vith.ut interruption or hindrance. Docauso
f tho thon provalont ala »st dally air raids -ver tho entire aroa of
Gorrnny, n guarentoo for an uninterrupted oxccuti n f thoso o.rpor-
imonts c uld bo givon in any s.wt in Gcnanny, howovor, it was Im.wn
th-t air raids n concentration canps did not tako place. Ptoroovor,
tho charge can not bo brought against Prof. Schrooder that ho chose
a concentration camp bocause he then had available defonaelcss tools
who, perfect, had to subject thonsolves to tho experiments.


10966


16 .July 57-^-H5D-12-l-Leonard In. , vorvSchoen
Court :»'o. I


The very opposite, is ture. It was dear to Professor Schroeder that
he axild carry wit these experiments only with voluntary experimental
subjects if he watned to be successful, for the director of the
experiments depended on the willing cooperation of the experimental
subjects, for in no other way cwild usable clinical data be achieved.
Every involuntary experimental person would have had the power to drop
out from the experiment preaautrely by feigning indisposition or pain,
and, in this way, would have caused the director of the experiuont
to terminate it prematurely.

r or the further evaluation of Professor Schroedor’s conduct
especially hia conversati n with the Reich Physician SS Grawitz
must be considered. Professor Sc hr oe dor expressed tho opinion to
Grawitz that ho could only work with healthy and voluntary experimen¬
tal porsons whose a30 corresponded to the t of the pilots undor his
connand, and he made the further condition that tho experimental
porsons should havo the same physiological and racial requisites as
the members of the German Wehraacht in question. In diroct exam¬
ination Professor Schroeder testified, under oeth, that in this conn¬
ection ho talkod to Grawitz d>out dishonorably discharged former mem¬
bers of tho Goroan 'ohreacht who, he knew, had boon transferred to
concentration camps becauso of tho soriousneso of their offenses.

Professor Schroeder could not assume, nor was any r eport on the
part of Grawitz or the SS leadership made to hia, that tho SS leader¬
ship did not accept this sug ostion and that instead of former ncm-
bors of the German 'ohroacht, Gypsies had boon decided upon for exper¬
imental purposes. Professor Schroeder, free his point of view, could
rely on Grawitz to make arrangements according to his suggestions;

I* had no reason to e xpect that tho SS would decide upon experimental
persons, against his well founded wish, who, racially and physiolog¬
ically did not have the prerequisites demanded by Professor Schroecbr.

recause of the extremely heavy official Aities caused by the

1096?

- ^


I

16 July Ii7—v-MSI>-i2-2—Leonard (In;., vonSchoen)

Coart r
•

lsninent collapse of German military resistance for Professor Schrooder
in his capacity as Chief Hectical Officer, this affair was only a snail
so'-pent of his official cfcities and it mat be admitted tfwt he c ould
not concern himself further with this affair.

A further consideration which Professor Schroeder had to make
was whether such experiments wore dangerous and possibly damaging to
the health of the experimental subjects. Profossor Schroeder had
thoroughly studied this question and contemplated all possible aspects
of tho problem. Professor Schroodor also knew th.t soawater is used
by doctors for drinking euros and that tho critoria of harafulnoss
ia soon in the dosos. If this question was given medical supervision
thon there would be no danger to hoalth. Theroforo, tho prosocutiort'a
chargo that he failod to tako into account sufficiently tho possible
hazards is not Justified.

Nothing shows tho highdogroe of responsibility which characterized
Profossor S c hroodor more than the instructions which the Modi cal
Inspector Issued to tho can carrying out tho experiments.

Professor Schroodor w a s convinced that tho oxporlmonta hold no
danger to tho oxperixontal subjects and ho oxprossod this opinion to
Roichsarzt S s Orawitt. Such danger was oxdudod particularly if and
when tho quantity of soa water to bo to be taken in was regulated in
accordance with tho host nodical experiences, and whon it was dofinitoly
ordered that tho experiments should bo stoppod at a cortain time; aid,
furtho nr ore, if the selection of tho man in chargo of thooxperimonts
guaran.ood, on tho basis of professional and ethical standards, that
the experiments would be carried out in a husane manner taking into
account all nedical and clinical considerations.

Therefore, it is fully Justified if Professor Schroeder c l aims
that ho, frac his position as a physician and a leading nodical officer,
considoredall possible situations and attempted to avert all possible
sources of dangers as far a s humanly possible. His direction to the


10968


16 July U 3-ieonard (Ir.t.vonSchoen)
Court I


-An in charge to discontinue the experiments as soon as the exper¬
imental subject refused to take In further water and if threatening
damages to the body were recognizable, axst be mentioned in Schroeder's
favor. The person carrying out the axperinants were furnished all
necessary assistants and a nunber of special co-workers from medical
circles as well as all oachinery to carry out his work in an orderly
fashion.

The contention that both the planning and preparation of the exper-
inents by Schroeder can stand any examination, that that planning was
with full -oral responsibility and with a true feeling of duty and
fw-mnity was roaffiraed, too, before this Tribunal by Professor Dr.
Volhard, as wall as the Aaerican expert. Professor Ivy. It is simply
unthinkable that instructions to one conducting experiments could
be more correct fron a medical point of view than those which Prof¬
essor Schroeder worked out.

By this plea and the evidence, a 11 charges against Professor
Schroeder in the soawater cocg>lex are rofutod. Above all, it has
JOon proved that it was not his intention to carry out experiments
on non-voluntary experimental subjects. I need not dwell on the
contents of hia letter to the Seicharxt SS of 7 June 19U* which tho
prosocution has used to try to prove that Professor Schroeder
considered tho oxperimonts with voluntary subjects t (k aim tod and said
ho now had. the intention to use non-voluntary subjects* that is to
say, prisoners from concentration camps. The defense's observation
that this paragraph of the lettor to Qrawitx can be interpreted in
rany ways must be used to give the defendant the benefit of the doubt.
Professor Schroeder was convinced of the harmless character of the
e:;perinents. !ie decided to Carry out experiments in a concentration
canp only after all other =eans were exhausted and only submitting
to the pressure of the military and econccdc situation prevailing in
oraany at that time. t 'hile planning the experiments, he proved to
b- a caroful physician who examined all possibilities thoroughly.


10969


16 July L7-tt-«BD--i2-k-Leonard (IntivonSchoen
Court Mo. I


Your Honors, this is the anner and attitude which Professor
Schroeder showed in the seawater complex. If the course of the exper-
iaen'.s was not such as Professor Schroeder had anticipated, he can ,
under no circumstances, be charged with the responsibility for it.

It is certain, however, that none of the experimental subjects suffered
any damage to their health from the experiments, aixi thrt they all,
after only short periods of time, recovered their full strenght.

Your Manors, if one surverya the conduct of Professor Schroeder
during the entire period from 19K> until the end of the war one will
not be albe to fiind one single pice of evidence to show that Professor
Sohroeder at a ny time or in ary manner violated the duties which
the calling of a physician and medical ethics prescirbed for him.

In no instance did he act in a manner which could not stand the exam¬
ination by a court. One uay»ell claim thet he never disregarded tho
caxim of Hippocrates "priaur. nil nocari", but preserved it as a guid¬
ing principle of his actions as a doctor and officer of the medical
services of the German Luftwaffe.

The prosecution has filed to prove that Schroeder ovor ordered
such an experiment during the period of time covored by the chargos
of the prosecution, or that ho participated or had knowledge of ary
such oxperiment. It has not ovon been proved that it was possible
or nedossary for him togiin knowledge of such experiments. Professor
Schroeder has clearly explained why he could not gain such knoulodge.
ror the whole period of time from 19L2 to tho end of 19U3 the respon¬
sibility oust rest on Professor Kippke, but not on Professor Schroeder.

Your Manors, from innumerable letters which I received from
colleagues of Dr. Schroeder, men who enjoy tho highest reputation in
radical circles and who are to be regarded the leading ten of German
nodical science even today, one thing be comas evident again and again:

■ one of than can tlieve th t Professor Schroeder, for when they still
reserve respect and affection, could evsr have cocci tied a dishonorable


1097o


16 July U7-4WCD-12—5-Leooard-Int.,vonSchoen
Court So. I

act or could have violated the high Aities of his profession. All of
then have expressed the hope that the innocence of Professor S c hroeder
will be demonstrated and be reaffirmed by the judgment of this High
Tribunal. I, as defense ccwnsel, have failed to gain any other impress¬
ion of the personality and character of Professor Schroeder daring
the long tine of our collaboration.

Let me conclude my plea for Professor Schroeder with the applica¬
tion thet you may bo pleased to pronounce an acquittal of Professor
Schroeder under a 11 charges levelled against him.

THE PRZSIEEKr: Doctor, the Tribunal a llowed an oxtra fiftoon
minutes for your address. I would aslc counsel to endoavor to eonfine
their arguments to the hour which has been allocated. The Tribunal
realizes thit this is not always oasy. At the same timo, tho arguments
mat be concluded by Friday evening. I roalize that sorao of the de¬
fendants nood doro tLzo than others. If any of tho dofondants do hot
need thoir full hour, that time can be devoted to tho benofit of
othor defendants.

The Tribunal will now bd in rocoss until 1 j 30 o'clock.

(A rocoss was takon until 1330 hours, 16 July 19l»7)


10971


16 July 47-A-IjC_13_l-Meloy (HUdcshclnor)
Ccurfc I


maaom ssssios

(The Tribunal reconvened at 1330 hours, 16 July 1947,)

TEL MARSHAL: The Tribunal Is again in action.

31 PHISIIUiT: Tta Tribunal has available an English trenalation of
the argument on behalf of Defendant 3loae, eo the Tribunal will now
listen to Dr. Sauter on behalf of defendant Blosc. The Tribunal hopea
that the hour allocated will be sufficient,

m. SHTEl: Tour Honor, Honorablo Judgoa of the Tribunal* The
roault of tho oridenco fCr the caae of D*fendant Bloae, waa glvon for
translation on the 24th of June end tho tmnalatlon haa been eubaittod to
tho Tribunal, In a supplement to this docunent on 2nd July I haro sado
a ayntheala of tho Important parte and which I havo quoted and othorwlao
-ado use of. In another supploacnt on 30 Juno 1947, which haa not yet
boon aubnltted to you by tho translatorj. I havo conaidorod those docu-
nenta which the proaocutlon have only eubaittod aftor tho caoo of Bloao
had boon concluded, and they would thoroforo not havo boon contolnod in ay
original docuaent. Ard furthoraoro, your Honor, in a document 12 July,
aa tho defense counsel, I havo crpreaaod ayaolf as to tho attitude of tho
proaocutlon. I aa referring to all thoso Bettors, now and I should llko
you to regard thoa as having boon eubaittod.

My considerations of the case Blooo I have basod on a quotation of
American Historian Professor Arnold Hash. In tho ■ unitor of 1946 Arnold
Hash, the Aoorlcan Historian, cane to Goraaay to spend his vacation horo;
on hie arrival in Brosen ho was assailed by tho Journalists with the
question, vhy had ho chosen C-oruany of all countries as the placo of hie

ending of the Second *orld Wftr » °ornany, a wilderness
of the concentration camp infamies whore every stop
aenory of ailllonfold aurdor of Innocent Jcva,
of Polish underground soldiers and displaced
The American historian Arnold Hash answered In
"Every scholar haa two honolands, his own and


19972


16 July 47-A-? jC_13_2_Xeioy (Hildeohelmer)
Court •


-HI PRESIHEfTl It would eies clear that you will not he able to
me ell of this argument which hao been placed before the Tribunal In
the space allocated to you. Tcu are prepared --

IB. SUTTEE: I shall be able to manage with one hour, your Honor.

In nay statesent on pages two and five I have explained how the whole
silleu has, more and core created prejudices, prejudices against the
individual defendant In thle case. Prejudices, In fact which worked, as
it were against the whole of the Gornan Medical Profession and oven tho
whole of the Gorman peoplo. I have therefore polntod out tho :
exemplary attitudo of Professor Sash.

I quoto from my plea on page four. I read: "During tho 5-1/2 years
of war, the world has learned only ugly things about Gormany and the
prejudice thus croatod, has increased considerably througi tho revelations
sado during the 2 years since tho end of tho war. Atrocity aftor atrocity,
Innumerable lnfaaios, mass curler and slavery of unrlvallod cruotly havo
boon provod sod will remain for over a stain on the Gorman naoo. But it
is the Kurnborg triads, particular, which, In their thoroughness and
objoctivity, havo shown tho basis of this rogloe and thoso responsible for
It ropresontod only an aaaolngly small Ciiquo which bandod around Hitlor
and formed, with thorn, a plodgod comeunlty cocposod of criminal olocvonts
which did not shrink from destroying tho ontlro German pooplo If they
could thus retain power and tholr llvos


10973


IS July-Jp-2E-lU_i-Heehi>n (Ini. Eildesheiner)

Court To. 1

This we have heard here In the court room with particularly startling
clearness from the forcer defendant Altort Speer. 3ut it is Just
through the Euernberg trials thr.t the whole world knows if it only
c-u-es to listen, that the Genoa people in its overwhelming nnjority
v»nted nothing to do with this tyranny, hod inwrrdly nothing in
cor-nn with it, end wp.s not even allowed to leern of its worst out-
cnfi th « Cernen people who stood outside that criminal
clique, longed core r.nd core os the nonths passed for the dry when
the world outside would deliver it from this clique. Tou, ns Judges,
hnve 23 defenders to Judge here,and your verdict will depend in
the first piece on whether you can include these 23 defendants in
thnt crinlnnl clique or not; whether you regnrd n proven or not
thr.t these defendants, by virtue of thoir position in tho Third
Seich, were nble to recognise the crinlnnl escesses of the rogluo
in their full extent; whether they consented to thjso cxccooon;
whether porhnps thoy even took pert in then, or whothcr ond how for
these dofcndnnts were also doluded in the smie wry rs 9 # of tho
Gernrn people, rnd were Just ns poworless against it ns our ontiro
nation.

I hnve only to investigate hero the results of the evidence ns far
rs it concerns the two defendants.Dr. Blone rr.d Dr. Huff; with
corplete objectivity rnd froa unbiased observation I definitely
bclievo thrt I nust conclude thr.t in any case these two defendants
did not belong to thr.t crininrl clique which had formed itself
like a brazen ring around Hitler and Eimnlor, around Knltenbrunmr
and Heydrich rnd the other nillionfold murderers.

So far to the quotation from ny plea. I shall jroceed without
quoting. Under :»int 2 of ay dociricnt, pages 5 to 14 I explain ny
attitude to tho charge that during the Hitler tice the standard
of the nedicol profession completely deteriorated. I have also
taken position against making Ur. 31oae responsible for this. I have

10972*


lo July-^-3£-lU-2_X eehan (Int. Eildesheicer)
Court Fo. i


•hove conclusively that Dr. Blond has the nerlt rad the right to
Glain the r.erlt, thnt he has done everything In the povor of a.
hu=n bei&a to proceed la hi work and the work of the nedicel
profession, end thnt he hrs taken overy caro that ell of the radie-
el profession should exeoplify tolermce rnd true love. Xcnlnent
scientists, high making scientists of international fane, have
certified this ra far ns Dr. Blone Is concerned. For instance, Prof,
von Ber-raann, Prof. K-rtius. Prof. Stoeckel, Dr. Straskosch and
others, the affidavits of vhon have been sutrltted to the Tribunal.

At this norent, I do not vrnt to deal with this problee, bocr.use
It Is quite obvious that nil of these statements of tho Prosecution
do not deni vith crlninel guilt, but with n strlotly uoral offense
or political responsibility, which Is not identical with n ponal
guilt and which does not con© undor the Jurlediction of thlo
Tribunal.

Under Foint 111 , on pages lU to U 3 , I cos© to tho actual oxporinent-
al frets of the cose In which Blono is chrrgod with conplotc responsi¬
bility by the prosecution on prges 1*4 to 18. I hnv© exeninod whether
Dr. Blono had takon p-rt in rny way in the Lost gas expori'ionts of
Dr. Rrsober rt Dachau. I have explained thnt these two assignments
of the Reich Council for F.cserxch hnd not boon given by Dr. Blonc,
but thrt Dr. Sruerbruch was tho originator thereof md thnt tho
notation In the card Index of the council is only a nlsteko of tho
staff. 31ome had nothin- to do with such experiments and they were
not within his competency. Ee w-s not interested in then rnd it
cor. be 3cen that it wa.s absolutely possible, shrll we spy, thet he
bad nothing to do with such experiments, vMch were exclusively
vithin the competence of Dr. Sruerbruch. It is also doubtful whether
frer the very beginning these concerned hunra experiments at ell, or
whether they wore not perhaps experiments with nnincls.


Xalarin -nd 3ulfonmide experiments did also not concern Dr. 31o=e,

10975


16 Jaly-A-BZ-lU-J-Keehan (let. Eildesheiner)
Court So. 1


as I here sold on pages 18 to 20 of ny plee» *he unimportant
fact thr.t a nrn like Kudo If Brandt, In hi* various affidavits,
ha* a* a used thr.t 31ome was the deputy of Conti and c* *uch nuot
have been Informed about theae experiment* does not doteralne
anything. This la an assumption on the part of Hudolf Brandt
which can not be maintained.

It 1 b especially surprising to me that the proaocution also
charged Dr. Blome with euthanasia, especially ns they must have
considered for some tine whether the charge against 3loro should
not be dropped. Referring to the euthanasia question, the prose¬
cution dods with the chart which was submitted by the defendrnt
Brack, or which at least was supposed to be node according to
facts purported by hie, but which is obviously wrong as tho
defendant Brack hinself said, os a wltnoso. Blome never took
part in this program, he never supported it, but on tho contrary,
when he heard about this action ho tried to clarify tho nnttor
and oppose it although this again was not In hio competency and
ho hrd of course no right to do rnything against it. Thus I
cone to on pago* 21 rad 2^ whore I hevo pointed out that Blono
was ono of the fow people within the party who, in his book,
which came out In I9U1, took position oponly against tho outhnna-
aia -jprogres of the Germrn government.

In this book which is quoted on page 15 of tho prosecution*a
closing brief he has cxnressly stated thr.t one could only defend
the euthanasia, prolan if there was some logoi Justification
which woulf create ■* legal right if therefore would make it part
of their leaal program, furthermore Blome stated thr.t euthanasia
should only be opolied if people, incurably sick pooplo, asked
the doctors to be relieved of their suffering. In the book by
Professor Blome. the quotation is verbally: "Ve ask ourselveo


whether in the case of lives of inferior people the Doctor

10976


l6 Jaly-jfc-BS-lU-U-Ktehua (Int. Hildesheicer)
Court Fo. 1


could not take legal step* to end r life before it* tine hod cone.
Ve think of those very ill people who cen not be cured, who cnn
only expect physical and psychologic cl suffering until their
deaths end who ask the Doctor to be relieved froc their terrible
suffering." So far the quotation in Blone’a book. I cpn only
say, if these denrads t rj the defendant Blone had been fulfilled,
if a legal basis had been presented rad if one had Just trlod to
fulfill the wishes of ineurrbly diser.sed people, possibly nobody
would have thought to charge the defondants before this Tribunal
with prrticipetion in the euthanaein progrru.

Tour Honors, the prosecution charges the dofendrat Blone with
the proposed nurdcr of tubercular Poles. This chrrge noons to
ne rlnost trr;-lc. Bccnuse of the inportrneo of this progrnc, I
shrll read ry stateaents, rs froa page 2 U of the docuicnt which
is in front of you. Here 1 take position as to this charge by
the Prosecution and refer you to page 2U, Fo. 5*

Probably the noet sovore nccusotlon ogrlnst Dr. Blono oocaod to
be tho rilegrtion that he hrd proposed the nurder of 25 - 30 000-
tube rcular Poles and hrd taken port in carrying out this pirn.

Tho evidence clearly shows, however, that this accusation is
quite unfounded. I nr. in tain on the contrary*

r) it is not true that Dr. Blor.e approved or supported this
murderous pirn and

b) it is rlso untrue that this pirn was ever carried
out. It is true, though, that it was Just Dr. Bloaj who has
prevented this devellsh plan. It was Dr. Blone who, by hio
clever intervention has send the life of the 25.000 - 30,000
tubercular Poles who were to be "liquidated".

Tho docuncnts in doctnent book no. 9 show that this plan first
existed rt Gauleiter Greiser and 3eichsfuehrer SS Eio-ler. Blorr


was then detached to this natter because it wrs known that he

10977


10 July— A-3&-1 4-5-Meeh*n (let. EJldeshelter)

Court To. 1

had for nrny years nnde the fight agrinst tuberculosis the aln of
hli life end because he built his cancer institute la the sane Oau
In which Srulelter Srciser governed. 31one then stated his atti¬
tude clearly in the well-known letter of 18 Bovecber I9U2 (Docunent
Book 9, pa.’e 10, Docusent Ho. 250, Exhibit 203); In regard to this
pirn. He discussed the three possltilitles which existed rnd ex¬
plained the pros end cons of ecch of these three possibilities in
detail. These three possibilities ore either ■Liquidati¬
on ", i.o. t the nurder of these Poles suffering fron incurable
tuberculosis, or their interanent in isolated institu¬
tions, or lastly their aettleoeat in a reservation. In his letter
of the 18 Hovscber 1942 (appendix 25) he definitely recocted the


first possibility and advocated the letter possibility.


f u 1 .


Orcloer wrs so euch inpresssd by Blone's argunents that ho no longer
dared to carry out the liquidation of the Polos which had boon docidod
upon: . In fact, he subnlttcd Dr. Blone's ce;x>randic to the Bcicho-
fuehrer SS Hirnlcr so that he should obtain o decision from Hltlor
hlcself. This, already, wr.s r rcnarkablo success of ^lono's because
Hinder had alrerdy ordered tho liquidation of tho Poles. Blouo's
arguments cede such an lnprcsslon evon on the bloodhound Hinder,
that contrary to Oreiser 1 s expectations ho cautiously put tho
nrtter before Hitler rgrin and obtained his definite ruling. It
should be ronenbered that this in itself would not have been
necessary any nore beernso not only had Conti agreed to the nvrder.


10973


lS July-A-3X-15-l—Co ofc (Int. Hildesheiner)
'■Court To. 1


but free Greiser's cover note of 21 Eovenbec }92 It la obvloua that
Sltler plso hud given hla approval to the extermination of the Poles
elreody before.

Thereupon, after a subsequent examination of the natter, Hitler
withdrew the extermination order and thus Hlnnler had no alternative
but to do the ease. Thi# is clearly proved by Hlmler* a letter of 3
Decenber 1942 (Doc. Book 9, Docuaent 291, Zxh. 204, ijo. 26 ) .

The extercination of the Poles did not
tnleo Tip lace ; this la due to Slone .

Although these facta nro Incontestably proved by the documents
presented, the prosecution nevertheless upheld tho charge against
Blonc. This evidently vr.s due to the peculiar wording of Blone'o
letter to Grelser of 18 Tovenber 1942. The prosocution In tholr
speech of 19 Decenber ig46 described this lotter ns a. "devellsh
masterpiece of murderous interest*. In considering this erse tho
prevailing conditions should be £orn in nlnd. Dr. Blome know that
tho tuberculous Polos wero lost, that tholr aurder had boon decided
upon unless It was possible on cone grounds to chrago Hitler's
olnd at tho last nonent. The stnteaent of tho witness Dr. Oundcn-
n-nn (Doc. Book BJono Doc. Ho. 1, Page 1-5. *PP. 2®) provod that
Blone, at thrt tine, ns Is confirmed by Slone's own testimony (Gornan
examination rocord of 17 March 1947. Pe«-e 4607, Aoo. 27) strove for
days for a ouccessful wording of his letter; he repeatedly drrfted
tho letter, thon rejected the wording again and finally introduced
orgunents in the lotter which he hoped to bo successful; from tho
very beginning ho was aware, of course, that his intervention was
bound to fail and have no succoss if he described Hitler's planned
extermination of the Poles as a crime and downright nurder and had
solemnly protested rrrlnst it. In this way Slooe would have achieved
nothing for tie Poles, but had to expect to be brought before a court

himself and sentenced for sabotaging on order of tho Fuehrer, or to

10975


16 July-X-3&-15-2-Cooic (let. Hildesheiner)

Co-art So. 1

disappear In e concentration-camp without any legal sentence. With
«uch n primitive net hod es entering n solemn protest calling on
the lows of hnnanity of Justice nothing would have been achieved with
Hitler, especially when he had already cade up his nind and had
decided on a certain natter and had already giv en the nocoseary
execution orders; in such en event Hitler was usurily inncceBsible
and would not listen to ray counter proposals. Sr. Blone knew this,
of course. Just as well ns, for instance, the Gauleiter of Kloderdo-
nau (Lower Denub e) who in connection with a sinilar problen (sterilisa¬
tion) in his letter of 2U August ljUZ (Doc. Book 6, Page l6, Docunent
0J9, Zxh. 153) painted out the importance of "eneny propaganda" as he
considered this Dost likely to be successful. Dr. Blone therefore
looked for such reasons which would perhaps have a decisive influence
on Hitler and these were elfchcr the C n u r c h or the 0 t h 0 r
nations. It is understandable that Hitler, in'ttsw of tho
tense sltu-tion at that tine, rdnist the second world war, did not
want to brerk cosplotely with the church rad ho also had to regrxd
the opinion of the foreign countries so as not to antagonize all
neutral states. Dr. Blone speculated on these two points; in his
letter of 18 rovenber I9U2 he emphasized in a skilful nnnnor end
with all hie determination these two points of viow and with thoso
two references ho achieved full success.

It n-y now be realized why 3 lose in the early part of his letter
tried to give Hitler the impression tfcnt he (Blone) fully agreed
with tho pirn ns such for the extermination of the Polos md why
he oven pretended thrt everything was already prepared for the ex ccu-
tion of this plan. Hitler had, so to spc-Jc, only to press the button
and 25.0CO to 30.&00 Poles would be done away with. This was norcly
a trick which 31oae used in order to ensure a fa.vorable considera¬
tion of his proposals 2 and 3 (intemnent or reservation) . If Dr.

3lone ha<? written that he declined to approve such an order of the
Fuehrer, that, as a consequence, no preparations for its execution

10930


l6 July-A-3Z-15->CooJc (Int. Sildesheiner)
Coart ?o. 1


had been Bade, end that he wold rr.ther resign than he cone a
prxty to a bass nurder, then Eitlcr would have had hio custonary
fit, Slone would hare been finished as far as he was conccmod, ho
would, of course, have entirely disregarded the protest of such
r * saboteur", end In the interests of so-called "reasons of State"
the Fuehrer's orders would of course, have beon strictly carried
out. To prevent this. Dr. Blone hrd to pretend for tho tine being,
that he was ready to acknowledge the Fuehrer' a orders as n natter
of course nnd, where possible, to participate personally in their
execution, if Eitlcr, as Hand of the State, so desired. However,
when weighing the pros rnd cons , Dr. 31ono wrs able to bring to
tho foreground points of view against the plan of extermination
•uid which, conceivably, night greatly impress Hitl*r.

Blono's letter of 18 I’ovecber 19^2 can only bo explained thuo,
and was intended in this way (c.f. with this, affidavit Gundor-
nrnn of 13 Dec. X 9 U 6 . Doc. book 3lone. Doc. Vo. 1, App. 28). Dr.

3lore, on the strength of this letter can not then be convictod.

For it is certain that Kitlor thereupon drop'»d his plon rad
completely rescinded his orders for tho m.urdcr.

This success, idiich could hardly have been anticipated bocauso
of Hitler's obstin&oy: and vainglory co—ilotely Justifies the
defendant Blone. It proves that 31one<s conception was tho sight
one and that hio canipulrtlons onvod the lives of tho Folcs.

.mother aetter helped Blone considerably, which mist not be
overlooked here: shortly before. Hitler had cancelled tho continu¬
ation of the Suthnna. sin Program. Apparently he
did this under the influence of numerous protests which had been
na.de by the two Christian Churches and, reaction abroad a.leo played
a. considerable part in this because oast destruction of the insane
had been taken 19 repeatedly by the foreign press with particular

stress on reproaching the Erti reglse. Dr. Blone nade use of theso

10?81


lb July-*-3£-15-U-Coole (Int. Eildesheiner)
Court Fo. 1


point* of viow which Led proved effective in the cc*o of the Suthaniv-
•ic Progfcn, end they elto produced telling effect* in the case of
the tubercular Pole*.

Vhy did the Prosecuting eutfcoritie* cointrin the rccu*e.tion against
Dr. 31one in pitc of ell thi? Apparently thi* wn* *olely on account
of an rffldrrit by the co-defendant Rudolf Brandt. In hi* affidavit
of 24 October IQU 5 (Doc. Book Q, p. 17, Doc. Fo. Uhl, Sxh. 205)
Rudolf 3 r a n d t conpletely uppree
tho letter* which enuae the conplete
rescinding of the pirn for nurdor. Ho
1 * silent about these letter* although it ern be proved thnt they
passed through hi* hands, were initialed and hmded down to lower
office* by hlr.,

Durln>- his exrelnrtion ty the defenee, Rudolf Srcndt was reproach¬
ed for hie untruthfulnee* (see Ocnm nlnutes of the exroinatlon 6fv

Kerch-19l»7.p. 5020/22, App. 29 ). He vr.a unable to offer an expla¬
nation for it, failed to mswor and Vas r.t r loss to endure tho r.prjv?..
reproach of untruthfulness, of deliberate untruthfulness. AAlto^ith, r,
gather, Rudolf Brandt has ar.de rn ann.xiryc nuebor of affidavits; he
has supplied without scruples the Public Prosocutlng authorities
with about every affidavit dssired for the incrinination of co-
defendants, and he arde likewise, with oqual readiness, affidavits
for these co-dofendmts which directly contradicted his fomer
assertions. 'Oiat he confims under oath today, he denies under
oath toaorrow and vice-versa I However, it rust be stated that the
affidavit which Rudolf Brradt cede against Dr. Blono dated 24
Octob cr lpUS was the cllnrx of his ncndccity. «ftor the experien¬
ces in this trial, rnd after having bccone acquainted, ns we have,
with a aan like udolf Brradt, it vould be riClculou to oven con¬
sider ctteohlng ray weight of the affidavit of e arn rs we havee

got to know in Sudolf 3 r mdt. His affidavit of 24 Novsa-

10952


lo July«A-3£-15-5-Cook (Int. Eildeshelser)
Court Fo. 1


tier I 9 U 6 h e b been entirely refuted by
docunente introduced by tho Frosecu-
t 1 n g cut hori ties. Zt la unnecessary, therefore to
exnnlne to vhr.t extent Eudolf Brandt' a untruthfulneae cm be traced
to hia atete of nental health.

During the aeaalon of 9 Pec. 196 (Oenara examination rcoorda p.
107 of 9 Dec. I 9 U 6 ) the Prosecuting authorities rnnouncodi "tfe
a hr. 11 produce evidence to ahov that the pro trtpz. was executed towards
the end of I 9 U 2 rnd rt t ho beginning of I 9 U 3 , ond that on tho
strength of proposals by Slone rnd Orelacr, rsrny Folea were exter-
rlnrted without pity, rod that othera were transported to ronote
craps where there were no nedicrl fncllltlea whatever and whore
thouerade died."

This evidence has not been produced ao fax by tho Froaocutlng
authorities, although tho dofenae, during tho aoaalon of 17 Krrch
197 (Oemaa exroinatlon recorda F. Ufel) referred In particular
to thla lpck of evidence. The assertions of n Rudolf Brandt In
thla reapect cannot bo evaluated ca "evidence*, oven If it had
not boon completely rotrreted end even If It had not nlror.dy boon
completely refuted by ndditionrl docunonta sutrslttcd by the Proaocu-
tlon. If the Prosecuting authorities hr.d auccoeded In producing tho
wltnoaa Porwltachky, who had nlready boen proposed la I 9 U 6 , rod
who hr.d boon approved bv tl* Tribunal, then hi a teatlnony would
have produo od rddltionrl clear proof that Blone actually jrevented
tho propoaed nr as rurder.

Ve know the later frte of thcae Foloa who aufferod from lncurablo

open tubrrculoais froa the affidavit of Dr. lunderamn, the highest

nedied offlcor of the Vrrthe Cru (l.e. the territory In which the

tuberculrr Pole# were to bo liquidated). Tho fight against tuber-

culoeie was a legal trek of the Public Health Office which were

subordinated la the Vnrthe Oru to the witness Dr. Oundenaann. As

r result of difficulties caused by the war. It was not possible to

10983


lo July-Jr-3&-15-6-Goolc (1st. Eljdethelcer)

Court ro. 1

accocnod^te during the war, either in restricted institutions or
in a segregated wren those suffering froc tuberculosis; these two
possibilities, which had been exes in ed in e letter dated 18 Foveo-
b«r 19^2 fr<n 31o=e to Treiser were therefore out of the qxeetion,
for the tine being. Therefore the tubercular Poles vero provided
for according to thbo sane legal regulations which applied to tuber¬
cular Oeraans in the old 2eich. Legal »gulrtions notwithstanding,
a separate Tuberculosis Velfare Office with Polish physicians
and nurses was established in the vorious Health Offices of tho
Vex the Oau. (See Doc. Book Bloce Doc. Bo. 1, pp. ^5, App. 30) .
Therefore the contention V the Prosecution ■ that the nccocnodntion
of sick Polos in restricted institutions resulted in tho cooperati¬
vely rapid death of the sick or, that tho transportation of the
sick into a reserved area oeant that, "they were loft to their
fate, provided with fow physicians and with fow or no nurolng
personnel", is devoid of application. (Examination record of 19

Decsnbcr 1QU6, p. 789-799.)

It should bs observod, however, that those proposals by Blono did
not originate froc bin, but had already ken diecuesed during tho
noetin.; of the Gorton Tubcrculoeie Socloty in 1937, rod wait back
to proposcls which had already been wjrkod out years before by
Zrutlleh research workers tuberculoele oninetructione from tho
International Tuberculoele Com! eel on, md which had beon ,-encrrlly
approvod. (c.f. Hoport of the aeetiag in Doc. 3ook Blono, Supplo-
nent I, Doc. 1U, p. 2 U, Aon. 3D. Therefore evon if the cxistonco
of thoee proposeIs h-d been known, it cannot be said that they
contradicted in any wry the laws of hunenity. According to wide¬
spread, views held by the responsible circles, such noeeuros aro
necessary if tuberculosis, of which Billions die yearly, is to be
fought ef'ectively, and if the healthy portion of the population
Is to be protected effectively ara.inst the dra-^rs rf infection
through incurable. tubercular patients. In this case, the protection

10?8U


lo Jil7-i-3Z-13-7-Codc (1st. Eildesheiner)
Court 5c. 1


of the healthy population egnlnst infection appears sore Import rat
than conelderetion for the inrestrlcted liberty of incurable patients
(c.f. pertaining excoinntlon record* of 17 Krrch 1947 pp. 46ll/46l5/
4618 to 4619).

In concluding this count of the indictment I should like to eephe-
slsc two facte in characterising 31one* s attitude toterde Crine*
arninet Eucanity, which hrare been clearly proven by the evidence:

a) In 1941 Blone prevented the realisation of Br. Conti* e plan, wr.oro-
by the Polish intelligentsia was to be sterllisod and thereby blologl-
cally externinr-ted (corpare Affidavit Dr. 3oehn in Document Book
Blone, pa,o 13/14, Doc. 5o. 4, Zxh. 7, App. 33 rad Affidavit by Br.
Blone on 17 It'rch 1947 Oernra interrogation rocord page 46?lfc-25. App.

34) «d

b) 3lone prevented the nurder of Poles in the year 1Q42, that is at

n tino when 0a many was still at the hoight of its Nllltnry Power and
could not yet know such a defeat as Stalingrad. I n tho cross-oxoninrv-
tion the prosecutor attested to presont tho suggestion to 31one
that ho would have agreed to the liquidation of tho Poles, if a
narrate* of absolute seerocy could have been assured. Blone, it
was rssunod had only "ferred tho effects of tho propngrade". (Ocmra
interrogation record, page 4853/56.)

Justice aid truth deornd that it bo confirnod in the verdict that
tho only notivc for Blone's actions were puroly hunanltnr-;;
lan and cedicnlly othical reneonB.lt in
therefore Just to protect the defendant 31oac a’,rinst lator unjusti-
fiod ropror.chcs. Slone's letter to Oreiser of 18 Eovenber 1942
was a. ^Kastcrpiecc" , but not in the sonse os presented by tho
Prosecution, that is, not (a* has been sold) 0 • devilish aastor-
piece of insidious desire for nurder", but rather a well thought
out intervention c-Tainst a devilish aurdor plan, tho


l6 J'ol7-ir-3Z-l>-5-Cook: (Xnt. Eildeaheleer)
Coart 7ot 1


reneln r. historic cl credit to 31on


10986


16 Julv 47«A-JjC_16-U&ro B . (Eildoshcin*r)
Court I


12 . SAUTIBt So f*r the quotations In conneetiorf with tuborculosis.

Tfco =crit of Dr. 3lose which I hare Ju*t reckon about cannot he donied

„ - ; . *;

by the closing brief of tho Prosecution In which they use the torn

non*cnee, tho affidavit of H^olf Brandt, and therefore tho affidavit
of Hudolf Brandt can have no prohatlvo value to thi* iaauo. During
the proceeding* Prosecution ha* charged the defendant Blomc with parti¬
cipating in biological varfaro. To thi* question I have taken position
on pago 32 to 43 and I have explained that on the G 0 man sido of thi*
thcro wore oae preparation for biological varfaro which had to bo oado
in ordor to prevent any attack* on tho part of tho cneay in thi* way.
7hoo woro only preparation of a defon*lvc naturo. Thoy wore novor
aggroealvo act. It cannot be denied - it le a fact - that no act wero
conaittod - no hunan experiment* woro carried through in thi* flold. And,
thoroforc, pualehablo acta on tho part of tho defondar.t Bloac in thi*
ephoro of biological warfare do not ala. All atatoeont* nalntaning thi*
aro wrong and of no relevance. A* to tho caao of Biono, during tho
wholo proceeding* it could not be clarified what thi* nontlonod oaremp-
tlon of tho IMT vai baecd on. Tho Prosecution of tho prooont trial hao
trlod for month* to find nose of tho document* of tho D4T docixaonts which
would have boon ablo to \^>port thi a'pptlon, and wantod thorofor
support th* chargo agalnet I>r. Biono. In epito of eoarchlng for month*
and month* no *uch document to support those assumptions oould be found.
Thv.roforo, it cannot bo provod today which oxporlsonto in biological
varfaro woro made on prisoner* of war and to what extent, by whoeo ouch
oxporinente should have boon carriod out. In thi* trial Biomo hoard
of theao for tho firet time from tho Prosecution and tostifiod to thi*
and tho oppoaito has hot been proved. If thcee statement* of Bloao'e
had not bocn correct thon tho Prosecution would certainly have shown
hia tho document* containing tho fact* of those experiments and whore
his own participation wa* alleged to havo boon proved. Votking like thi*

happened. Blceso had notpart in these experiment*, obviously - whether

• • 1 «•

they happened or whether they did not haoocn. ^d, In thie connection

10987 , , . '


16 July 47_i_7jC_.l6_2-.C-roas (Eildcsheiner)

Court I

I should 11 to to dr nr the attention of the Tribunal to the cwldonoo of
the witness Schrelbcr of the IMT which was rend here as ewldenco.

Schrelher who was Informed about all those natters el bo certified that
It newer COM to any action.

Tour Honors, tho last oxperiaents which the defendant Bloao is
charged with arc the Doryl and Polygal oxptrlnonts. Cn pago 36 to 41
I doalt with theso questions explicitly and I draw tho attention of the
Court to the fact that with Itoryl which Is a poisonous drug no human
orporlacnts wore nado, ard furthcraoro that the haraloso and not dangorous
troataont with Polygal cannot bo doscrlbod aa oxpcrlaent In connection with
thoso procoodings and experiments of this kind wero carrlod out only with
woluntocr subjects.

Tour Honors, In concluding ay brief I want to read tho gonoral lsouo
aa fros pago 44 of ny brief, statements which I want to lay wolgit upon.

I haro writton hor*>:

It or 7 Huroborg trial Is aecocpantcd by strong projudlcos against

tho defendants: Tho fact alone that thoy aro callod B prlnclplo war

crlnlnals" producos a certain projudlco In croryone, olnco one rogards

these people In the dock froo tho beginning as theso most rooponslblo

for the unspeakable aleory which tho Hitler rcgloo has brought owor tho

whole world and specially orer oux C-crsany. This trial, tho ond of

which is now approaching, has noroovor ropentodly boon cellad In the

proso tho Burnberg "trial of the SS-Doctors" and thus tho wholo

I

eabittornont wo foil against the SS aystoc Is dlrcctod egeinot thooo
dofondanta eron If they newer belonged to tho SS and newor wanted to hawo
any dealings with It, as was In fact tho case with Dr. Bioae, Dr. Buff
ar-d ooweral other defendants. T 0 sake the oomsure^full, tho nost
abonlnablo crlnoa which aro to be dealt with In this trial wore coanlttod
In concentration casps; when epcaklng of this trial, ono, thoroforo,
autonatlcally thinks of the nuaerous atrocitlos coaalttod In tho concen¬
tration ca?q>s. All the aisery which this dew 111 ah Institution brought
upon tho lnaatcs arises before one's eyes; one seos the Billions of poor

pccplo who were slaughtered there, one shudders at the thought of

10936


16 Jul 7 47 ^J'C_i 6 _ 3 _C-rogt (Hndeshelaer)

Court I

imsserablo rlctiea who sterred to t*eath there or wore worked to doeth
-ud tho ladl gnat lots one feels about all this is autonatically directed
against each defendant who in such circumstances occupios tho dock ns
a principle war crinInal.

Howorer, such a riew would, in sany respects, be unjust and could
neror lead to a vordlct which could bo Justified beforo our conscience
ard beforo history. Certainly every Ooraan approves and wolconos it
that crinos, conelttod during tho past 13 yoars aro punishod with all
sovority. Wo fool no cospassion for people whose handa aro stained with
the blood of tho innocent and who, thoreforo, deservo tho ropo. Es¬
pecially to-day when our people are sufferlag fron tho terrible conse¬
quences of ailllonfold surdor we say: "An oyo for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth*. Whoever conelttod surdcr shall loso his own llfo, he has
forfeitod it.

But this sontinental point of view entails cortaln decors bocauso
it nakes us forget too oasily that In Aoorican Law also a dofondant is
rogardod as innocent while tho prosocutlon have not provod tho guilt of
this defendant beyond doubt. Only recently tho vordlct of the Aoorican
Military Tribunal in the Milch enso contained the sentoncoi "If the
established facts can bo reconciled with the guilt as woll as with tho
innocence of tho dofondant, then his guilt cannot bo regarded as proven*.
The saao verdict of tho African Military Tribunal II solesnly doclarod
that tho American flag in this court rooo guarantees Just procoodlngs to
all defendants and passes sontoncos only if the proof of thoir guilt lo
properly established; othorwiso ho =ust bo aequlttod.

If yon only apply theso principles to Blooo then you will roach tho
conclusion that ho, who never belongod to tho S3 and had nothing to do
with concentration camps, in no way participated in crlainal oxporlnonts
or similar punishable acts, and should, therefore, be acquitted.

Burthemoro I havo another natter at heart, especially in =y capacity
as dofor.se counsel for this defondant: Bloae was deputy Reich Physician

^cador, he -ill, therefore, to a degree, easily bo rogardod aa tho

10939


16 «uly 47-A.JjC_i6_4_C-roas (Hlldeeheiner)

Court I

reproaoctative of the Goman nedical profession daring Hitler roglne.

Hew, there Is great da- gor that the ontlre Gcraan nodical profession
will ho Identified with Its forner leader Dr. Conti and with the crimen
he was chargod with during this trial; the Goman nodical profession fear
that those crimes which. In fact, wore coanltted by Individual doctors
who nay havo rightly bo chargod, aro to bo taken as typical of the ontlro
nodical profession. Indood, during tho last nonthe we could hear In the
Press and on tho radio that the ontlro nodical profession was horo in tho
prisoner's dock; unfortunatoly, by thus generalising, the natter was pre¬
sented as though the cntlro nodical profession was corrupted and that tho
sajorlty of Goman physicians had connittcd such kind of crlnos or at
least approved thon, as stated here In tho lndictncnt at tho trial. This
conception would be wrong and unjust. The Gcraan do dleal profooslon
nunborsd about 80*000 aoabers and If wo add tho Vchnaecht physicians
and tho offioial physicians, ono arrivos at possibly 100,000 physicians.
How lot us coopare with this total nuaber the snail nusbor of physicians
and researchers horo In tho dock. There aro altogothor 30 osn. Of what
lcportanco Is such an Insignificant nuaber to tho Judgoont of tho ontlro
profooslon? When out of 5,000 Goman physicians ono slnglo person
coonittod a crlso, it Is Impossible to draw a conclusion from thooo fow
oxccptlons regarding tho behaviour and noral of tho wholo rank. And
ovon If vc suppose that perhaps another fow bundrod ph^-slcian* and
rosoarchors had takon part In the oxporlsent on human beings and In
tho "Autfcanasla Action", not here In tho dock, tho number of guilty
persons in co^arlson with tho total nuaber of the cntlro profession Is
still too small to consider tho ontlro profession as criminal, and
norally Inferior bocauso soce individuals cocnlttod a wrong.

There Is 70 t another point of view. It stands to roason that not
ell experiments on human beings can be excused and Justified, not oven
during a tine of total warfare nor In tho caso of a dictatorship roglne
and no decent person would evor think cf excusing tho way and nannor In

which tho Hitler-State carried out the "Inthanasia-Progron." However, It

10990


16 July 47-JjTjC_i&^_GroB« (Sildecheinor)
Court I


1b a n incontestible fact that large scale exporinents on huaan beings
cannot altogether be avoided and arc, in fact, carried out throughout
the whole vorld, and that there are different Tiw points about the
problo-j euthanasia to a United oxtent also in the cirdos of con-
BCientlous physicians at least then when this is done on a proper
local basis


10991


16 July-A-FL-17-l-Leonard (Int. Hilda sheimer)
Court No. I


and "hen, in addition, full precautions are taken to prevent abuses.

It sust not be overlooked that the deterioration claimed in connection
with this trial arc connected exclusively with the problem
of experiments on human beings and with euthanasia, but that no accu¬
sations are made against the profpssional practice of the Gorman phy¬
sicians in any other respects, especially there are no accusations re¬
ferring to the relationship between the sick patient and the physician
■has he had chosen as a holper and confidant, to restore his health.

This confidence botwoen tho attending physician and his patient remained
completely untouched by this trial.

Your Honors, wo Germans have our onn opinion about our physicians,
we know their conscientiousness and willingness to render holp; mo
havo boon able to observe and appreciate especially durinfe the war their
readiness to sacrifice ttomsolvcs; wo know that tho good qualities that
aado the Gorman physicians and researchers a model in former docados,
were not loot during Hitler's tlao and it would bo a pity if tho abusoo
which havo been revealed and proved by. this trial should sorve to un¬
do nine tto confidence of tho German poooie in their physicians and
oxpose thorn to the contempt of all civilized nations.

Individual roaoarchors, who through ambition or a passion for re¬
search did not value a hinan being's life more than that of a rabbit
should not bo considered representatives of the Gorman physicians pro¬
fession, nor should those physicians of the concentration caop3, nho
for lack of a conscience or for soac other wicked reason raado fatal in¬
jections on prisoners or tortured them to death be regarded as repre¬
sentative of the Goman radical profession. !io: representative of a

•

aodul Gorman ohysician also during Hitler's time is tho non-political,

practicing physician, who, \.vcn if he did perhaps formally belong to

the Party, strongly opposed from the bottom of his heart all kinds of

violence and intolerance, who is closely bound tc his nation and its

needs, tho practicing physician who had cared for his patients in the

10992


16 July-A-rL-17-2-Leanard (Int. Hildcshciaer)
Court No. I


aost devoted manner day after day and night after night during tho tirao
of total -jar and fearful bombardments, which ia especially hard for a
physician, or who as military physician served at the front far froa
r.ccu, from his practice, free his family, fairly sharing all tho hard¬
ships, dangors and privations of his soldiers. Arri the surgeon who, as
director of his clinic, operated and cured and helped froa morning till
night wterovor ho could help without having time to breathe, lot alono
to take oart in political activity, he also is roprosontativo of tho
model German physician also during Hitlor's time,.

I not know what vordlct you will arrive at rospjctini, ono or
the othar of thosj defendants; but as defense counsel for the former de¬
puty Roichsaerztofuohrcr I o«g you to oa!:e it clear by your verdict that
in Judging tho defendant if you oust condemn him you do not condemn
and defaming tho ontiro German medical profession but that tho abusos
which wore cocnittod, wore individaal acts such as, perhaps, happonod
in all professions during Hitlor's tioo without njeossitating a con¬
demnation of th- entire profession. Thoso wura individual acts arising
perhaps partly from personal criminal tendencies of individual fana¬
tics, partly from being connected with tiio oxcessos of c total war in
a dictatorship of unscrupulous violence.

If bosidc tho 23 dofendcr.ta. Your Honors, tharo is a 26th sitting
in the dock, invisible to our oyo, it is not tho German medical pro¬
fession as was scid in tho German press, but tho SS spirit of Hiimlor
and of a dozen other murderers of mill' ns of people. This spirit might
have Ic-d a fanatic to iorgot his professional ethics and to commit cri¬
mes. But the entire medical profession reo-ined sound and counseloua
of their duty.

May your verdict. Your Honors, not completely rob the Gorman poo-
pit of their confidor.ee in th-ir physicians, but restore it to th^a
and I have no doubt that after the present crisis has been overcome and
In noru normal circumstances tho German acdical profession will prove

10?93


16 Jul7-A-FL-17-3-Lconard (Int. Hiideshoicer)
Court No* I


to their pcopL: that in its entirety it :«vor forgot nor will over for¬
get the professional ethical c erramda-nts of the Hippocratic oath.

So such for ay plea in writing, To -r Honors.

In ortier to ccoe back to the ease Olorx, no guilt of tho defendant
has boon proved, but only that ho tried to help wherever ho hoax'd,

Ixlp was needed and tnat he did so with success, although oft-n endan¬
gered, and that ho saved the lives of hundreds of thousands of people
■ho, by Hiaal-r Hitler and Groisor, had already b«en condemned to death
«nd I would, thereforo, like you gentleman of the Tribunal, to acquit
the defendant,

THE ?R2SIu!I!'Ts I would ask tho representative of the offico of tho
Secretary Corurol nhot translations of tho arguasnts of counsel aro on
her dusk, availably to tho Tribunal.

Thu Tribunal isinforaod that tho translation of the orpuiont in
behalf of defendant Rudolf Brand is available, but I do not soo his
counaol present in court.

DR. KZTJEL (Dufenso counsel for defendant Cenzkon): Ur. President,
ns far as I kno*-, the translation of ay speech is in the hands of tho
translators.

i:.TSTJ’-’£ISr.: I/O have it, four Honor.

THS FKHDBHTs I aa aware of tho fact that the translators have i*.

Counsel for defendant Gtmzkcn say proceed.

Boforo opening tho argucent, the Tribunal will be- in rocoso.


(A recess was taken.)


16 Ju iy-A-FL-19-i-! fce ban (Int. vcr. Scfcon)
Court Ho. I


THE MARSHAL: Tfw Tribunal Is again in session,.

IKK PBESIEKT: Counsel for t»x defendant Genzkon may proceed with
his arguments.

OR. SSITZL (Counsel fer the defendant Genzkon):
i*r. President, Your Honors:

Thu cfci-ndant Dr. Genzkon - the first and only director of tho no¬
dical Corps of the laffon-SS - la tho fifth nan in the dock. If the or¬
der in which the defendants sit in the dock is supposed to express, pu¬
rely superficially, their iaportance add tho degree of their responsi¬
bility, this, in any ccso, is not Jastifiod as far as the defendant Dr.
Gonzkor. is concomod. This is not to say that the <*tent of his work,
his missions, and his responsibility as medical director of tho ifoffon
SS is’in any way bang minimized. But tte. field in which ho worked and
his responsibility lay in a ccoplotcly different sphoru and was ontircly
n para tod from tha oxporicents which are under discussion and Judgment

in this trial. . .

As in tho caso of the first four and most of tho other defendants,

Dr. Cenzken is not charged with the actual, active conduct of tho ox-
perinaits on concentration cemp inmates; ho is under indictawnt .ooroly
bccp.uae arerg tho so who conducted th> experiments thoro were persons
■ho wore allegedly under hip corxwnd or because ho is said to hevo had
knowledge of tho experiments at the time they were carriod out and thus
tolerated and aided th-a, if only tacitly, or at least not to have pre¬
vented them. .

In this connection it must definite* y be stated right way that
the purely feral subordinate relationship never constitutes a punishablo
feet as such. In addition there must be oithur exact knowlcdgo of the
punishablo acts of th~ subordinate in question, or the superior must havo
ordered the subordinate to tak- theai actions. Only then and only in this
single concrete cast can there be any question of a punishable act, and


10995


16 July-A-FL-19-2->fcehan (L-.t. von Schon)

Court So. I

then it is not the subordinate relationship which is the essential and
decisive factor - it is the giving of the order to take the action or
knowing of it and not preventing it.

It is not n-ccsaary to explain that any or.e who in any way induces
anotter person to ccmit a punishable act is liable to punishment as on
instigator. It is also a generally recognised legal principio that par¬
ticipation in a crime can also consist of omission when iction is not
taken despite existing legal obligations to do so. But also it obviously
assays that the accomplice has exact knowledge of the cri Inal act of
the actual porpotrator and that he wants to bring this act about if it
*c»\> his cx»n.

Who the r thoao assumptions ere present in the caso of tho defendant
Dr. Genzkcn, who did not personally conduct th, tno experiments (sulpho-
nlnide and spotted fever) with which tho “rosecution charges him, will
b- determined when tno evidence is considorcd.

As far as the person of the defendant, his position, and his acti-

^ •

vity as director of the Medical Corps of the Wnffun-SS arc concornod,
the Tribunal can find those in the appendix to th; plea.

Tho character of th> defendant, as it has been described by tho
■ itnossos, end as it has cxurgcd from his examination before this Tribu¬
nal, io illuminated by an -specially nolo worthy statement of ono of
tn-sa witn-ssea. Ho calls Drv Gensken >ho "Father of the ifaffun-SS phy^
sicicns". It is Just this impression which points to his f therly con¬
cern for his soldiers. The medical care was his most important principlo
and the guiding star for his every action.

Count I charges all d-fondants with having participated in n so-called
conspiracy to caeiit war crimes and crimes cgninst humanity.

On tho basis of the dciaicn of the High Tribunal, announced on
U July, count 1 of tho Indie taint is to be eliminated, therefore I ncod
not dw -11 on this charge.


10996


16 July-A-rL-19-3-fcehon (Int. von Schon)
Covxt No. I


'..bitcvcr .acy bo said in regard to conspiracy as a fora of parti¬
cipation, I nay draw tho Tribunals attention to tho closi g brief of
tho 4-fvnsc.

According to Count 11, No. 6 K and J, the defendant Dr. Gcnzkcn
is charged irith special responsibility for the sulphoniaido and spotted
fs,vor experiments and with participation in these.

In this natter I »uld like to begin by stating that during the
almost three months in which the Prosecution presented its case the
name of Dr. Ger.zken was mentioned only rarely. Doc intent No. fD-1657,
Prosecution inhibit 484, which was submitted by the Prosecution during
the cross-exaoiration of Slavers, was, to be sure, directed to Dr.
Genzken to be handed to Professor Itugcmsky in his capacity as consul¬
tant in hygien in the Ministry of the Interior, but it has nothing
to do with the experiments on human beings; it concerns itself, as its
conten proves beyond a dcubt, solely with counteracting a typhus, epi¬
demic in tho concentration caap Neuengafum, which was located in tho
territory of the State of Hamburg. Sven though the Prosecution submit¬
ted more than five hundred documents, the Prosecution was unablo to
produce o single document, a single lotter, a single order or directive,
which bears the signature or counter-signature of the defendant, or
which was addressed to him in reference to the experiments. This fact
proves better than many words the non- participation of the defendant
in the experiments with which he is charged, especially when one con¬
siders the completeness of the documentary proof submitted by the Pro¬
to cut ion.

Considering the entire case of Dr. Benzken objectively one cannot
escape the impression t.-at Dr. Genzken is in tie dock only because in
addition to the D tree’-or of the Medical Corps of the Wehroacht — Pro¬
fessor Dr. Handloser and the Director of the ifedical Corps of the
Luftwaffe — Professor Dr. Sc breeder — they wanted to produce, for
the sake of completeness, the Director of the Medical Co.ps of the

10997


16 July-A-FL-19-4—lieehan (Int. von Schon)

I

Court Ko. I

Waffen-SS in the person of the defendant Dr. Genzken.

To bo sure. Dr. Genzken held the title of a medical director of
a "Medical Corp3 n , like the aedical director of the aray ccu^oonents.

His Jurisdiction was, however, considerably do re restricted .when con-
pared to the so-called aedical directors and the aedical inspector. .
According to Kiaaler's express orders. Dr. Gentken was not allowed to
call hiaself a "aedical inapectcr".

As Diroctor of the Hedical Corps of the Wafffcn-SS ho was an aray
aedical officer and he was directod solely to build up tho ontiro nc-
dical service for troops of the Waffen-T c and to superviee it respon¬
sibly. In contrast to the nodical Inspectors officos of tho threo cora-
ponents of the ar/ad forces, the Hedical Office of tho foffen-SS was
novor concomcd with scientific research and plans, those wore exclu¬
sively oarried on by tha Rcichsarzt SS, Dr. Grawitz, and his agencies,
Grawitz had oppress wrltteh orders froa Himlcr to that effoot.

Aftor the Frorccution had withdrawn the chargo against Dr* Gonskon
arising out of Cont II No. 6 K of the indictocnt -- experiments with
poisons — and !!o. 6 L — oxporlacnts uith phosphorus incendiary tpabo—
furthor explanations concerning those two counts are unr. pessary.

Thu3, according to tho indictment and tho oral statement of tho
Prosocutlon, tho remaining charges against Dr. Genzken contain only the
sulphorlnido experiments In tho concentration caap Ravansbruck — and
tho typhus experiments in tho concentration camp Buchetmald.

In its closing brief the Prosecution has in addition charged Dr.
Ccnzkon with Dr, Rascher's altitude and freezing experiments, and tho
sterilization crrpcrlasnts of Dr, Claubcrg. I oust protest against tho
fact that non, after the submission of evidence by tho Prosecution and
Defense has boon concluded, new special charges arc brought up against
the defendants. According to the indictment only the defendants listed
in it sioctfically are charged with special responsibility for the ex¬
periments relating to therm. The Defense presented the entire evidence

10998


16 July-A-FI^-i^-5-4fcohan (Int. vor. Schon)

Court Bo. I

under the assumption that the defendants would have to ar.sner only for
those oxpori-ioits for which they have bean charged with .-osponsibility.
Dr. Gonzkcn is not charged with any special responsibility for the high
altitude or the freezing or the stareliration experiments. He can there-
foro not aftowards bo charged with toosc experiments.

It boom as if tbo Proeocution is r.ot convinced of fcho fool-proof
quality of its ovidonco against Dr. Cer^Iccn and therefore attempts at
the last moment to produce further incriminating material against him.

Regarding tho sulpahnimido ixporimonts, thu following:

Although tho prosecution's presentation of tho so sulphanimido ex¬
periments took almost thruo days, Gcnzkon's name was only muntionod
twiou.

Whothor thoso two zwfsror.ces can be construed an incrimination
tho High Tribunal can gat ho r from ay exhaustive exposition in tho sup¬
plement to ay filial plea.

I stall hero present merely a brief compendium of k vat is oxplainod
there in dotal 1 .

It is true that Dr. Gonzton found out about tho sulphanimido ex¬
periments in Ravcnsbruock shortly aftor Gebhardt ar.d Fischer road their
papers. Hie jsrticipation in thorn at this time, was no longor possible
olnco tl» experiments had lo^ previously beer, concluded. Culpablo par¬
ticipation, however, either as instigator or as accossory in tho way
obviously intended by tho indictment, is only conceptually possible if
the participant is active at a ti=w when the culpablo act is not yot
ccmplotod. Participation after the act is, at least for those oxpori-
ixnts, out of too question.

Dr. Goazkoh was not present when Professor Gebhardt and Dr. Fischer
read their papers in ^ay 1943 in tho Military Medical Academy in Dorlin;
nor did he know anything of tho delivery of cultures, etc. Ho did not
him so If order the experiamts to bo undertaken, nor was ho ever pro sent
at tho discussions between Gebhardt and Hisnler. He never visited tho

1099 ?


16 July-A-FL-l>-6-U«h*n (Int. von Schon)

Court Ho. 1

concentration camp Ravsnbrusck or tho clinical station there. Ho was
never Info mod by Professor Gebhardt and only long after the expori^onts
wore over did ho find out about then, but here also only as a third
pursen, and no aoro than the public at large. The prosecution could
produce re letter or other document bearing cn the Raveasbruock sulpha-
nceido oxpori-ior.ts which was signed or counter-signed by Dr. Gonzkcn,
or addressed to him, or in which bo was oven mentioned.

Sinco any criminal responsibility of Dr. Gentken for thoso expe¬
riments must thorofore bo denied, I ask that the defondant Dr. ICarl
Gcnzkun bo acquitted on Count II, Ko. 6S.

t.hat the indictment calls tho "murdorous" typhus experiments In
Buchonwald havo boon portrayed by tho prosecution as one of tho most
sorious charges in tho wholo trial. In ordor to avoid unnocossary and
tirosaao ropotition, I as counsel for tho defendant Gonzken, shall ro-
frain from ontcring Into tho question o* tho nocosalty, admissibility,
or inadmissibility of these typhus experiments. Counsol for tho co-do-
fendant Prof cases- Hrugcmsky will dilato on this natter.

Urxlor this count also Dr. Gcnzkon is not charged with aotivoly
carrying out any typhus experiments, but is charged only bocause Ding
was his eubordir&to and bocauso ho is alloj^d to bo incriminated by
or. entry in tho so-callod Ding Diary. For mo, as Genzkcn's counsol,
therefore, tho cxily important questions arc: Did Dr. Conrkon participate
in any way in tho- typhus experiments, and did ho havo any supervisory
duties in these experiments; or, at tho time when tho ex orimonts woro •
still being conductod and it might have been possible to interrupt them,
did he havo full knowledge of thorn, and, if so, was ho in a position
to have then stoppod?

As tto oxtonsivo ovidonco aameoblod in tha closing brief shtxis
experiments wore decided on and ordered by Himmler or Grawit* without
Grawitz's in any way participating. Then Himm l er, cn Grawitz's sug¬
gestion, casaissioncd Dr. Ding in Buchcr.wald to carry them out; this

11000


r


16 July-A-FL-19-7—lieehan (Int. von Schon)

Court No. I

ccozdasicn was not ccoeunicated to tho defendants Gor.tkcn or Profes¬
sor Urugcwsky. .'S-ugewsky, who had repudiated the typhus expori-oents,

■as merely the Hygienic Consultant for the Reich physicians. This ac¬
tivity of his had, froe thu point of view of his duties as supervisor,
nothing to do with his official position as Chief of tho Hygionc Ins¬
titute of tho .affen-SS or as Hygienic Office Chiof in the Medical Scr-
vico of the "affon-SS. Dr. Gcnzken hiasolf issuod no ordors or direc¬
tives that typhus research experiments *.K»rc to be undertaken in Buchcn-
■ald or olscwhcro. Since Goniton issuod no such ordors to the Director
of the R-soarch Department, and since this order «ont dir-ctly from
Himlor or Gra«itx to this Director, naooly Dr. Ding, Ding could to
this extent never bo Gcnxkan's subordinate, but was tho iasnodiato su¬
bordinate of tho porson fro* whom he had received his research assign¬
ment, that is to this extent ho was irvacdlately subordinate to Graiiitz.


11001


lb July-*-Bfc-20-UCook (Int. Vos Scheen)

Court Bo. 1


Dr. Din- he! a witten order to carry out typhus experiments froa
Srevits. 7 he strep of ths experlaontnl station In Block 46 rend,

•3elchsfuehrer SS, Typhus Zxperinentnl Station Buchenwald." Thus
Dine was subject to supervlslm by the Belch Physician and not by
the Chief of the Kedicel Service of the Vaffen SS. The evldenco
presented, particularly tho prosecution witnesses theoselves, proved
that the experiment station In 31ock 46 on the one hrnd, in which
tho typhus experiments were carried out, and the vaccine production
station in 31oc'e 50 on lie other hand, were co pletely separate
entitles in the concentration cer.p Sue hem# old nsregrxdD location,
personnel, organization and consequently also supervision, of both
of which, however, Dr. Din^ vns in chrr.te. Scientific rcsorxch, pi
planning n\d therefore also the institution and nnintcnrnco of re¬
search institutes belonged to the duties of the Belch physician.

Consequently Diim* as chief of the research institute, in other words
of tho oxperlsontnl strtion, was his immediate subordinate. Only
with roi»rd to the v.-ccine production Din* wes subordinate to tho
Chief of the Ey^iene Institute of tho Vrffcn S3 rnd thoroforo would
have been subordinate of Gcnzken, if this production had strrtod
tofore Scptoabcr 1943. That was not the cose, howovor, since the
institute noved to Block 50 only bb Into r.e *u.-pist I 943 end the pro¬
duction there only be^rn towards the end of 19 U 3 .

A supervision of the research institute in Block 46 or any other
jurisdiction over the experimente therefore never oxistod for Dr.

Genzken.

As Dr. Genzken never was in charge of eupcrvleion he never receiv¬
ed any reports froa Dr. Din.’ on his typhus experinents. all the
reports by reason of coopotency went to Sio * 1 s superior, the Belch
physician Grnvitz.

The reason why Genzken was not informed by Ornwits ebout the
experinents was thoroughly explained V ae in the pier, where I

described the position of the Belch physician vis n vis Dr. Genzken.

11002

1


16 J-il7-ir-3E-20-2-0oak (Iat. Elldeshelner)

Court So. 1

Dr. Qer.xkMi therefore could aot know anything cbout the typhus cxperi-
nents, or the sulfonnalde experlnente or about any other experinents,
when planned, prepared or carried out, because he wes never lnltirted
by Slnaler and or en less by Ornwltz In these secret research assign-
nents. The Helchsfuehrer end the Belch physician considered hin ns
a persona lngrotn et lncertn, that Is as an unreliable person, and ho
had neither the evidence of one nor the other. Ornwltz with

exonerated jealousy defended his duties and conpetenclos and care-

•

f ully protcctod his secret always fearing for his position. Eo
prevented ray interference of Oenxken by repeatedly telling Hrugoweky
that Dr. Oenxken hrd nothing to do with the scientific oxperinents.

He furthermore could not even have glv on any orders for the execu¬
tion of such scientific resorrch work In r. concentration cacp. T ho
rosearch Institute was located in tho "uehenwnld concentration car*
and was administratively and eeonoMcally under the administration
of this '‘concentration cast. Dr. Oonsken had no ncdicnli authority
to give orders within a concentration cp^p. The nodical supervision
within the concentration ceap w.-.e Ornwits' duty.

Zvon if Ding during hie ac tlvity In 3uchonwcld was sovcrnl tiaee
in 3 erlin, it hce to be trken into consideration that Oentkcn wae not
Info road ty hln about these experinents and their details, and that
therefore Dr. Oenxken did not got =ny knowledge about tho kind, tho
extension and the length of the experiments. The experinents began
in January 19 Ue. Dr. Urugowsky once Informed Oenxken officially
about these experiments in April 19>*3, et a tine when they were
concluded to such an extent that a result on the vaccine produ: tlon
had been ascertained and Ding Intended to coke a public report on
the experinents. This report was very brief. Standing up, nrugowsky
reported about the amount of vaccine which was intended to be produc¬
ed for the troops Details about the experiments, such ns artificirl
infections, the nunber of experlnentnl ^subjects, and the nunber of
death, were not nentioned, and the defendant only got the knowledge

11003


lo July-A-£&-20-3-Cook (1st. Tor. Schocn)

Court Fo. 1

of these dotriIs during these proceedings.

The impression of Xrugovsky's infornntloj^ on Genskcr. who hcd
no bacte rlolagl ca. 1 ior serological training, wrs that cf c regular
scientific series of experiments. But ho did sot suspect that they
were any criminal experiments on bunm beings. " ronson and the
possibility for interference therefore did not exist for Gcnzkon
besides the fact that he was not in charge of tho supervision.

The entry of 9 Jamytry 193 In the #o-c.-lld Din ^irry nay. at
first ^lmct, sees to incriminate Dr. Oensken. The Prosecution
thought they could infer from this entry that the roserrch station
in 31ock 46 belonged to the Hygiene Institute of the Vrffcn SS ond
thus, through Krugowsky, era# under tho Chiof of the Medical Ser¬
vice of the Vrffcn S>, Dr. Oenxkon. Vhr.t is to be said in rencrnl
concerning the probntlv e vrlue of the Ding aery, the High
Tribunal can see from the supnleoent to the final plea. Thero I
have explained in dotnil that the so-called Ding dlrry ern by no
Dims bo considered r. regularly kopt diary and thoroforo cm havo
no full probative vrlue. For does the entry of 9 January 19^3
contain mything which prrticulrrly incriminates Gcnzkon.

Tor, as is also explained in detail in :iy closing brief wc ere
here concerned solely with the issuance of cpproval for a. chrngo
of name for the vaccine production slto, the suggestion having
originated with Ding and not Dr. Oensker.. This took place as
lrtc as fall of 1043.

Consequently tho dirry entry does not fom c fim basis for

the conception of the Prosecution, which is not supported by cny

other roason for suspicion. The foundation is removed fron it

completely by the extensive evidonco which clearly shows that

Oenzten as Chief of the Medical Service of the Veffon SS was

eliminated in every respect froa questions of research work in

3lock 4o. In this connection I refer to the sworn testimony of

the witness JCogon and the before-mentioned rffidr.vit of Joachim

11004


l6 Juiy-dfc-3I-2(>-4-Cook (Int. Schcan)

C=urt To. 1

2uff (Doe. Xrugovaky So. 109, Zxhibit 103.)

If I era, la conclusion, strte that during the war Or. Gcnzken
-ever entered either the concentration caip Suchenwrdd or the typhus
research station or the prodactioc site, then I believe that I
have evgry right to assert that Or. Gensken did not jrrticlpotc
In the planning and'execution of the typhus experlaents In 3ucheo-
wrld or Srtxveilor as leader, instigator, r.cconpUce, or la any
other capacity, and I therefore ask that he be found not guilty
ua*. er Count XX So. 0 J of the Indictr.ent.

Under Count XXX all the Defendants are accused of a crlnc against
husrnlty since the nodical experinents listed in Count II Ho. 6
are rlso represented rs crlnes eg-iast hur-anity.

The defendant Or. Gensken can only be sentenced according to
Count III, fibers 11, if the prerequisites for such r sentence
are given according to any of the counts under II, figuros 0 - 9.
Count III, figure *11 contains no independent crininnl act, but only
the stateoent that the er^erinents on hurra beings listed under
Count II figures 6-9 rre considered as criccs against husanlty
by the prosocution. Therefore punishnent according to Count XXI,

• figure 11 is possible only In connection with punishment accord¬
ing to Count II, firures 6-9.

Sinco Or. Gonxkcn did not prrticlpate In the sulfrnocide oxnerl-
r.ents nor in the typhus oxperinents as principal, necormlico or
instigator vithln the nerning of the indictment therefore tho
possibility of sentencing hin according to Count III, figuro 11
is excluded, since independent punishnent is not possible on
this count.

In Count IT Or. Gensken finally is ch-rged with having been a
nesber of the SS. end thus a nenber of c criminal organisation.

Ac cor din.; to the text of the I XT Judgment (pa^e 16503 of the
Gemrn record of the IX?) the nere ncabershi? docs not suffice
for a person to be included in the declaration of criminality.

11005


l6 JaIy---3Z-2G-5-Cojk (In-. Ten Schoen)
C-urt So. I


author, the SS aesber can only then be ~-uniched if he is connected
with wrr crises or crises against humanity through his direct
psrticijr.tion or knowledge. D r . Genskca by so seras denies hrviru;
been e higher SS lender and hrvin* Joined the SS Yprfuesungatruppe
volunterily. Moreover, he was never a sesber of z resistance
nover.eet ead does not want to produce material in his defense in
this or sidl-r directions. Only where it wrs necessary did he.
la corrilete frrnJeacss end honesty and with that energy and touch-
sess peculiar to hinself. fi#*t for his points of view. Yhen he
wrs celled by Elcnler to beccne the successor of Grawitz as Reich
Physicim SS rad of the police he rejected the appointment p.bsoluto-
ly. Therefore, he vra nev er appointed deputy of the Reich Physi-
eira Grawitx. Tor did he hesitnte to put himself rr.ainst the
Seichsfuchror SS whenever his (Dr. Ocnzken's) honor was involvod.

And it certainly took courrve, resoluteness cal nature conduct
to state in front of the lrrse number of SS leaders: r .-ot ovon
Heinrich Hinrler era Halt ny sense of honor.*

The HiJi Tribunal will not havo to consider in detril the question
of y* ntrtJershl? since his ansbership coull only then hr.vo rn a.«ra-
vetln; effect on his sentence if the defendant wore to be convicted
for the er ericcnts with which he is ch*>r.xd. However, the
tvlior.ee submitted by tho prosecution does not suffice for such
q conviction. Dr. Oenzkcn ernnot be sentenced by this Tribunrl
for his SS mentorship rJonc.

Hr. President, Tour Honors:

I ca approaching the end of =y speech. I nust eophaslxe vein

that Dr. Gcnzken was a physician rad a soldier, that he had already

%

served his Tntheriand as a physician nnd a soldier during the first

World Vrr 191U.191S. rad that. In that snr-c cmner he saw his life's

work In .dicrl service for the Yr'fen-SS. Be has accormlishsd

his duty rad mastered the nrny difficulties which geared durlnr.

the war. He vr.s not supposed to exceed this task. nor did he want

11006


lo July-Jr-BZ- 20 -o-CooSc (Ini. T 3 a Schoen)
Coart To. 1


to do aore, rnd actually he did no cor© tha tort.

Sis hl-'fc rrnic rnd hl« position n nedlcd chief of the V-ffen-SS
cry not nriee It eppenr improbable, perhaps, thnt he wrs Involved
In the experiments In sone fora or other. If the Elfih Tribunal
will carefully ex mine and wei*h the lncricinctlnfi evidence of
the prosecution nnd tbeimterlel suboltted in his defense, end I
m flraly conrlneod thnt the Ei|h Tribunnl wiirawinsrtake'.fcfcls
difficult tnsk with Its peculiar sense of responsibility nnd
painstaking conscientiousness - then It will have to conolude,

Just ns I aust do, that tho defendant Dr. Oonxken ernnot possibly
here incrimlnrted h la self In the experlnents rs charged nnd that,
therefore, he Is not guilty la the sens© of the other counts
of the lndlctcent.

Thus, Tour Eonors, I piece the future fnto of the defendant
Dr. OensSeen confidently Into your hands nnd I rr fimly convinced
th-t 70 U will pronounce n Just sentonce.


11007


16 July-^-J?-21-l-Gr«*a (1st. Yon Schna)

Court I

TrZ PB2SI-23T: Che Tribunal will ho at fmn counsel for tho defen¬
dant 2udolf Brandt.

-o, KALTjVJjra: (?«r tho dofenlent Rudolf Brendt: Tour Honors• tho
final ploa which you havo heforo you I have narked with rod linos at
*o=c points. If tho Tribunal will look at tho ploa they will boo boso
rod linos at tho nargin and only tho so parts aro what I intond to
read. I holiorc the Tribunal does not yot hare copios but I have just
.tended then up.

TKZ FSaSSBORt The Tribunal has tho copios, counsel, but I
do not boo any rod linoe on thee.

Tho Tribunal now has tho narkod copios, counsel.

TP, £ALTJy-a»'x Mr. President I should liko to point out that on
pagoa 1 to 17 y. u will seo soeo placos narkod with rod linos but, at
the non ant, this nftorr.onn, I shall not read thoso pnssngco. My client
has askod no not to rood those passages although I should liko to
onpheeizo that ho ogroos with tho contents of ny stntonont but he
had his own personal roasons. In thoso passages fron 1 to 17 I hnro
spoken of goncral principles and I havo oxiwinod vhothor it is advicablo
to discuss thoso principles within the frnao work of c final plead.

But, opinions diffor so greatly in thlo rooa, I boliovo 1 oould sny
that truth could not fcurt anyone, not ovor. tho dofcndantc. bocauoo
I bolioro that truth alono nnkos froo. Row I shall turn to pago 17
and I shell bogins

3.

1. Vho j 3 Rudolf Brandt. what do his forner poaitjonc co»»n ?

Che indictoont has characterised this 37-yoar-old can, who in the
witness chair, stood out conspicuously anon* the rost of tho Bofondonts
because of Bis clu=s7 defense, as an influential personality who
had a considerable and evil influence on Eicnlor. This view of tho
prosocution soccs natural to tho casual obsorvor, for Rudolf ar-ndt
hold tho rank of an SS Standartonfuohror, he was tho bond of tho "Xinie


ters« Bureau" end of tho "Personal occrctnriato of Hinnlcr. As far

1103d


16 3-Gr->ss (1st. Vcm Schon)

Court I

-te resit of 3S Stacdartesfuohrer is concerned, I wish t" point out that
Sisrlor gave Brandt this rank so as sot to subordinate fcic to other
= cr.bors of tko Go coral SS. whereas in tho Vaffon SS he only bold tho
rank of Oborscharfuohror which corresponds to tho rank of Staff Sergeant
is tho Amy. It would certainly bo wrong to consider Brandt r.crcly a
stenographer, crcc a good ono. Ho was, of course, noro than that.

But tho fact that all thoso who obsorrod bin at dosost rango and for
easy years, considered tho technical ospoct of his Job with Eimlor as
rbsslutcly credo.-.in»nt. should be food for thought.

Vk-it nil witnesses hoveunanir-ously tostifiod to is thoir observation of
s subaltern, intellectually insignificant, but .-.orally clean personality,
without groat scope or rasourcofulnoss, lod astray and then without
rosietenco. 1 deecendont of working-claus pooplo, ho enno to Kinnlor
for roasons of povorty nr.d noodlnoos, not o U t of porsonal inclination,
roccivod only nodost trlnry, and rcssainod without corns to tho ond
because ho only wanted to earn what ho noodod to support his vifo, his
children and his paronts.

If his unceasing diligence h-d r.ot. nlroady during his oirly youth, no
a student, aado hie ono of tho bost stenographers in Go many, ho would
have never sot foot in Einclor'e offico. 3ur ho set foot In it ond
did not lorvo this drondful placo, oven though ho could no longor ono-
vor for his presence there. Brandt originally wnntod to bocono n
stenographer by profession and had to havo an academic degree ns re¬
quired by rcgulntionc. Thus his university studios oro connoctcd with
thic ideal anl did not originate fron an particular cciontiflc inclina¬
tion. I shall not quote fron tho affidavit of Dr. Horrgosell but shell
continue ferthor down.


16 July-Br-J?-21-3-Grog 3 (Iat. Ton Schnc)

Jonrt I

that ho realised the cri~.os only when be vaa put on trial. She de¬
ficiency of his conaclor.ee cannot be ignored, in viov of the f net
that not all of hla signatures woro executed without knowledge of
the text and the entente of tho ordora iaaued by Eiar.lor end passed
on by his. But tho reaction of that c-naeienoe wee at that tine al¬
ready only a weak ono; It did not riao in protoat aa a nornal conc-
cienco would hero roectod, and a poraon with a normal conacionco would
noTor haro lot hisaclf be nlovsod for signing auch docuaonts. HuAolf
Brandt know - atorting froc about 1941/42 - about exporinenta on hunan
boInga, carried out on prlaonera aontoncod to death whoa, in Brandt*a
opinion, auch oxporiaenta offorod a chanco of aurvival. Letor on ho
auat haro known that thero wore only a few prisonore loft who volun¬
tarily eoinod tho opportunity to rocoiro a prrdon red that thoroforo
o^npulslon had to bo used to nnko tho oxporinontnl subjects aubr.lt to
the experinonte, I do bellovo hin that ho did not know, did not road,
uueV lose atudiod noat of tho inching and outgoing pnporo of nodical
character, anong thoao th'ueanda of nonthly lnooring and outgoing
pnpera cooing undor ■pcraonal-rofornt"; I hold It to bo truo that
without exception ho did not know tho epocialixcd nodical roporto and
thoir do tail a.

The taatinony of Profoaaor Ivy (Morning aoaaion of 16 June 1947) with
which I sgroo nanoly, that ovon a loynen can recognize tho violation
of nodical othics, give a ne no reason to qualify fay remarks; bocauoo tho
atatouont of Profoaaor Ivy aaeur.os, of courco, that tho laynnn did
aetOAlly read tho report and specifically those poseegoa which aro con¬
tradictory to nodical ethics. At first glance tho contradiction to
the report ad caper is on to can certainly not bo recognized by tho loynan.
But I should not dare to say that Brandt oxecutod oil oignnturoo with
closed oyos and did r.ot know one of tho docunenta, at least in its


ecsontiola, which the Prosecution has now aubnlttod hin. Eia dofonoo
on tho vitnoas stand, V. the effect that ho could not roacr.bor this or

11010


16 July—i-v~ -21-4-0r •> ci (Int. Ton Scfcon)
Court I


or that drcojeat, not sufficient in itsolf does not say or prove
anything -bout hi* knowledge at that tino. How -.any of the docixtonts
of tfco Proaacution Brandt actually road, found correct, understood
•r. thoir purport and approved, at that tiro end before ho signed thee,
cannot bo ascertained. If the statenents of Brandt hinsclf and of
the witness Koine regarding tho excessive workload and the pr.co
af tho dally working routine are accepted as truo, r.s thoy aro eon-
firaed by the nost v Tied witnesses in the affidavits produodd by
the Dofcnsc, then tho oyo of the Judgo, in ordor to Judgo fairly
«ught to loavo tfco * council table" on which tho documents arc lying
today, stern end inexorablo, and go beck to tho tiro o f tho occurropco
of those ovonta*

fton ho will notice also all the special cireunotnncos which exerted a
lasting and prodor.inant influence up on Brandt. To bring about
letters, ordors etc. on ono's own initiative and authority io ono
thing, to pass such docunonts on without knowledge or with only a
■light knowlodgo of thee or to givo a noroly tochnical help, lo nnothor
tiling It is truo that cron n cursory knowledge is a knowledge, but
it is lid ted to the passing nor.ont, porh-ps only ninutos, and thon
tho "conveyor bolt" on which Dr. Brnndt was working would again bring
oonplotoly difforent events within his ho risen. I shall now continuo
on pogo a.

A Gemrn poot states a general truth in saying that in tho first atop
wo aro still froo, in tho second wo nro slavos. Vo should trndo tho
path which tho 25 year old 3randt followed free tho day on which ho
decided to bccoco a nenber of the personal staff of ElnclST. It is
an old oxporienco that a 7oung ran with n sound character is tho noro
likely to attp.ch hir.solf to a powerful nan if this nnc stand* out
toforc his inferiors as a nodol of good fellowship nnd industry. In
this end no other way did 3rendt regard Hinder through the years until
he, particularly after the outbreak of war, apFonrod brutal ovon in

non


16 Jttl y -Ap-JP"» 21/ »5- Gr oss (Int. Tons chon)

Court I

ths cyos of kis inferiors, devising individual orders of an inter*, nn
Batoro together vith others and thereby losing tho character of being
b just personality also in tho eyes of Budolf 3randt. 3randt does not
inwardly approve of these new practices and orders of Hirjrlor, but
fulfil® then by sluing letters otc. takes dictations fr'a which ho
nest roalixo, in broad outline, the nisanthropie.nl coueso of Hicnlor.

So rocains silont. That is his guilt which cannot bo donlod. -
3ut it Is bnsed, in port, on a conturits old horitegs of the Gernrns,
sanely tho dovotion in tho face of tho "order" of tho suporior -
starting free tho ordor of the non camissi'.nod officer, up to thnt
of tho gcnornl, the king or tho erperor and this devotion rogrrdod
such an ordor ns alnost sacrosanct and inplied rolcasc froc any porconal
responsibility. 3ut nuch grostor guilt !ios with tho porson who doviood
and iosuod such ordors that with a nan liko Brandt who pascod then on
without evor having influoncod thoir origin or having ovon had tho
possibility of influencing thoir origin or execution*

Tho sabotogo which Brandt right have beer, nblo to carryout would by
no noons terro Influoncod or evon lnprossod Klrrlor, Lr. Rnschor, Dr.
Ding* Profoasor Hirt, Professor Hagen and othorn.

As n result of tho ovldenco I oophasixo tho fact that Rudolf Brandt
vas not one of tho cynical brutal Kati-nal Socialists. Tho wltnoeoos
for tho Dofenso call hin an "idoallat".


11012


Coart I

16 Jul 67-X~22-i-££M-Leosard (Yoa Schon)


Kedixlnalrat ?elix Zerater, \&o knew his well, testified that Erandt
lid not even hate or feel eneity toward the Allies; on the contrary, he
always ireased of an understanding anong all oeooles on a ncaccful basis.
A =aa who coecltted crlnea against huaanlty - and Rudolf Brandt la
Indicted as sueh - la congenitally a niaanthrop. Hitler, Hinder,
Gcebbele, -orsa r . r ., and nany othera were auch enealea of ary hue an bein^
who oppoaod thee. An offender against huaa n lty will bo able to conceal
only for a abort while the lowneae of hie noral corruptneae, because at
•one point even the aoat wily hypocrite will drop hie aask. Here, too,
oao could think of Hitler, Hinder, and others; after all, they loft
deeusents, speeches, and other things to husaalty, and they ccncitted
acta 'it.1 ch - thank God - havo radically deatroyed the leeond that thoy
were honorable sen. Scthing of all that appllea to Budolf Brandt, If
I say sentIon hia at all In connection with the forogolng. Ho, who
only had a chance to occupy hlaaelf for aeconda or minutes with thooo
sattcra and who, like 3rendt, had neither the education nor the know¬
ledge of a physician or a acientiat In thl*particular field, certainly
deserves different Judgsont than he, who by profeaalon and by the
authority Invested In hta, perforna exoerisante and conducts reaoarch.

In the alnd of o sell cal acientiat Ideas and clans of the sort ahown
In this trial develop only slowly and aro only rarely born epontono-
oualy. “ho acientiat hoa a definlto idea or at least npproxiaatcly
recognizes the significance of the experiaent. To oaploy this way of
thinking In the case of Rudolf Brandt should lead, at least to a certain
extent, to a situation of puniehcent. If he had influence Hinder In
cne of the criminal plans or orders under consideration here, if he
had lie crossed thee with Hinder, as It sight well bee one the duty of the
so-called private secretary, then I would not lose aany words in rr.
Brandt's defense. But the situation 16 different here. There is no
doubt that Brandt a Satlonal Socialist. Whatever one's attitude


towards the question whether according to progras and character of

Satlonal Soclalisa cruelty and contecjst of huaanlty was the essential

11013


Zxrt I

15 Jal 47-A-2C- C -.-ZX-Lecnerd (Von Sehon)

jart - which creation should be answer ad la the affirmative, being the
inevitable consequence of caking national end racial values absolute -
and whether this was recognisable for anyone - which question should be
answered in the negative - Hitler at any rato continuously sooke about
peace and the uninitiated learned abcut his devilish tricks only when it
was too late and the terror ande any opposition hopeless.

I continue on page 24

This trial too, and particularly the IXT trial, has uncovered one
of Hitler's biggest secrets which was the unin cause of his extension
of power, namely, his snstery of keeping secret even the nost extorsive
and nost gruesce crises. To be sure, the average Gor-.'ir. knew about the
concentration cieps and the ccnplielty of the Secret Police. Ho also
knew that the existence of the concentration coans and the system of
treating the people ir. these casps was a still lower fora of violonco
*.cward human beings than the nilitarisn of the last years, cartlculurly
since Hitler's star began to dosconl and einco he triod to free this
instrucent of any tradition. But details of the terror, of the execu¬
tions , the liquidation of hundreds of thousands of pooole by goo, ovor-
vcrie, and other methods were known only to a fey coaparcd to the total
cf 80 Billion Oorncns; perhaps several thousand knew about it. Ho occ-
candant of a concentration comp or his guards who coacltted such atroci¬
ties vculd have had any reason to cublls such cruelties; for they know
that it wculd have earned for them the contempt of the ovorvhelning
majority of the /enan people. Secrecy then has a psychological nococt:
Atrocities are committed by the uerpetrntcr only with a loudly or nt
least secretly throbbing conscience. The conscience is never silent.
Vhoever commits crtieltiee feels guilty and avoids the light of day.

It is ay conviction that details which took piece behind the walls
ami the electrically charged wires of the concentration conns, the aory
thousands of tragedies, were never known to the large nesses of the
seople.

Despite the fact that Sudolf rrandt spent approximately 12 years in

HOlIi


Cl I •


5 April 47-A-7. 1 ^-22-3-Leoneri (von Schoen)
curt I


Hinlfr 1 • anteroom, hi had nc more imc«ledge of the shame of the concen-
•.ratloa ccmps than many another official, except that he knew, since 1942,
that prisoners vere being used for nedical experiment6. According to
his ova plausible statement on the witness stand Brandt had never visited
a concentration camp, none of the defendants or other doctors had ever
retorted to him a single detail - tut the fact remains: Brandt lived in
iarhness as far as Himmler ves concerned and he did aee the salvation of
his people and country in Hitler's program, 3rar.dt had insufficient
knowledge of general Christian concepts. He never came into oereonal or
official contact vith the Christian philosophy of life and therefore grow
up with those ideals, Wiich certainly, in tholr theoretical formulation
hal their good points, too, especially in so far as they propagated the
renunciation of egotiss as a way of life. Brandt did not roallre that
these ideals were based on araev paganism and for that reason alone were
bound to lead to violence and slavery. *hus Brandt accepted Himmler's
personality for naay years, even during the war. This Is natural, if ono
tdaires and respects a oerson. Brandt did no longer load a faally llfo,
tsd if one locks closely, Brandt no longer thought or actod independently,
tut it was Himmler rather who spoke and actod through him. ^his is true,

I teg you to res ember, cot only for the aedical experiments incrlainated
hers but also for matters cospletely outside the boundn of criminal law,
vith which ho had to occupy himself very largely every day. I will not
go so far as to soy that Brandt was completely lncapablo of forming his
ovn opinions and degrade him to the level of an unthinking tool, but it
is nevertheless true that Brandt, already at the beginning of the war,
vas no longer a person of when one could have erocctei any intellectual
resistance against Himmler. 3randt had lost his ovn standard, to be
sore exact. S’—-T -r had become his standard mere and more, so that he
could not master any resistance even when Himmler dictated the wcll-
bncvn letters, orders etc. or ordered Branit to pass them on. Brandt's
conscience, it is true, still rebelled as It did not agree with the
experiments on humans which had been ordered; but we notice no reaction

iraS


15 July -.7 > '2—r-L--osard (Vos Scboen)

Court I


is t he sense of as opes or hid dan resistance egelnst Hlr.nl or* s vlov in
these natters. Himmler geve the orders and the orders of this un¬
believably powerful sen completely overwhelmed a nan still comparatively
yourg who, by nature, was neither politically inclined nor a revolution¬
ary, '•ho vas neither cruel nor ambitious, who saw his goal in life attained
when he could put to use the only talent he possessed, namely, to write
quickly,

! continue on page 26 .

Some weeks ago sentence was pronounced against the forcer Field
Marshal Kllch. *he Tribunal knows that it was not a sentence of death.

I have studied this verdict and appreciate the conscientiousness with
which the Judges examined and considered all imaginable arguments of the
defense. Is it permitted to establish a relation between the Milch
trial and the doctor's trial, particularly with regard to the person of
the defendant Sudolf Brandtl As far as each trial has its own peculiar
history, any comparison is cut of the cuestioa. As far as there is,
however a similar train of thought in both trials, the defense counsel
any establish such a relation. As a matter of fact, the Judges in tho
Milch trial refrained from sentencing this man to death despite his
extremely high position, despite the initiative and strong energy ho
applied in executing his clans, despite his numerous, incontrovertible
remarks. This encourages me to intervene once more In Brandt's behalf
and to ask the Tribunal for a mild sentence. In comparing the two
personalities Lsd series of arts nearly everything turns out in favor of
;y client, and I do not foil to recogniro that Hisler's orders resulted
ir. shameful excesses against the life and liberty of innocent odoolo.

Tet I do not hesitate to say that in the case of hilch a guilt can be
expiated by a relative punishment, the punishment for Hudolf Brandt
should not open the gate to eternity.

I conclude this discussion with a Question which clso clayed a cart
1= the cross examination: Will Budolf Brandt's good character descrip¬
tion as shown by the affidavits of the defense become dlased or even

11015


r

Court I

15 Jul i~-A-22-5-Ii>.-Lccr.fird (7on Schon)

Influenced in an entirely unfavorable -a? by the sworn affidavits which
he gave to the prosecution, tut vhich are wrong in essential points?

I have to answer this Question in the negative. She entire contro¬
versy about Brandt's own affidavits shows that this defendant lacked
intelligence and will power and that his poor state of health evidently
eggravated both even nore. Brandt signdd affidavits for the orosecution
•he contents of which were objectively contadictory to the truth and
which he could have corrected on the witness stand after coin reflection
and exaainatioa of the facts. The fact that Brandt was prepared et that
•ice to sign affidavits for the orosecution which were in cart objectively
incorrect, and that he evidently dil so without raising any serious
objections, should give us pause for a noaant, when the Tribunal
tixnalnes the iaportence of his signatures, which he gave Just as Quickly
in his "persona F-*fevnt", terhnps even =uch aore cuicklv. I oschaslxe
here that I have no intentions of reproaching the prosecution. It only
■oess relevant to ne to shew in this exunrlo which care uo hero during
the trial how quickly a signature can be given, even though the oerson
giving the signature has not fully realised the lcoortonco of the otnte-
nor.t signed b y hia at the tlse he signed it. Brandt expressed his
opinion, pertly even reoorted facts about scroe of his co-defer.dants
vhich lack sufficient foundation without there being any reason for
ennity, aversion or any other selfish notives towards his co-defendnnto.
Brandt oinply signed these affidavits under the erroneous ussunotion
that his signatures confirsed things that were correct. In order to
Judge this peculiar situation it should be noted that it is not the
ctateaents which turn out to bo untrue that ere to be considered as a
lie or, if =aie under Cnth, rs perjury, but only the statements which
are consciously false. In the case in question no other reoroach could
be naie against Brandt except that he had nade an objectively incorrect
etateaent by nisteke. I do net consider this a syaptoa of unscruou-

Icusness cf character.

I continue - page 4c:

1101 ?


Court I

16 Jttl 47-A-22-6-lBj*-Leonard (Von Schon)


5udolf Brandt does not consider hlnself innocent. luring his
interrogation in the vitness bo* he ansvered the auestion vhether or not
he considered hinself guilty:

"I en honest and consistent enough not Just to deny all guilt. If
a core or lest isnortant stenographer bee ones guilty because he taicas
down dictation and nesses on such dictation to subordinate stenographers,
or cosooses letters on orders free Einnler, then in this sense I an not
vlthout guilt... I realize that it is alaoet lnpossible for Your
Honors to place yourselves in the position in which I found ayself then.
Tour Honors could cot do so even vith the beet of intentions since those
conditions were unlcue and cannot be re-constructed; nevertheless; in
ashing for a Just verdict, I would again and rgain refer to the threo
aspects because I ayself oa deeply increased by the extrenely weighty
evidence brought against ae. Today, in caln retrosooct, viewed fron
the green table, so to speak...! would be happy not to have signed these
letters because the;' were contrary to ay sentiaer.t and convictiono. I
have, to date, cot had to change this conviction."

(Page 4521 of the English transcript)

If, aftjr all, Brandt 1 o guilt rcarlns, it is nevertheless auite
evident that his oerson cocorisos both the good and the evil so that I
could not but plead for a lenient sentence. The denor.lneal strongth
inherent in a giant orgtalca *-ckee a nock of a nan like Brandt who Is
seek cad weak by nature, barely good enough to be its passive tool, on
autonaten, yes, though hardly etill a non.

Only few ere better able to Judge the character of e defendant than
his defense counsel because no one else can have a greater interest to
probe below hiB surface. After cany careful observations, I arrive at
the conclusion that this nan's spiritual constitution entirely confomo
to the testinony deposed by the defense witnesses regarding Brandt's
character and gentleness. He suffers the deecest renorso ar.d in horri¬
fied et the htcon tcmects which energe fron the docunents end confront

hir.. He nay ’-ell be the only nan accused here who, in the witness box,

UCle


Court I

16 July 47-A-22-7-*BI-I«oner4 (7cr. Schon)

saio statements which reflect deec shame at his own action* and manifest
Genuine repentance. By ceeslng on orders and documents, etc. he somehow
became a link In that fateful chain of events vhich freouently ended with
•ho death of persons, and elthough he could not have thought of these
himself, Brar.dt is ashamed of his actions. Should not the Tribunal also
take Into consideration Brandt's genuine regeneration when the ouestlon
of the penalty arises?

Assusing it is proved vhat I have said regarding Brandt's oereonality,
hie rank, his oositlon, his sphere and treasure of work, orders, etc.,

I consider It should be nossible to see this man in a different light
free that offered by the prosecution.

Vhen a world is uuside-dcvu, the guiding spirits vho feel responsible
for regeneration suit sake Justice the basis for the community. Then
will follow porce and prosperity for which vo Germans yearn r/tor long
rears of bertrricr. I cculd understand it if it was oald that a tot-
terlcg Justic. for l.c soke a harsh sentence. ?rhrso an a

warning to those vho say be dloooeod to trparle again upon these nnln-
stays of civilisation.

Greater wltdos, however, abides on the side of moderation; after
all, hnrdly any nation In this century can be absolved of all coral
guilt, forclt me, therefore, that I conclude with three cocent us
words, guides to e. rebirth of the world: Truth, Justice, and decency.

Thank you.

THE PRESITE: I: The Tribunal will be In recess for a few minutes.

(A recess was taken.)


11019


16 July Ul -A-S -2a—1—* 'e«han(Von Sch n)

Court 1

THE PRESIDE?'" : The Tribune! is again in session.

The Tribunal is info nerd t/it, the or?misters have the transcript
of the arguments on behalf of the defendant Sievers. The ocunsel for
the defendant Sievers aay now proceed with his arguments.

DR. ’EiS;: ; .- r R: (Counsel for the rcfend-_nt Sievers) Hr. President,

I do n.t know whether th- Tribunal has a written translation of my
plea.

1 V E =. SI l . T: The translation is not available to the Trib'nal,
but the interpreters have the translation and the Tribunal Kill listen
tc the interpreters. C:uucel nay crocked.

DH. WEI33EST 1: President, I have receivod the requisite

nusber of translations and will te glad tc givo then to the Tribunal. •

Mr. President, Your Honors .

THE P.'CSirarT: Ccunael, if you will speak in a little lower tone
of vcico, it will be er sior for ttt • Tribunal to hear the interpreters.

DH. ' ISGEPBER: Kr. President, Your Honors, "Sievers - a key
figure," a special case, "Ciavers and his c.lint-orators in the Ahnonorbe
feisty were completely possessed of the vici us end horriblo doctrines
of rfazion." — Th -se are sece of the slogen-llke epithets that tho
prosecuti a used when presenting the case SIXERS. It is ray duty
to discuss tho case of SIEVES with dispassionate objectivity in
crier to offer you. Your tenor, the basis for a judgment doing
•t'sUcf ta all the details of this caso.

SIEV3LS' Uf? hi-wery and hjs prcf-asi-nal career are being

discribed in cy closing brief, in which I quoted a number of affidavits

testifying to his good cte-racter and his high ethical attitude.

sIET/RS met Dr. HIKLSCHE& for th- first tine in 1929 who with extra-

ordinary insight recognized at a very « arly stage the dangers cf

National Socialise made SIEVERS an entirely realible, decided and

faithful follower of “r. HIELSC'iER. On -.is instigation SIEVERS became

? .--nb. r f the MS AP. r n his irrigation SIEVERS in 1935 resigned frora

11020


16 July 47-A-S^-Z-—2i£»ch;»( Von Schon)
Court 1


hi a professional career in ostler to f i ll the position of a secretary
gen*ral in the Ahnenerbo society. Ho did this in order to make possible
the execution cf the tasks againrt rational Socialiaa that Dr. HIELSCH1R
had assigned him. Alcne the fact that Si ever a renounced a safe
positicn and took over a duty that sir»:e the beginning uas connected
with the greatest danger for his personal safety oust bu appreciated
is an act of .. re&test self-denial.

I only want to deal very briefly with Siwv* rs' position in the
Ahnenerbt Society ti >.t I h ve described in detail in ay Closing Brief.

I consider this necessary bcr.u6< the Prosecution has described
Sicvers as the cut crity in th* Ahn- norbe and tho "dir* ctor" of the
Institute for Kilitwry Scientific .Uisoarch. Th* nrrcnocunmss of this
concept is of docisivo importance. Tho President and therefore tbo
high’st authority for both institutes was Hiaaler. Und r hie was thn
curator ant later Aetschof, Prof. Dr. aiast. Rector of tho I'unich uni-
t< rsity, who nn in charge of th* scientific direction. If them was
such a thing os r sup rvicory right and a sui> rvlaory responsibility
for th- scientific ncpartaois s, it was oxclusivc-ly Dr. last's duty
and not Siovers'. Severs was th*. "Reich business nanagnr" who woa

* x-lnwivaly in *h'.rge of adainiatr tiva duties, which, however, wore
Halted to special fields. thn in 1942 or. Hionler'a or* scher' a
•v.d ‘irth’s institute wore unfertunatoly annexed.

'Jrao in l r :«2, n rriH£Rs order, thr H Ahrjenirbe” — unt : 1 then

• xclusivoly culturally try? huiani3tlw.lly oriented — was unfortunately
jin* d to tho institutes of Dr. R/3CHER and Dr. HIRT and later coordinate

■ith them in tho Institute for military scientific research , SISTERS

tasks r-aaimd axactly the saao as before. They r rc designated exactly

in HQa£Rs written erder of 7 July 19 U2, rod of 13 -eccc^ur 1942,

rdering research projects, giving orders, supervision and execution

f r:s arch work, allocation cf prisoners for exp rinents on human

beings , rll those did net belong to SISTERS wort:. If y* t there arc

r jc*:r3 in the docuamtary natnrial of the Prosecution that deal with

11021


I


16 July - han (7On 3ch.cn)

Ccurt 1


•he allocation of prisen-rs, the*, those pap> rs — if at all — were
only forwarded to the cocpeteit authority by SIEVER5. On all activities
of an £rtainistrativo n tur«, reports were cade to the Curator and
Actschof. Insofar es SIEVERS, considering the geographical distance
totw -n Berlin end )V»ich, signed the TdrrospdAdcnce; the copy TO
subsequently countersigned by Dr. 'VEST, with those few sentences I
hop* to have clcrifi- d the coop* tencies and responsibilities within
the "Ahnonerbo" and the Institute for c i lit'-ry scientific research,
ton Professor Cr. GE8H/LROT characterized r ncnsibility within the
"Ah«ncrbo" with ttw roenrk that 3I3/ERS did not belong thoro at all,
his Judg»nt was absolut- ly correct.

I shall now turn to corc-nt briefly on t.hn individual counts of
the indietomt. At first I stall deal with tho ;'0 ccunta, in which
SIEVEHS' participation do s not exist, because the characteristics of
cbj.ictive fcctucl evidcnco aro nissing.

1. SIEVEE3 is being connected with th c lorio exp- riaonts of Dr,
SCHILLINO. Wo rritn- ss of tht Pros cut ion could certify this. The docu¬
ments subaitted do notshow anytidng except thi t SIEVISS wont-d to
rolraao Dr. Ficn:~7 free hi3 activities -ith Dr. SCHILLING , which
-as «xpr«33ly r u st-d by th* forr*r. The cntcrnological station in

*tchou, :ihich olo\- d to tho Institute for military sda.itific
r« - arch hrd not thf- l*ast thing to do with either Dr. tCHULIWl'e
-..laric re-. rrch or -ith exp^riatats on hunen beings, as witness u r.

"AT t>stifid. For the r*et, I rtfor to tht state in ny Closing Brief,

Mges 49-51.

2 . " 1 th tho si-aw-t-r oxforiaonta that wore carried out in the
Concentration C?cp Dachau by ord r of the Luftwaffe, SIEVEKS had also

thing at all to do. On the basis of an agro* =• nt between the Luft-
-affc and the Hoichsfuchrung -SS, SIWEiS, in the course of a coin¬
cidental netting cn 20 July 1944, in a conference of at cost 20 minutes'

duration discussed with Frofessor D r . BEIGIHJCttK, who hrd b-.cn

11022


16 July 47-A-^24-4r*5eehaa(Yon Scfcon)

Court 1

completely unknown to him until then, the cession of rooms in the
r.nto=ologic6l institute, which, moreover, was locat-.d out3iac
the camp. SILVERS had no knowl- dgo of oithor the subject of the
scheduled experiments, or of their furth r course. After 20 August
1944, SEVERS was not in Dachau any core. (Sec Closing Brief, pages

63-66). ~

3. >s proof of SEVERS' pf rticinations in the experiments with
•pidenic jaundice, th« Prosecution refers to r.n entry in the journal
of the "Ahnanorte" dnt d 3 )>rch 1914. °on-ralsr2t Dr. OCKRIBER is
requesting SIEVIRS to arrange a ccnferenco with HE!) 1IR about hepat¬
itis. Until that dr y, SIEVIRS did not know what hepatitis was, neither
did he know lator where hepatitis uxp-riner.ts were carried on, and
•hat sort of oxpjrincnts th>y were. (S«.o Closing Brief, pg< a 67-69).

a. Tho typhus ..xporinenta carried on in the Concentration Camp
tatswollar won. ordered via COTRJJSG >,o president of thu Reich Rusoarch
Council and via the Insp-ctor of Sanitation of tho Luftwaffe. SEVERS
did not coso into contact at all with t: exp rim-nts or th • director
of th«’ experimr-.ts, 'rof* ssor Dr. HAACIN. Until 1946 he did not oven
knew Cr. H . Also, at th- tin- the experiments woro ccriductod,
SIFVEPS was ouvor at th Concentration Carp Vats*til r. Twice there
wre written requests for a c rtr.in nuab r of persons for typhus
1 -suni rat lens fcrw?rdnd to SEPTUS who «"B definitely not tho corapetont
uthority for this. Th-. repress assurance was given that these iirmun-
izatiens ware noo dangerous. How should SEVERS have obtained tho
knowledge that this was possibly r. question of illegal experiments,
which was emphatically denied by Dr. H AGE!., th director of tho
-xpuriornts? That the immunized persons were ruart. red thu the so-called
"'hT-norbo" .— barracks in the Concentration Camp Hatzwoilur is no
proof of the fact th:t the "Aho- ncrbt r nr.d snytldng at ^.11 to do with
the hsrrening3 there. The building block opposite this barracks was
still call d 'Ch: vauzleger" barracks by thu n-tives when in Germany
for a long time already the "Cr.'Vauzlcgcr" - as the light cavallcry

11023


16 July V7-A-S-2i^5-4fr<-an(Von Schco)
Court 1


of th»- old caveri mi ensy was coll'd — were, no.'i-oxiatent.

Therefore, hero too there w?.s .10 connection of Siovers with the
typhus experiments (See Closinc Brinf, pages 69-75).

5. If tho r rcaecutic« maintained that SIEVHiS was connected with
B lological arfare, the so-called "!r-Stoff" (K-Sfatcrial"), and with
e-rt'.in gea experiments, it still r*cains for the Prosecution to present
preof of tho fact that it was here a question of any sort of crime.


1102b


lc Juiy-A-FL-25-i-Cc<* (Ir.t. vor. Schor.)

Coart Vo. I

Tf. assertions of the. Prosecution have boon completely refuted. (See
Clssing Brief, pages 94-96).

6. - Also, -he indictment SieVers' for participation in crcpcrim-nts
ar- the congelation of blood hu no (ounuation whatsoever 1 Si-vers was
zrly to fiBMfst* t h e vnofflclurj a of “Polype 1 * which wa& (LvidopuLby^

Dr. Rr.och&f tosothur with the Dachau-prisoner Foix. Siovers did not par¬
ticipate in any fora and at any time in the previous dovelop.»_r.t of
this orcoaration. If lx. Rascbcr is supposed to have co.trnittud cri-tiii-al
offenses in connection with the d-v-lcpncnt of Polygal, this feet nas
completely un I nam to Si-vers. (Closing Brief, pages 35-94).

7. Siovers did not personally oarticipetw in the Lost (gas) - ex¬
periments carried out by Professor Dr. Hirt, in Katxuoilor. .."hen the ex¬
periments wore already concluded, and the persons experimented on ittro
still lying in the experimental station for observation. Ho was in Xata-
wuiler onco for c short stay. Thore he talked to the persons on whoa

the oxperiac. ts wore conducted who, upon his questioning, answered that'
they had volunteorod. This fact was verified by witnoss Kales. Regarding
the ciKstion of volunteering of the persons experimented on, I refer to
the stotunant of facts in my Closing Brief (psgos 23-26a). Tho outward
picture that Si-vore obtained free the people experimented on, and tho
declaration that they had volunteered, could not possibly croato in Sil¬
vers tho conviction that medical * ., whose supervision was not in tho
least in Siovers* resort, tculd conduct illegal experiments. (Closing

3ritf, pafe3 52-62).

3. Siovers hed knowledge of tho lcw-prcssuru and lc*-tc.rpcra'.ure
-XJerinents tiict were carried out in the concentration Camp Dachau by
Rascher together vita Dr. Ronborg or Professors Holaloobnor and Dr. Tinks.
•hat these wero criminal experiments cannot bo assua-d in viev of the
evidence. In use case had Siovers positive knonlcdge of any criminal c.c-
*-Titles, should they actually have tak-r. place. In th^ course of the


experiments hich iicvcrs observed wholly =r in part, all persons on vnoa

11025


16 JuIy-A-?L-2>—2- Cook (Int. von Sc’r.on)
Zxrt So. I


t -so experiments wore conducted stated that they had volunteor.d. TJhat

r.eson should Silvers have- not to boliovo those assurances? I That reason

sr.culd Sicvwrs have not to believe the frequently repeated declarations

given to him by H i gg ler end other participate, that the people expo-

rlnc'itcd on tKife volunteers? tfhit lv&son should Slcvcr# heve to cssirn©

that th- doctors assigned to carry out th.se experiment would disregard

tfc« principles of medical professional ethics?

There is nothing at all which lead on, to a shut, that Siovors knew

about the experiments carried on by Rasehcr on his own. On th. contrary,

•

frea the affidavit of Dr. frita Kriodrich Rescher we know with how much
secrecy Rasober sorrourded his noiwontrolled experiments. ‘ 0 also know
frea thi testimony of Dr. Panxengruber (Seo 2xh. 45, soo Doc. Book II,
psgo 10), hew little trust Rascher put in Sioversj to import to him joint
tacwlcdgc of a secret was out of the question, in view of Raschor's civi-
r.'.cter. I hevo theuroughly duaenstrnto in my Closing Brief how to evaluate
Siev.r's activities in connection with Rascher' - plor. d hnbilitation
*j a l-cturer and his transfer into the Waffen-SS. I cornu to tho conclu-
sicn that Siuvcrs cannot !*o occiscd of criming 1 participation in tho
lew-prossuro and low-tisporaturo oxporiaonts. Th. prerequisite for that
*culd have to bo knowing or being bound to knew of criminal experiments

connected with the nr.i-.us auctorls val ad.lutori s. None of these characto-

»

ristic facts era present.

9. If I new touch on thu Jewish slco lotion collection, it is cloar to
- that prima vista Silvers' activities can be thought to constituto con¬
siderable material for indictment. But is this really so? Did tho idoa
3f aakirg a Jewish stoletlon collection originate with Sievors? No 1 The
plv. was discussed by Himmler and Hirt, and Blaalnr then ordered it cxc-
e-ted. hue, r.t Zaster 1942, Sievors tried to influence Himmler to desist
-rem connecting Dr, Hirt's department with tho "Afanenarbe", H i mm ler point-
- out tho commissar order ("Kocoiss arbelehl") which had been un'jvr.m

■- Sievors T.til then. To this ccaaisaar order Himmler added thu explan-

11026


16 July-A-?Ir-25-3-Cook (Int. vor. Schon)

Coart Ho. I

atior. that Soryot ccmaissars bed coacittoa inhuman cruelties on Goman
soldiers and civilians innumerable .cases. Siovers had hover boon person¬
ally acquainted witn war conditions in the East; can he be ocpoctca to
knew that an order giv^n by the Ehief of State md Coonon i or-in-Ch'.of
^T T yb ■■ ■: ■» . i|Xm nas illegal? To answer this nation in the .ativc
.culd awn to charge everyone who xld a saoordinptc position with a
rvsoonsibility which ho simply cannot bo expected oerry, wore it only
for his lack of knowledge in the fields of international end national

The persons disignatod for tho akoletion collections were selected
In the Concentration Caap Ausc>itt by Dr. Buyer on orders fx0O L r. Hirt.
T? interfere with this part of the oxccution of Hiaolur's order was
fKithcr in tho p-xicr of defendant Siovers, nor did ho have on opportu¬
nity to do so. !tor was ho ever in Auschwitz, and did not ex-rciso in¬
fluence of nny sort on the operation Dr. Hirt or Dr. Buyer, '.'an, Siovors
signod tho lector drafted by Dr, Beyer, dated 21 June 1943 w* addressod
to thu it in Reich Security Offico (Reichssichorhcitehauptrat) which
contained netorial on the transfer from Auschwitz to Nntarailor of -ar¬
sons who had been nolected for liquidation. (ProJSxh. iei). Is thero
to be sure in this letter any supporting, furthering or favoring of
the skelotion collection planned by Hinder and Dr. Hirt? In ny Closing
a-iof I hav- thoroughly outlin-d ay opinion xi this question. The trans¬
fer from Assctaiitx to Notzwellor of the people solectud by Dr. Boyor
tad a long tLoo ago been decided upon in the plan Kionlor-Dr. -Lrt.
Cluucks, who rr.s the competent authorities for all natters cor coming
concentration cr^, and the Union Roich Security Office (Roichssicher-
teitshauptcat) had Airuady received their orders from Hia=L.r a long
tia. ago. ould tlx re have .boon no sko lotion collection if Siovors had
not written ttx. lotter of 21 June- 1943? Only he who is complete^ igno¬
rant 8 of the order machine of thu NS-ro*4au will first it difficult to
give reasons for the decid-d "BO* that must answer the question posed


11027


16 July-A-rl-25-A-Ccok (Int. von Scbon)
Court J'o. I


above.

Ir. 3cotecbor 1911, Dr. Hirt askeu the -Ahnenerbe", "hat should be
den© with the skeletior. collection. Sievers forwards this inq'ilry to the
next authority. The decision ia made by SS-Star.darter.fushrsr Banncrt of
the personal staff of the Reichafuahrer-SS. Sievors forward3 ttese di-
rectivee. Thus, hero too there is no independent action on Sievera' nart,
quite analogous to all other cases. Sven already on the basis of ts.eir
occurrence, which, in itself, is completely negligible, it can be noted
hi* irclusive tho prosecution's attitude is that Sievera was a person
of authority. Evaluating ths evidence and tho legal questions arising
therefrom purely objectively I caae to the conclusion that in tho nattor
of the akolton collection Sic\ers cannot be regarded eithor as principal
or as accosacry or as abettor.

10. Regarding the quostion of conspiracy I rvfor to defense counsel's
statoconia in tho plenary session of 9 July Ul. I refer to thoso sta¬
tements on this subject in ay closing brief.

11. Siovers' membership in the Sb, an organization that hum boon
declared criminal, is a fact, objectively tpoaking. ftit for oubjoctivo
reasons, which I shall no* discuss, ho cannot be condconed for this.

Stay it please tha Tribunal, Let ai remind you of tho part of my
presentation which dealt with Sievors' participation in the resistance
aweoent against the !.aci rcgiai.

hhen tho defendant Slavers claims to have been active in a resis¬
tance Mfttont, ho is not thus attempting to achieve a mitigation of
the sentence that nay bo passed against him. Rather, I aa of ttv. view
that this activity must inevitably lead to his acquittal, even if the
Tribunal, contrary to ail expectations, should be inclined to tho opi-
nion that Sicvcrs took part in tfx incriminating experiments.

I first intend to state ay attitudo toward a nuobor of legal cucs-
tions which aro rcccgniwed in the penal codes of all civilized pcopJ.es


and at all tiacs


11029


16 July-A-FL-25—5-Cock (Ir.t. von Schon)
Ccort IJc. I


The Tribunals task hare is not siaply to apply a specific para¬
graph, but to oxtract frea general juridical and legal principles tho
rule which reveals ar.d creates new law for newly arisen eases.

It is a sattor of course that in first ordor I an appearing in bc-
h_If of =y client, bet you. Your honors, arw not passi n g j uri ga r . nt in
your verdict acroly on this defendant* Your verdict has a much noro in¬
clusive, universal, and I should like to say, world embracing si^nifi-
cancu , or or and beyond this Individ iml case. For this is tho first
time that a decision has to be passed regarding the actions of a aoobor
of a rosistanco oovcasnt in a trial of the significance of this ono.

And thorolorc your verdict is fundamental and ostablishoo a pre¬
cedent for the present, for many many other defendants who stand and
sill stand bolero you and otlsor tribunals. Tho implications of your
decision oxtends also into the future for thousands and tuns of thou¬
sands of nuemn beings who aoact la*. or othor any find thcasolvos in tho
position of cocbetticg sees, criminal governmental systua with means
similar to thoso used by Siovers. Thoro aro still autocracios and totali
tarian dictatorships on this earth, and one needs but little political
p;ropicacity to see ttat futuro dictatorships can bring about further
intomatioml imbroglios ard wars of the most torriblu sort. And in
the futuro also courageous non will again and again be needed who 'or
tho weLfaro of thoir people of their nation and of humanity will hurl
th.ciselves against this danger. Ard for those fighters and groups of
fightors your verdict will bo a guide. You are passing Judgnent in ad¬
vance on trx, futuro possibi litics and radius of action of coning ro-
sistenc- movements against criminal governments. In your judgment you
cin apply a brake to such aovaaonts; but you can sisc afford then the
certainty that is raevssary for thoir hazardous undertaking and for
their success. Hew ar.d whuru would you in the future again find such
helpers, if they had to rcckcci not only with the inzediatc danger but
with the additional danger of being colled to account by tho very people


1102?


16 Juiy-A-n-2S—>-Cook (Eit. von Scbon)

Court So. I

for whom tliiy had striven. And therefore, Your Honors, in your judgment
in the caac arcinrt Siovers you ere talcing upon yourselves a responsi¬
bility before the entire world and for all time, a responsibility with
ii'ich a tribunal only sc Idas finds itself confronted. But on tho other
hand you car. also say with pride that In your iudrSjnt you hvc dono
tho • orlc, in its struggle for peace and justice an incalculable ser¬
vice.

And therefore also, the reasons for your judgment a ftinst Siovers
ere so prodigiously important, such more important, in tho grand move¬
ment of world history through ti-.u, than the potty case against Siovors
can ovor be. And I aysoIf cm obli w .d to deal with thcao logal problems
at somewhat groctor length.

Of course the member of \ political resistance sovomont can only
then rofor to his resistance, if this resistance itself is Lawful.

This will not always be the case; for political crir*-s and similar deeds
c-rudtt.d for political motives art* and regain crimes. Vihoevor ro-
aovos his political adversary for tho sole reason of taking his posi¬
tion himself or opening tho way to his partisans acts unlawfully and
Is punishable. This changes, however, in the moanrtt when it is not

sorely a political dispute that is being settled by murder, whon it is
£

rather a tyrant, -.’hose reish is ontorod with bloody letters in tho an¬
nuals of nankind, who has finally been prostated. Here a recognized
n-ason Justifying hia deed will come to the perpetrator's aid. And
thit is s^lf-dofcr.so.

According to Article 53 of tho Gerern Criminal Code an act com¬
pelled by self-doicnse is not punisnable. StLf-dofor.se is such a tto-
fs.r.so as is required to npol an imminent unlawful attack on onosclf
or another.

But those principles are not only -Goman legal regulations. They

Tw common legal heritage of all peoples and all times. They nr- in

lino with hur.- n sentiment to a largo dcrroc and arc called "the "rent

11030


ic July-A-7L-25-7-Cook (Ir.t. von Sc bon)

Court So. I

low of defense.” They arc to be found already in Hcaar. lew as: vi_- vi re-
p'-iivn- licet arxl hcvu been taken over enthusiastically - as stated by
harton in Par. 613 - by English Cccnon law and by American law. livery
individual is authorized tew nr off injustice froa himself or from another
person with all noons at his disposal. The struggle against a criainnl
government, menacing world peace, preparing aggressive wars and 3>out"
to plunge tho world into Laaecsurablo aisory, uojIodo and ncddl-acly,
out of lust of potior and arrcg-r.ce, nust be regarded in tho saoo light,
tho struggle end resistance against such a gov-rrupant and leadership is
lawful and permissible, regardless of t!* aeons with which it is being
conducted. Indued since tho end of the n.or more ar.d toro people Jiavo
taken the attitude that such n struggle is not only lawful and pernis-
aibic but the duty of every individual. Is it not o fact tnet tho cok-
luctivo :uilt of the whole Gcraan nation is that it had viewed tho "c-
tivities of tho Kozl regiao without doing anything about it, at tho e«ost
with their secretly clenched in their pockets?


11031


16 July-A-GJ-26-l-*iro33-(vcn Sehocn)-
Csurt 1

xudcr and nanslaughtcr, bodily injury and deprivation of liberty
cocadttod against th_ responsible mainstays of such c system arc acts
of self-defense in the interest of peace and humanity. *hey are law¬
ful and net punishable, they are duty if there Is no other remedy.

This question as to the lawfulness of political curler and the
duty to cof*»it political surdor has at all tines been pendorod about
not only by lawyers, kwt also by a wide circle of poets and philoso¬
phers. Friedrich von Schiller Justifies the murder of Gessler as the
last deperate attempt to gain liberty frera servitude wit now way out.
Thus Uio murder cf a criminal tyrant in addition to bain? Justified
legally is also valued highly in a moral sense.

It eay happen setsetiacs that of necessity it is not tho real
attackers who auffor injury. A person warding off an attack may bo
forced to affect a third innocent party. Prevision has been r-ado for
this case also In Article 5h of tho “orow crinimal Code; it is called
necessity. Article 51i roads as follows: "An act docs net constitute
an offense, if aprt fre a Instances wf solf-dwfcnsu, it was ccooittod
in a state of necessity in order the rcscuo the porpretrator or his
relative from inainont danger to lifo cr limb, pr vidod the necessity
was caused through no fault of thi pcrprctr'trr and could not other¬
wise bo averted."

The legal ccdos of all peoples and nil tines had to take a stand
cn this problem of two legally protected interests in conflict with
each other, which can only bo solvod by violating or even destroying
cnc of them. Law cannot insist with extreme consistency that tho indi¬
vidual should re apoct the rights cf others under all circumstances
and in ovvry situation ind sacrifico hos cwn instead. A rrtnchnnn lias
the following to say with regard tc this point: ’’This theory is adni-
rablo for saints and heroes, but it is not designed far vulgar humanity.
Vied nen cst lieiturn in lego, neccssitas f.acit licitum is a saying in

Reman law and Rossi, a french Jurist says:

11032


I- e aIy-A-G J-26-2-Gr cs s-(von Schoen)-
Ccurt 1

■The act la excusable only when the agent is yielding to the
instinct of sell preservation, when he is confronted by isminent danger,
when his life is a a take. r An old Geman legal proverb says: ■Need
kncvs no law." F in a ll y American Law also deals with this problen under
the nano necessity— (T.harton Par. 612) - a literal translation of the
Geraar. oxproesiens ■Hot? cr Vfotstand". Thus under the pie Tof ndeCssity
a shipwrecked person nay push his cccpanion in nisfortune froa nplank
*tich cannot support both. Applied tc resistance oovenents against
or i g in a l govonnenta, these principles nean that even third parties
any be hurt, if there is no other way oat, if the ''.'Jot'' "Mecossitas"
necessity it is required imperiously and unavoidably.

Tour Honors are called upon to reduce the principles of selfdefense
necessity to their ccecon dencainator, to apply then tc ^levers' case
and thus to insert then aacng the unwritten rules gov. rnlng international
relations of public and international law. Anglo-Saxon legal thinking
and the principles o; natural law arc oth.r legal sources that nay
bo of valuo to you in arriving at a Judgnent.

And now I should liko to turn to Siovors' ease particularly. Tho
folliwng p ints arc of decisive importance in Judging th_ acts cf this:

1. Did a Geman resistance aovaaont exist at all?

2. Did Hiolschor's group belong to it?

3. .as this group to be taken seriously and what were it oins?

U. ,ms Sievers a accbcr of this group and what were his tasks?

5. Hew did he conduct hies elf in cariying out his tasks?

6. Did other possibilities exist for Mr,?

It has frequently been asserted that there was nc Goman resistance

acvenent. But, resistance in Gemany did exist. I cust, howebor, adnit

that the question: 'Thoro then was this resistance?” suggests itself to

person net knowing conditions within u _-raany, particularly during the

“r. I also have to concede the fact that the public as a whole has not

ne'jd of nxch acre than Stauffenb^rg's bceb plot of 20 July 19lii, with

11033


16 Jirior-A-£J-26-3-Grcss-(von Sch-er.,-
Ocort 1


its tragic results. 3ut 3 person asking this question would cceplctoly
fail to recognise under what conditions the whole resistance concent
was forced to work against the nazi regiab he forgets that he tc-o, did
net hews any idea of tho -xi 5 tenet of th- group around StaaffOnberg
until this fatal day of 20 July 19^1. All the aero I on ccopullod
fA ji Vi n r.nf\n^f. t^ r\f ^ t S aa tV ,.v.‘ wtiKf/^v

vv—••• 7« ••• *w * ^ W » WVUJ '-*<

faced who opposed the nazi regime.

The authcritarion regime aspired fr<o the very start to gein
ccepletc control ov«.r German can, every ^ornan woman, ov r children
and ever th- aged, so as to instruct then along tho lines of the now
feirs of govemount. The demand fer absolute auth rity did net recognize
personal frtcdcc. It did away with professional and industrial organi¬
zations, with cultural and social institutions, so ns to revive th&a
partly in a different shape, ccaplotely subjugated to the control of
the nasi regime.

Un thu ether hand the battle also sot in from the 'beginning.

Nothing wculd bo aero wrong, ol course, that to l&aglnc that this
tattle coula be fought quite cpcnly, with a great deal of publicity,
with the uso of physical viclenco, with fire oms, bcabs, war and war
crioa. Net oven the trade unions, the most highly organized and dutor-
nlncd opponents of thu new Torino could afford to adept this typo of
warfare in 1933. This repine hold the entire public machinery in a fira
rrip nd gained an over increasing control extending to tho spheres
of private life, by Beans of thu security Service of the SS and the
iostape organisations. *he flexible regulations of tho hointuocksgosetz
allowed fer sentences of severe tcras of imprisonment ovon in the ci»
cf th- pettiest derogatory remarks. haxqr of harmless rcairl: caused
political discrimination and the constant danrer of fcuinr token to
a concentration camp.

Xc press could have bo>n found to rebel against the tyrants. If
leaflets were secretly circulated whose contents defaced the nazi regime


’he .ntire cochinury of police, Gostapo, the £D etc. was mobilized

1103-


16 July-,»-GJ-26-i.-Gras£-(von Schcen)-
Ccert 1


?'scsoicn cf arr-s was certain evidence of acts hi^h trc'acn and resulted
in the death penalty fer the careless, additim there was a wide¬
spread spy systec affoctinp people's every cove. One had to be on cno's
guard even with crib's eldest relatives and one's children.

These few words cn conditions inside Germany are necessary, however,
'.s a r .ply tc the absurd question the witness Hielrchcr was asked in
Stcckhtl-a, nascly, "'.Hiy dc ycu not speak in public?' 4

kost striking in their r.sistance were probably the two great
Christian faiths. That was not preachod free tho pulpits against tho
Anti-Christ and his false prophets, hew nary clergy cf all denominations
went to prison, to punitontiorios, ccncontrtticn camps, even to death.

Of course, the Churches could propagate their vl_ws with less restraint
than others. After all thoy did net want to have a port in thu ever threw
of the system by shear force by the killing of its leaders, and represen¬
tatives, by arced bittlo. These resistance groups cutsidc the Church,
hewevtr, which had coco t- roaliso that without using force thu dictator,
National Socialism, could nov^r be brought to fall, those who wero not
told bock by the idoolo/ical restrictions and inhibit! *.ns of the Churches,
they oust not nnkc themselves kn'orn buforc the day ef action dawnod. Up
to that tirv. they had to kucp silont. "Hover s.wok of year alti, but al¬
ways think cf it." If they had forgotten this rule thoy would have booh
betrayed by spies and oppressed by the Gestapo. If th. Stauffcnb.rg ercup
had net acted in the sane way, who knew ab^ut it? .ho knew cf its exis¬
tence before the baab burst in Hitler's hcr.dquatcrs on July 20, 19JiJi?

Tho sane was the case with all thu other resistance groups which
•unfortunately no lender wore in tho possibility of acting and port of
which had boon traced up and secretly killed. The fact that all of
then existed is proved, however, by tho w- rks cf Ford and others.

3ut downright classical witnesses ere tho numerous blo-dy victims
sent tc ccnccntration camps to death by tho Gestapo.


11035


if Juiy-i--:-v r -2&*-5—SrnBa (1st. Tea Schnn)

Court I

Acong these group, was also tho group around Hiolocher of vhieh
the defendant Sievers won a neeber.

This Hi ol ocher groan existed it was a fact, it was on action.
Hiolschor hinsclf is an unlnprecticeblo witness for that fact. It was
the reason for his bo in,- under arrest for 3 norths subsequent to tho
20 th nf July 1944, for his boln^ one nf those whfLVors to.bo hnnrod.

But Hiolochcr l s undorgrosnd activity is beyond that sbustantiatod undor
oath by nnny oqually rcllablo w* tnescos. Shoro is, for one, tho
politico! oniTart for Dr. 3ortanu who at least since 1920 was nctivo

ir. tho strugglo gainst Bational Socialisr. Ho hod known Hiolschor oinco

•

1928. Eo spooks of Eielschor's hostility against rational °oelalisn,
of his "sharp attitude at that tine, done a groat dee! of negotiating
and oon spiring together with Hiolschor. Hiolschor expounded to hin
hit nothods of action. Lntor on, during tho tiro of his oxllo aftor
1933, Dr. 3oriconnu still watched Hiolschor's notivity fron abroad and
eo nr in cod hinsolf again and again; Hiolschor is carrying oh. Such a
testinony coring fror. an enlgrant doaorvos our crodonco. Another witnoon
who novor lost contact with Hiolschor is Dr. Topf who hinoolf woo activo
within tho rosistenco -.ovonont. So, too doscriboo Hiolschor as a vio—
lost opponont of rational Socially, and untiring workor and fight or.

In addition tboro oro tho cmy affidavits sulci t tod by on and whioh
belong to this contoxt. Tho fact that Hiolschor did not ploy a bigger ,
part la public dr,os not dieproro his activity in tho opposition.
Conauflago to tho hour of decision was tho suprono onnnandnont for
hi- also, end Dr. 3orkonau considore it a high achiovor.ont that ho
succccdod in this to such a high dogreo. Sievors was a nonbor of tho
Hiolschcr group.


11036


lo Juiy-A-3&-27-l--«onAri (Xnt. ”aa Schoea)
Court So. 1


This, too, cannot be say longer subject to any doubt. Apart fron
the vast amount o? testimony given, the whole personality of cy
client sneaks against any rational Socialist inclinations on his
pert. Eis whole character and temperament and hi a career were bound
to sake hi— a decided opponent of the Hitler systea of oppression,
surder and terror. His very origin, the interests of his youth
took his into an environment which was as far as possible removed
froc national'-social!stlc idoaa. He, the eon of a director of
Church susic, was engaged in studies of history end history of religion,
gion. Els character cake-up led hln to the Vandervogel and to the
Boy-Scouts; these were interests, activities, inner attitudes which
were ridiculed and slendered and violently fought by national Socia¬
lise. Everyone who has testified to Si overs' character either in
the course of direct exncinntions or by affidavits knows his ns a
sincere nan with high ideals of deeply felt humanity and a strong
sense of right end justice.* If you consider this description of
Sievers' cheractor given by well-known anti-fascists along with tho
frequent suv «rt which Sievers, as has been proven, grve to the
victiss of nazlss, only a sanll step is needed to sake ue cortaln
of the fact that Siev-rs took pext in a resistance movement.

The -ffoeecutor nay say: "I don't believe all that; for Hielschor
red Sievers did not do anything."

This would be wrong. Tour Honors'. Other resistance groups have
had the s.ae cisfortune of not getting a chance to deal a blow. The
witness Hielschor has stated the repeons very clearly why, after the
uneucceesfulplot of 20 July 19 »i 2 , nothing could be done for a while.
Ihie to the temporary elimination of the Vehrsacht froc the plan of
Hielscher and his comrades everything had to be started again from
the beginning.

Just what was the position of the defendant Sievers within the Hiel-
acher group and what were his tasks? Eiclscher hinself gives us the

11037


iD July--3&-27-?-I<«o:rd (Int. "on Schoea)
;Court To. 1


answer! iSlevera hod two tasks:

1.) Obtaining information from the immediate entourage of Eicaler,
os heals for the assignment of all the opposition forces rs to placo,
tine and Banner;

2 .) Sievers vas not only a spy and a scout; he was appointed, and
v-s reedy, to li<pldate Eimcler at the conent of action;

These tasks desond a double legal clarlf icr-tion:
e) Vere they themselves permissible, legal or eren In keeping with
duty?

The principles which I have developed concerning the concepts of
self-defense In the field of political warfare present the nnswer to
this.

b) Vhrt censures was he prfitted to use? How far was he permitted
to venture Into this fiold which was punishable in Itself? To what
extent could he ispllcntt third prrtloe who were not involved, but
even victims of ?rtlonnl Socialism?

The rules of necessity point out the way to r. decision and solution
of this problen.

If I now turn to the first problen, I can deal with it relatively
briefly.

According to everything that we know today, it ie an incontrover¬
tible feet that Hitler and hie nccoe:lices terrorised the German
pooole and the entire world in a criminal manner and with criminal
ne-nB, the*, fron the very beginning they conetituted a direct danger
to peace and to ell civilisation, and that finally the worst feors on
this score became a horrible reality. The prlnary condition for
defense, self-defease, is beyond all doubt, the following; an immin¬
ent illegal attack upon the highest possessions of mankind. This was,
to use the language of tho German Heich IW Code, the -danger* which
vtb to be ■ guarded against-.

Ve know, however, that this defense could not be carried out by the

normal acans of a democratic parliamentary system. I have described

11033


lo Juiy-A-3Z-27->-lI<eoiiard (let. Ton Schoen)
Court Fo. 1


the truly devilish orgralsotlon by which the explication of these
■Mins hr 1 teen nede lapotslble. Pros this, It becones apparent
that only the elinination of Hitler end hi* confederates was the
one wry by which thl* ayster could be broken end scashed. Lee*
stern end violent neons were not available.

•VIth that, however, the Eielscher Plan to reaove Eiaalcr had
becone scnctloned rad obligatory for anybody who had the opportunity
to act according to it. According to the etp.toaent of Hlelscher
and other credible witnesses, it cennot be denied that Sievoro re¬
ceived that assl£iceat.

If the reooval of Hlnaler was Justified, so was also, ty the sane
token, the preparatory activity as a spy -nd Inforaer which went with
it.

Before turning to the answer to the question ns to how fnr Siovoro'
activity could affect third persons, I feel it necessary to draw n
short outline of H ielscher 1 s plcn of action and the position of
Slevers.

It Was not in Vain th»t Hislscher gave us rcplo lnfonsation on this
subject. Vc have also heard other wltneeoos ns Dr. Borkenou, Dr.

Topf. CSievers gave us a clear outline of his trsks. All thoso
depositions show n degree of rgreeaent and unoninlty which oxcludco
any doubt in their truth.

Hlelscher wns one of the first of those few non who roolirod that
action against the systen could cone only froa the very ranks of
the FSBAP. He had realised thpt only the reuovrl of the top aen of
the F&-reglne md the selsure of the governaen*. right at the top
held out any prospects of success, and that no hopes, no hopee at
all, should be placed upon c revolutionary devolopaent coning fron
below, froc the rrnk rad file of the peonle. Such a revolution would,
within c short tine, have been drowned In strenns of blood without
achieving anything.

This realization, however, node inoerative four group8 of censures

11039


Id July—A-3Z—27-l—Leonord (Int. Ton Schoea)

CCourt To. 1

upon which Hielscher hr.* elaborated on 15 April:

(a) Preparation of the rction by r vellr-cnaouf loged organisation
of treated representatives cad spies within the SSEA?, the Trojm-
hor*e policy.

(b) Piecing qualified =en of courrge p.e closely ns possible in
the entourago of leading personalities of tho SS nong which
Hinder wr.s the cost dangerous one.

(c) Henovd of Hinder md other top nan upon n given signal.

(d) Seizure of the governnent by pn organisation Jeept in rerdi-
ness for this purpose.

Elelscher also had realised that despite a certain freedor. of
pction for his rctlvlsts, success could only be hoped for if nnd
when or oh nan obeyed his orders exclusively nnd in a spirit of
strict discipline. Only thus could he keep everything in hio hand
md give the slgnrl rt the proper tlr-e. And in this connection I
cunt e ".'hAideally stress the fret thet Sievors, in accordance with
thr.t necessity of discipline, acted nlways in full ogreenent with
Elelschar; that he secured order* fror. Hiolschcr rt every inport-
nr.t nonant r/ter giving hi a on exact situation report, and thr.t in
this nanner Hielscher wr.s kept closely lnfomod about the geno in
which Slavers wrs involved rnd the brad ho plcyod in it. Siovcro
was nothing but the tool in the hrnd of the herd of the novenent.
Therefore, I wrnt to subclt to the court thr.t your verdict on Sie-
ver* will fell with the grne weight upon his guiding spirit,
Hielscher. Hielscher will be sentenced with Sievcrs, he will bo
acquitted with fci=. And thus Hielscher could rt the conclusion
of his exminntion declrre with the sprx courcge which ho showed
when deploying Sievers rnd other aen of his in drngerous positions -
that he not only accepted but doom dad to bear the sole responsibi¬
lity far everything his follower Sievers wr a charged with in this
trial.

Hielscher gives the following outline of Sievers' esslgnoent:

m io


lS July-JUaC-27-£-Leonard (Int. Vos Schoen)

Court *o. 1

He was to work within the Trojan horse, i.e. In the disguise of
r zealous >-sd enthusiastic collaborator, by

(a) acting r .s an infomer rad soy,

(b) using his influence in order to place others for the onae pur¬
poses in si*:il'r positions or in positions where their work would
not be interfered with,

(c) covering up for, or if possible, rescuing neribers of tho
resistance covenant when they were in danger;

(d) and finally, renoving Hinder when the nonent for notion had
coco.

This last point, however, was the very core of ny client's oosign-
osnt.

Zverything also was subordinate to this nia, this order, nnd w.ns
subservient to its preparation and furtherance. Zroe this noint
his whole conduct cm be grreped and his actions Judged.

And wh-t did Silvers do within tha scope of this rssignncnt?

X can't, at this nonent, reiterate in detail the argunents I
ol-borrted »^>on in the first part of ay plea. I have arrived at
ths conclusion th-t Sicvers did not act ns a participant in or
accessory to tho crines under indlctnent. However, if one doos
as suto that Slevers has to be found guilty on sonc of the counts
as charged ty the Prosecution, it will be ay task to find the
Justification of this conduct before a forun of nct-ial law, os
transcending hucen lav, and to place it beforo the court.

Vkat is the explanation for the fact that Si overs rennlned rvt
his post even rfter 19^2 when the society "Ahnenerbe" becnao in¬
volved in nodical experlnents which possibly were to nssunc a
erlnlnal*character. V e should keep in nind that Siovers was
assigned to effect the recovel of EiaJ.er and thet he was the only
person within the Eielscher group who had a chance of success. Thus
he held the actual key position within the Eielscher noveoent, a

position on which depended success or failure of the whole action.

llOUl


lo Juiy-j*-2S-27-6-I.eo:iard (Int. Ton Schoen)
Court To. 1


Hi* destiny -na, fro- the beginning to the end, only in hi* hand; for
Hinder wrs the cost dangerous son in the Bari syate*, since he as
the chief of the O^rnac police rad eocnaader of the hone aray had
ell domestic arsed force* at hi* disposd and thus vp* in a position
to crash every uprising in it* earliest stage. Elcnllr- wa« ftUTe to
ran the govemnent without Eitler, hut not Hitler without Hinder. Tho
removal of this nen therefore ccne first, both in lnoortance and in
urgency. If the person of Hinder w»s overlooked or if he succeeded
in escaping soaehov, everything else boecne problenatlc. Ve nay
therefore use Hinder's irportance as a yardstick for the importance
of Slovers who wes kopt ready to striko in the foraer's dosost en¬
tourage. To ask the question whether that position could be abandon¬
ed, would neon to answer that question in th# nogetlvo.

Sievers was awaro of the far-reaching conscquonco of such a
decision. In this noreover he because involved in the deepest inner
conflict of his life. It was a question of avoiding the groater
of two evils end accepting the lesser, or of circunvonting both.

The latter would hvo been the easiest wey out. The fact that Slevors
became involved in this conflict bears witness to his sense of rcspor.o-
ibility, his feeling for right and became value. To be sure, ho was
not cole to handle that conflict by hineelf. Too nuch depended on his
decision, effecting not only hicself but the whole of the resistance
covenant. Ve nust put ourselves into the place, into the soul, of
a nan who, on the one h-nd, felt the pressure of p revolting inner
abhorrence of the things which he felt were in the caking; but who,
on the other hand, wns ewnre of the fact that ho would r.o longer be
able to ®=jlete hi* task at the post assigned hin, if ho allowed fcic-
eelf to be guided by his personal feelings. Perhaps Siovers would hove
had the possibility of disappearing fron his post without nuch ado
and with no great disadvantage for hineelf.

Could he not have retired to n position with sono hornless research
undortekingl But b7 doing that Sievers would hove becone n deserter.


lS July-A -3E-27-7-Leoaard (Int. Won Schoen)
Court Fo. 1


In this Inner conflict he turned to Elelscher, sad Elelscher decided
efter thorough deliber-tien end consulta.tion:

Slevers rec-lno et hie post *

?or it »jr>errcd inpossible to forego the position in the entourage
of Kinkier. If Slevers left hie post, he had to be placed in another
position close to Einnler, or to be replaced by mother nan with the
era* talks. Was that ponibleT VouldnU he have arrived at the irae
crossroads prrin and .-gain if he regained close to Kinnlir 1 Wi.s It
to bo cxpoctod that another nra would succeed, was there tine to wait
until ho could succeed? Was Sievcrs not likely to rrouso suspicion
even if he took all possible precaution when motivating his resigna¬
tion? 7or it had been stark lunacy to do It oponly and under protest.
Just iru ginc tho danger in vhich such an act would Yr.vo involved him¬
self and his coorades. And who would have had any ndvantngo from his
resignation? A nd, another question: If Stovers' resignation could
have preventod the human osperinents at all, that still would havo
been .r.ly m insignificant parti. 1 succoss. As far as the or.tlty
of the gro-t objective, tho removal of Blrrlcr and tho ES-rcgino,
wae concerned, nothing would have boon gained, nothing but a further
postponement of tho decision or altogether tho impossibility of
reaching such r decision owing to the loss of the actual key position.
Tho conaoquence would hove been still rore victims of tho BS-rogine.
Thus a *r rtirl success had to be sacrificed In the interest of the
great objective.

If the rwnbers of the court will review nil those questions:, in
their ninds, it will tecane deer beyond any doubt that the decision
taken to* Sielscher was tho only one possible.

Ar.d with that I arrive rt the final, cost in port.ant part of cy
defense plec, the question:

Whet was the line of action Sievere hrd to take fit his post?

doubtlessly he hrd to sake certain concessions, i.e. he had to adjust

his behavior to that of the persons he planned to remove. Every ■??

110U3


lo JoljwA -5Z-27-S-L«oaard (Iat. Ton Scboen)
Court Jo. 1


has to use camouflage Red 1 nn not telling n secret if I sny thrt
nray a spy has donned’the eneny'e uniform in order to conplete
such cn assignment In ver tines. It is a known fact that the
7reach general Siraud sale good his escape free a ftemra ceop In-
I9U2 wearing the uni fore of a Ofiam General.

Zvcrything Slevors did - his seebtrehip in the ESBA? frou 1929
to 1931, his renewed membership in the 5SD1P end SS at a Inter
tine, his high position within these orgiciltatloas, his tenure of
offico as the business n ranger of the "Ahnenerbe* rnd hie accept¬
ance of a high rank in the SS, - wnt no doubt part of the easoufla-
go which according to Klelecher, D r . Borkonau, Dr. Topf and others
was a necossnry prerequisite, n eer-ouflcge usod in tho line of
duty for the conpletion of the task of the defendant Sievorc.

Obviously, no one will try to crintain that this eanouflcgo
which were usod to approach a lawfully up- roved, ayo, even doelrcd
aim, cro as such crininal and non-pernlssiblc. The fact thnt tho
outward coaborship in tho SS held 'ey the defendant Sicvcrs is
therefore ipso facto oxcusod by lte purpoee of canouflogo. Ee
ora not be blened. either, for posing at certain occasions as a
good Jaxl prrt7 neober. Thrt was part of his dutios according
to EiOlschor*s orders.


noUi


16 Jhly U7-n-4CD-25-Hiiloy Ir.t*,vonSchonn)
Court Ko* I


The career of the organiser or of an activist in the Goman underground
:ovo::ant riould hcvo found an I rra diate end if he had not acted a
:ic.zt in every vord and in' ovory sovro-nt*

I havo to give oven groater oonsid-ration to Siovors* consent
and his further partial pa tier, in the oxporianeta with hunan boings
and in tho organisation of the skelter, collection which involved
injuries to third porsone*

Only ho re tho question artsosi whore era tho liaits of
coer- oncy, if it involvoa actions which in theasolves are criminal
acta* “he answer to this question is the aain point of tho trial
against Siovers*

And hare tho logftl systoa a all over tho world have tho sane
principle*

•

The rl-ht ’violated by an act of oeorgoncy sust bo relatively
aoro vnlu bio then tho proterted or sevod right *

••hat rights aro coapotlr^ w fchach other in tho coso of Siovors?
On ono sido there is thooxistonco of tho civilisation of tho world,
poaco on oerth, hiaanity, life and oxictonco of millions of poople
who, through Hitler 1 ! crininal drrdnation, wero directly ondanf-.orod
or already violated* Tho now international law calls suoh actions
crinss a-.ains peace and against hucardty and threatens then with
tho »st sovero punistaont. ^ho AUiod nations held thoso righta
valuable enough to havo their soldiors fight and die for t icn with
onthusiasa*

pn the otfcar sido we havo tho life of individual hunan boings,
thoir physical safety, rospoct and doforonco for their personality,
their free don and freo will which, too, certainly consti uto rights
of high value* There ray b:vo boon hindr-ds of vie tins who had to
suffer in this connection* llo’.r.vor, it was a nagligebly snail
-••-her in comparison with tho asses which HLrslor, Hitler and their
accomplices led alraadjr -uriorod or intended to sairdor.

UA5


16 Juiy u7^-?5D~2S-2-ifclcy (int.,vcnSchoen)

Court >'c. I

I now ask 1

'/hich of the two cor. to sting fights is the ...ore valuable one, in
tho sinse of proportionality

It shall bo far fFco so to; xcuso or belittle the horrible things
afa hav.. ?nea in the concsntrr.ti r. coops, but r.::.;ita of all
horror which I fool, I can only answer tho question as follows:

Tho protection of civilization and of humanity is to bo
above tho life and health of sir.-lo indivicfcals, as much as ono nay
pity these inevitable victims. And, therefore, it was necessary, d>-
solutely necessary, to accept the violation of tho loss valuable rights
characterized “bovo, in ord^r to savo tho nore valuable onos, tho
rroat ontiroty. It was necessary for Siovors to remain in his
positi.n at tho "Ahnonorbo" in ordor to bo ablo to liquids to Waaler*

It would bo -asy to st to now, afterwards, that Siovors could
havo acted Ufforontly, that ho didn't habo to o that far* 9ut thoro
is nobody who has told us so far* how. Sow ivon tho prosecutor
attenptod to or was ablo to moko a concrete proposal to that of foot.
And oven if it should bo possiblo, ovon if today oncala rofloction,

0

a possiblo way out could bo found, it cannot bo hold against tho
lofondont Siovors if ho did not think of it at th-t tiao* Ono can
rvally put oneself in his situation at that tiao and tako its psychol¬
ogical effect into consider- tion. Only then can ono imagine what
-cunt of r-flocti n, what amount of koonnoss in solocting his moans
could bo asked of him* This, too, is a recognized principle and

0

oxL-.ir.ed in detail “t ftarton, article 621. Ivory ody nurt, adnit,
hewavor, th t it rs onorcously difficult to find ono's way in

0

'hii labyrinth of demands and sentiments, to keep exactly to tho right

— 0 m

path, and net to ovorsti , not even by a hair's breadth, the fluotuat—

ir* limits of ooergoney. And wc also know how much Siovors fought

■1th hinsalf for a solution of this uroblce. If afterwards you strt e

th- * only ir. the choice of his means did ha make a slight mistake,

be is, after all, fully excused through tho psychological effects of

UOl|6


16 July ii7-A-i53-26-3-feloy-Int # vonSchocn
Court I


situation at th t tine; ono nu-t not ask too such of cne who wrs to

act in a dangerous situation*

& •

Honored Judges, others, too, faced tba same question Siovers had
to face, pfh-t for instance would you do with the caap doctors who
knew about t.ioso oxporiaont3“in the concor.tr: tlon craps and t-rc-pcrod
thsa and asistod tho doctors accused her-? Would you sentence the so
pooplo for complicity? Tfhat doos for instance, tho uitenss Hoff say
on IS December 1914?

"I nr. ewnra of tho rosnonsibi-ity and of tho consoquonces.

It was not only the court partial, not only tho fear of Dr. Raschor,
but tho Aity placed upon no by ry ccceradus to hold out there, in ordor
to provont wh t I could" •

Would you sontonco tho Lioutonant of tho Ohotto, Kosonblntt at
Litfaamatrdot, who, according to tho testimony of tho witness Hiolachor
was forced, personally tosoloct tho ircr.tos of tho ghotto for tho
gassing? Would "'osonblatt claln in vain, th t, after hard struggles,
irith himself, ho accepted tho duty placed upon hin by his conrados
to hold out in order to procant ovon-orso things.

Vo soc, tr- t in tho last analysis aade exactly the sarao
decision Siovors oade.

And still Siovors triod to cako up for all ho had to tolorato and
witness by helping in other ways. Did ho not save nary? Siovers

participated in Q dodsivc way in tho prevention of further experiments

• *

with lew prassuro chaabers, with dry cold in tho mountains, in tho
prevention of tho application of tho "n" substance and others. Ho
saved tbr«a hundred Horwogian students free tho concentration camp
at tho last moment. % warning hin in tine, ho helped a Dutch
professor to floe to Sweden. Bj alleviated tho fate of nary othors
Those, horror, arc only a few exaaplos to which I don»t want to add
•ary -ore for lack of tine. You have ioamad of many noro through tho
ffidavits subsit tod.

And especially I don 1 1 -.rant you to forget, honorable judgos, that

llOli?


i6 -July 2i— L-Int. ,vonSchoen

Court I


Silvers re', only h ' *c -itn__s the sufferings of other, ho was also
ready tc cut his am lif■- at stake and to s-crifico it n case of
failure* : ut your .-If in is position, and you uiHaddt enormous
courage end readiness for sacrifice i/oro neod.d to hold out in the
•.osition of the defendant Sior-ra and to c arry'througfcV Did he~not—
seo how also at daily other nor. fron tho resistance aovenant wore
banted down by tho Oostapo, by the Security S c rvi'o and tho fooplo's
Court? Did he not have to fear tho sane fate a very hour of his life,
and was it not likoly that daily tcaptation to withdraw fron this
danr.orous task would assuno gigantic for.a?

Gor.tlcojr.t of t'.io :'-eh Tribunal! As f r as it was ossiblo
in this short period of tiao, I h-.ro atto -pted to dononstrrto
.ho actual and la si aide of 1evars activities In tho l.llachar
rosistanco group. Inn if Siovore should bo found guilty of
partieijn ti >n in inadnlsciblo or on human beings, it must bo

token into consider: ti:n ih t ho did no noro thrt what ho v/as forced
to do by his orders. In no j.l~co end at no tine did ho do anything
which wont beyond tho ordors given to him* 'hat ho did, ho had to
do, ir. order to fulfill tho great nd high task which f.to had assigned
to him. Tou, gontlonon of thu tribunal, idth your Inpurtorbablo
acnoo of Justice rdll weigh all pros and cons of tho Sicvurs caso,
and I am firstly conrir.cod th t yr>r verdict in tho c-so of Siovors
will bo or.o of '•not 11 ty", for which I plocd h-rewith. Thank you.

THS PCSICSTT Tho Tribunal vill now bo in roc.ss until 0930

V

tonorow rsorning.


UOt,8


17 July rotter Xnt ( *.-.enScheen

2urt I


Official “ranscrip: the A-erican

Vilitarv Tribunal ir. the -atter of the
United St'tea of America s-sinst Karl
Brandt, et a!, defendants, sitting at
Turnher-, Ger-any, on 16 July, C930,

Justice Peals presidenp,

THE -APSHAL: Tfce tfcnorable, the Judges of Military Trivial *•

Military Tribunal I ia rev in aersion, God cave tfce Unitod
States of Ar.erica and thla hon-.rsble Tribunal, There will bo ordor
in .ho osurt

r?L MttSIIWTi Mr. Marshal, you aaObtain if the defendants are
ell present in court*

THE 'ARSEAL: Key it please your Honor, all defendants ere pro-
sent in the court,

“HI F?J3HUFTt The Secretary-General will note for tho record
of preoer.ee of all the defendants in court.

Tho Tribunal will now hear arruaents cn behalf of the Defondar.t
Kru^owolty.

IE. FLWK!i.G (Counsel for tho Defendant tfrufowsky): M r ,
Prooident: Tho Prosecution sale in its orrusents: If C-rawltc wero
still alivo he would sit h* ro as ono of the principal defondanta
-n tho defendants' tench. This is certainly ture, But Gravitz
pecoed sentence on hineelf. ecd whet is the Prosoaition doing?

I* indite Krugovsky instead of Grswltz. It dees not censidor In ito
wvunente that Mrugowcky v *0 not s prirate person but e Medical Cf_
floor in the Maffen - S®. *o e scldier, and that Grewitz and
Hinnier vere his solitary st*oriors. It speaks of conspiracy
tut it Aces -ot exanine thereby to what extent a conspiracy nay


*e concolred when rllitary euberdimtion playo ltr pert, *ho Pros¬
ecution advanced In its sunning - up document* end in its orals


ni?


iS -costly


allegations of the indictosnt. It did not
brought by the defendants for thoir
out a bit scornfully that this ovidonee
affidavits, ^ut this is no facult cf tho


17 J«Ty V7-JO(3IL-l_2-^cater lot.,7 C rScheer
Court I ‘


defendants'. They world hav* preferred to be able to produce copnt-
proofa taken free their records. 3ut *11 tfcff deeuaents of the
defendant* be j of other offices.- where the evlder.ce brought in by
the Prosecution is taken frcr, are in the hando of the Prosecution.

It selected parte of then hlch, separated in part fron the' content 1
see* to lncrlninate the defendant*. But It =ade it irpoaeible for
tho defendanto to find the record' oh ere in connection with the
evidence produced by the Prosecutl'n and would bring about a co=plete
elucidation.

I would ash th* Tribunal to consider in particular thi« difficult
pcoition of the defendants 'It- record to evidence. It oocpelc to
an increased extent to the old legal principle that tho defendant
io coneidered ae sot guilty before hi B guilt has not beon provon and
•ha the C-urt is to Judge in favor of the defendant if ihccaso ie
loubtful.

The chargee against Xrugevaley ere ocno ged three rroupei
(l.) -he typhus experinento and the execution' carried through with
econltino where volunteere -ere not in question. Tho "ribun*l will
havo to cone Id er in theec caeea If the er.or^encjr of the C»,ero
cor.tonded by Krugowsky really cxic'cd and if It Justlflee the typhus
experiments and thoexecuticn b7 aconitine. If answered In tho
afflrnative, nolther the typhua e'porlnen’s ror tho aconitine execu¬
tion are crinlnal glnco there ic no objection raised on the way tboy
vert carried through. If the question I* denied it ie to bo conoid-
ored if and to veht exten* ' / -rurt''ohy partook In then and if he is
rcrponsibie under crin'nal law.

2) “he second group ere the acts of I>inr which ho comitted arbit¬
rarily, e.g. hl6 pertieipeti-n in a killing by phenol end tho special
experineat on 6 percons.

*

■3.) T he fl-ird group are the protective vacclne*irne for w lch vol¬
unteer? were available according to the evidence produced by tho ?rcs-
ecuti-n.


11050


17 JXI 7 47JLX3l!-h-c-Pcsier Int., 7 onScbceu
"cur: I


The defendant Xrugowskyis Indicted first of ell for hie
alleged partlcipeti -a la the experincntt with typhus (spot fever)
et Suchenwald and la other -radical experiments. «*hen submitting
evidence the Prosecution treated these experi=cn*s as criminal and
as experiments carried through by physicians. Also vfto Interroga¬
ting the experts Professor Lelbbrand «:d Profeesor Ivy the Prosecu¬
tion treated thoao medical - experineats as experiments an do by phy¬
sicians end asked tM experts If these experimente w ero to be
oorJldered aa adnltslble froi the point of vlev of medical othico.

I an ocnvinced that the expeiiBOnts to which the Prosecution
rofers as to the baso of its indictment are not at all oxperiaonte
which originated fron the initiative of the executing physicians.

They really are research work necessitated by an uncommonly urgent
emergency of the State and ordered by tha higest governmental
authorities coapotent for it.

Also Professor Ivy adsittod that thore le a fu-daaontal differ¬
ence between the physician «• a thcrcpeutlst and the physician as
a scientific research worker. *fcen oskod by I>r. TippJ "So you
sdalt that for the physician »o a thorapoutist, the physician who
circs, other rules and therefore other para-raphc of tho oath
of Hippocrates are in forcol" he gave the answer; “Toa, I do so
without any doubt. 9

Consequently tiporiecnt* on human beings carried through for
ccgont reasons of a public character and ordered by th ° cprpetont
authorities of the Slato cannot simply be considered as criminal only
because the experimental persona chosen by tho 8tate for tho rosearch
work wort not volunteors.

T*t Prosecution ought to have ofcown in addition with regerd to
the individual experiments for which re aeons they were crlninal

apjrt from the fact that the experimental persons voro not volunteers.

%

The largest cpace in . o lnJlctscnt against Xrugcwaky io takon


11051


17 Z\ 1 I 7 47_X.Jt32.1.-4->?03ter Int. ,7on3choea

Court 1

•— by the typhus experiments at rnche»eld. ?he Prosecution does
cot contend that Mrugovsky partook in then personally, but I further
beliove to hare denonetrated in vy deductions in writing that ho
coithar suggested ror ordered nor controlled these experiments, that
he did not further then or even approved of thes.

Srrertheloae, for precaution '0 aako I also uust prove that the
experiments in question vere cot illegal ®d that under no aspect
they can be considered as criminal • nee the7 were caused by an ur¬
gent enerroncy of tho Sta»e.

This proof can be produced in a particularly isprcsslvo way Just
in the case of tho typhus experiments.

In the Tliek trial tho Froaocuti'n produced Document HI 5222
which I offered to th« Tribunal.

In this Document wich coneg fron tho Laror Offico Mootphalia and
la datod lob. 3, 1943 it is said that according to a ©>r.=unfeation
made by the Military CoawndB a abort tine "ge the nunbor of tho
prisoners of war who died of typhua a till case up to 15000 a. Abx

I think I nood not emphasise any aero that it in to bo considered
os a noit urgent emergency of tho Steta if of one aolo opidonlc
dlsoocc, 15,COO people * day I repeat, arc dying in the canps for
Hussion prlaonors alone.

Cn the other hand the Prosecution has statod that fron tho
beginning of 1942 till the beginning of 1945, 143 person* i” total
died in c^ascqucnco of tho typhus experiments st Suchonwald. - ln-
•onticnally pace these two figures in the beginning of sy arrueento.
They show that during tho whole tiro of tho expericonto in Puchonwald,
•bo number of the victims who diod eaounted to one percont of tho
toll taken every *ar by typhus in the Huaglaa prlnoser £ 2 Z£ 2 . fllrflfi
In winter '41 end *42, In addition to these vlctinc in tho 2uasian
prisoner caspa tho eronsoua number of people w'-o died of typhus
cu:nj»H* the civil pcpulatl n of tho occupied Ipstirn tettitorioe and

H052


17 «nl7 47JL3t3L.l- 5 Joattr -at,.TonSchcon
Court I

•he Gcr»a Ajxed Tor cos i« to he cornidcred.

It i« clear that irdcr ronditi rn «lraBtlc -«aeuro8 had to ho taken,
Vhen 2 'iffi.TLf: the Thphus experiments carried out in tho concentration

casp

i


i


11053


17 Jul 7 47-X.K.j'rou-ehocn

Court X

3 ueh«swald one sust act forget that Gcrasay van engaged in ver at
this tine. Killio&s of soldiers had to £ive up their livos
becauao thay were celled to the front *7 the State. The St®to *
eeploytd tho civil population for work according to State requira.
sent!. Xn doing so it rede distinction hoWotn sea and vosen.

>.0 State ordtrod occupation in chemical fectoriee which was detri—
rental to the health. Xt ordered work at the construction of new
projectiles connected with considerable danger for lifo. *hon
^exploded now eno *7 shells wore found at tho front or unoxplodod
now boshe after an air raid at fcoso it ordered eunnery offlcors to
discount rach now shall or besb with tho aid of assistants to got
ecoualnted with tfcoir consturctioi. This lspiied groat danger for
lif®. Then tho fillings of the new shoUs and bosbs had to ho
cxtslned as to it oosposltlon b 7 an analytical cho -ist. In eortaln
canes this work was dctriw^al to tho health of the dhoaists and
tholr assistant* and alwa 7 > rathar dangerous.

In :ho naso way tho State ordered tho nodical son to aoko oxporl-

\

ntnto with now weapons against dan- orcua dlsoseoo. ^heso woapone
v «rc the vaccines. Thr? during thoso oxporlacnts not on'y tho expor-
iscntal persons hut aloo the nodical sen wore exposed to great dangor,

o

is shown by ho fact that Ur. Jing infected hlsself unintentionally
in the v CfInning cf his typhus experiscntSt and fell oorloualy ill
with typhus,

*ith regard to such redical expertsente ono will hevo to erreo
:n principle wi *.h the oplni r of Prof. Ivy and Prof Loihbard that
they are tc be carried through onlv on volunteers. Put even Prof.

Ivy adnittod that there is at such difference between caoes in which
0 scientific research worker starts such txperisente on his own
imitative, and tho cases where he is granted mthority to do so
V the competent organs -f tho State. The question whether the
v-a- of the S*atc is rospcnsible wag answered by his in the effirs-
-*lvo hut he added that this hao nothing to do with ihc nornl


1105U


17 July 47 .J 4 -XSH- 2 - 2 J<a , .07 In*.. ,vc=3chccn


Court I

responsibility cf the cxportr-cnter towards the oxpcricontel subject.

This moral responsibility of experimenter toward* tho oxpcrlnontal
subject rely tea whea the experiment i* ordored by the State to the
way the experiment is carried through but not to the experiment it~
self.

That the xperinert* at Buchonweld were carried out correctly
vae Lot contested by the Prosecution. By way of precaution I
offered 07*donee foV tho correct oxccuticn In my closing brief.

On a cue!'* aked by D . Saute-.- Prof. Ivy observed that ho
did not thi-Jc the State could tako the roaponsibllity to order a •
scientist to kill a nan to re t kr.owlodgc,

^he cnee with the typhns experiment* i* different. So order
vaa given to kill a nar. to nt knowledge. But the typhus oxporl-
terta wcr< dangerous oxperl-cnte. Out of 724 experimental persono
154 dlod. *ut these 154 doad of the typhua exporinonte havo to bo
confronted with the 15,000 who died of typhua cv. rr dwv in tho camps
for Soviet prlacnort of war, and tho ennuscrablo doad by typhus
snongat tho civil population of the occupied iaatern territories and
tho Corn, troops. Those onora us numbers of dead led to the
absolute necessity to have effective vaccines against tjphua insuf¬
ficient quantity. Tho newly developed vacclnoe ha boon tested in
tho animal experlnoct as to their compatibility.

1 explained this In detail in writii^.

The Tribur-al will have to decide whether, in consideration of
the enormous extent cf epidemic typhua, in consideration cf the
15,OOT men <Vlcg of it every day in the camps for Russian prlsonero
cf war alone the order rive- by ‘*-e Governm e nt authorities to test
the typhus vaccines "was justified or not. If the naswer ia affirm¬
ative the typ v us experiment a at Buchenvald were not criminal, since
‘he Prosecution did not contest that they were cerried out according
* the rules of tho medical science. In this case every responsibil¬
ity of "rugrvosky for these experiments in excluded. If, on the


11055


*7 July ^7.JLKS!l-2^Cei0T 2 n t. sS c hcen
Court *e. 1


cth«r »sd, the Tribunal denied the question act declared the typhus

experiaente at Buchen*ald ae critical then it would have to ho

•

considered if Mrugowsky is responlshle fros then in any way.

In ay written°tate=ent I explained in detail that Slock 46 at
3uehen*eld, where the experiments vero carried out did not depend
cn Krugov sky's orders, hut that Dr. Ding vorked under the iaseodiato
:rders of Grrit. Out of the extensive evidence I offo-ed to prove
this fact I only want to tress the letter addressed hy Grawlti to
XrugCvaky in which Growit* declare* explicitely on iug. 34, 1944,
thst he consented that the aeries of experisents he mentioned in
the let*er he carried throurh at Buchcnvald in Block 46 and tho
letter addressed hy Krugovsiqr to Grewitr on Jen. 29, 1945 in which
he suggests the testing of • Jaundice virus and in which ho vritoe:


’I prey to obtain with the Riechcfuehrcr - SS tho porsl&aign
to carry through the infection experinonts la'llift lyyhun


-here two letters demonstrate that still in the autumn 1944 and
early in 1P45 Krugowcky could have carried through a aorles of exper¬
iments in co-peurd 46 only with a opecial porcieelon. This rofutoo
•-ho assumption of the Prosecution that compound 46 was placed under
"rugewaky'c ordero.

■3ut above all I want to stroas aft in tho affidavit givon hy Dr,

H rgen on Key 23, 1947 in which he stated that whor. he investigated
the occurrences in Block 46 at 3uchonwald r Dr. D«nc showed him
an attostati'in signed hy Gravits in which Ding was rocci30i' , ned
oxplicitely to carry out the experiments.

Dr. Horten has further stated that he had to re]ert to Growltz
personally about the reoult of hie investigations “o an examining
Hrristreto at Buchonwald. There also it resulted according to tho
affidavit glvon hy Dr. Xar.ea thrt Growlt* ordered tho experiments.

=o ther called Dr. Ding "his ran", *nd said h# would regret it if

21056


17 “-Ij In'-.,von Sdhcec

Court I

the investigation had ’ins»ht an Ch=rge against Dr, Dirv, cince
ha eenlcycd his for the expert ; eats. Xorgen e-jhasized thaV
the case cf Krugovs] ej v ri rot centionou In the course of hio con¬
versations with Ding and Grafts. *hi« clearly shove-, I think, that
Kmrovtky h a d nothing to do -!'h Block 46 at Buchocvald, For father
evidence that Ding still Upended on Hrugowsky'o orders in Block 46,
the 'roseeutlon referred to the sketches designed by Xrcgovaky, DO
413 and 417, which were offered with Doc. 3ook I of the Prosecution.

It reeu’ts froa these pictures the* the action for typhus and virua
research was only 3lock 50. 3lock 46 was called as froaerly "ixper-
i=enta| Station of the concentration arp 3uche»ald", This rosulto
froa the letter Just quoted. 3lock 46 was only attached to the eoctlon
for typhus and Tims research without establishing thoreby and rela¬
tion of subordination to Krugovaky. This ia ahovn in detail in =y
cloalng briof.

Prcn the two scotches designed by Xyugovoky, which show that the
tocticn for typhus and virus. research “'a under hl B cntrol froa ito
establishment to the end of the war, nothinr can be deduced thoreforo
fros the asou-rption tha* ho wns Ding's exterior in Bloch 46.

B 7 this faot and the further erldence brought in =y closin/ briof
it is dosonoetrpted that Block 46 at Buchenvald was not placed under
tho order of Krurovsky. There io therefore no reaponoibility of
«<rugovok7 for the typhua exporinonto.

In this connection I “an* to ennhaslze that Hrugovcky never do-
aiod that he know the typhua experlnente at Buchon*aid were orderod
by Gravity and carried out by Dr. Ding. E 0 never denied thit ho saw
fer instance, the report about the series I of the expeflaenta c
which he reirrote in his letter of Mty 5, '4 2 and that he saw Ding's
eenay about acridine which Ding set *“ Gravity for conecnt to pub¬
lication on 18 nontha after the experimenta were corcleted and
which Gravity then g?vc to Hrugovcky to return i 1 to D*^ e But froe
‘his k-owledge no responsibility of Hrugcvsky for the typhus oxperl-onts

nc;?


17 *uly 47.JLKS2_2-5~Xeloy-Int.,vc:.3chc’Cn
C-uTt I -

can he deduced. ?he experiment* were ordered by Hiaaler and C-rawit*
as his highest sllltary superiors. X® a Medical Officer of
the Vaffe- - SS Xrugcwsky had no possibility to oppose theoa
sxperixents ordered t7 hie sv^eriors in any wey. Mhos C-rawitx first
suggested the .xperinests he ccctr«dicted fci= *t once, and induced
his to ask for a Settles of Hireler as the highest superior. Hiasler
decided against Mrigovsky. Under these conditions Xrugcwsky could
do no sore. E« obtained however by his opposition that'ho “as not
comicsioned with the exporiaents but that Ding got the order for
execution.

Hor hae the Frooecution brought ary evldonco to show that
Krugowoky Intervened later in enjr fora in the typhus exporiaentc at
Suchonv.-ld, that be furthered then or participated in than in any
way. On account of the fact that Mrugowsky know about tho typhus
experinentr no charge can bo cade on his undor criminal low. bocause
noithcr in law nor in fact he h*duay possibility to prevent tho
oxuorisente or to enforce later their cessation.

?ho Frosocutl'n further basod ite eharco gainst Xrugcwcky on
*.ho despoeiticne of scvo-al witnesses that ho had boon Ding’c
chief in Slock 46, alao in eo far the xporinonts carried out by
Ting in Flock 46 were concerned. I have contested thlo with all
'■■orgy. All the statoaents produced by tho Prosocution in this roo-
p«ct have their origin in ii^orsoiicn glron by Ding, b'enc cf thooo
itn’Caente coses fros goaebedy who worked in Block 4G hiasolf. It
ic Bigniflcant that the Prosecution has not been thlo to off or a
eingle order given by Xrugcvsky to Ding for the carrying out cf ty¬
phus experiments although its witness 3alachcwoky stated that Kogon
•cec managed to. collect extensive evidence which he had handed, al-
=cst corplete to the Aeerican Ar = y. If there hod been any vritton
orders fros Krug^waky to Ding, the later would certainly not
hav 0 destroyed thoa for the sake of his protection, and Eogon veuld

noz:


IT-Jvlj 47_M_KSn_2_6-H e ic7 Int. f vonScfaoen
Court X

h.^o 1v«b thee to tfce Aeeric bo Arcy vlth his other doctcento.

It is true that tho witness logon who deserves no credit, as I shall
shew, pretended that Mrurcvsk? gave to Ding softly only oral orders.
3ut he further deposed tha frm the year 1943 onwards Clnr was no
acre satisfied with oral ordors fro* Krugowsky, hut askod for such
to he given in writing. In spite of this not a single written ordor
froe Mrugowaky to Sing concerning the execution cf a series of typhus
cxperlaentc was produced.

Ihe only witness who night ho ablo to tell anything about tho

o

order given to Ding in respect of the typhus expcrlnonts by his own
kr.cvlodgo is tho witness Dr. Morgen. I Just remarked that Morgon
saw the order given by Grawitx to Sing for the execution of the typhus
experiments and that GtbwUs personally told Sr. Morgen that Ding
was his =en st Buchenwald and said ho onrlcyod hla there,.

The error of the witnesses who stated thrt Mrugowsky Mad boon
Sing's chief, rcsultc froe the fact that Sing was dopendost on
"rugowsky in respect of *hc production of v»ccino in Block 50 and
also concerning his activity as a Hygienist. X showed in sy closing
briof that free 1942 to 1945 Slug w»t> working with the typhus
vaccine exporliont B only for shout 2 1/2 Dontha, if one adds all
the h-uro h# wrfcid fron thor. All tho rest of his activity during
3 years approximately was devoted to tho vaccine productl n and tho
verk of a hy/loclat, so for tho activity whore ho woe Mrugowcky'o sub¬
ordinate. It in c:nprehop.aibl e that during tho epproxiaatoly
3" sonths ho w;rkod for Mrugowoky he got rany oore ordore froc hie
then free I-r«ritx for tho execution of the 13 thphue vaccino
cxperlnentt. It therefore is cosprehensible that the cain pert of
hi a correopondonco under theso circuastances was carried on with
"regevsky.

In consoquonco of the contention of the Prosecution which hardly
sp<kc cf anything tut of the typhus - vaccine experiments, and


11C59


17 July 47_X_XoU^_7Malcy Xnt..vonScfcoen
Court X


produced dccucents only in respect of those the depression had
to originate that the typhus - vaccine experiments were Ding's rain
activity at Suchenwald. That i* not so. Tor his aain activity at
3uehc-wald, Ding was Xrugowsky'* subordinate. Therefore it dooc not
rcsutl from the fact that his correspondence wont on mainly with
Hmgovshy and that he called Krugowsky his superior that also in
rcspoct of the typhus - v a cel no cxporiacnts a ©nnection botvecn
Krugowsky and Ding was established not the' MrurovskJ oarticipated
in theso erperleents in any w«y nor that he wsa responsible for thorn.
The Prosecution did net deny that ouch doublo subordination as it
existed between Ding on ono hand «d C-ynnwits and Hrofoviky on tho
other is possiblo in a ellitary organisation and happoned frequently.

X can r^for also in this respect to tho staioeent in ry closing brlof.

The witness logon and Ding's diary nro tho chief neons of
ovidonce advanced by tho Prosecution '■gainst Hrugowoky. Thi B is
why in ty closing briof I explained in dotail thrt noithcr Kogon'e
otatosent nor tho Ding diary furnish any substantial proof. Ac to
tho statonrnt of Kogcn I -ant to osphaol*© once ooro tho principal
points:

Kegon described lr. tho witness stand the drasatlc clreunstancos
under which ho protonds to hrvo saved tho so-called diary of Ding.

I needn't point out that tho particular occurrences which happonod
whoa ho saved tho diary as ho protends ho did would havo 1 procscd
Mb so the ho did not forget then if Ms statosent bo trnc. So
ho oouldn't possibly rclato this event in'a different way whon ho
related it several tines. In fact he gave in the physicians' and the
Pohl triale two reports about the way ho allogos to have saevod the
dla^r, which differ so fundamentally that this is only cosprchonsiblo
if his contention that he saved the diary is u-truc and the des¬
criptions he gives of this event are a pure invention.

Kegon stated in the p^slcians' trial that Dinr assorted tho
secret do cutsets to bo burned in 3iock 46. X v ilct Ding and Diottsch


11060


17 "uiy 47_X_X32_2_8-Xa 1 cy I-t.YonSchooa
Coart I

vest Into the adjoining rooa for a accent he hfi throve the diary
end a heap of papers Into a box to save then fros destruction. Two
dayo later ho had tcld Ding that,ho had saved the diary and a heap
of other papers fros boiag destroyed and had ,ot the remission
to fetch then fros Block 46 whore he couldn't h«ve got then other¬
wise. He had fetched then end kept tfcon since. This description
la quite pleuaible end it vculd be hard to refute it If thoro vaa
not Xcfon's evn stntcncnt in the Pokl trial.

In the Pohl trial the sane lofon has said about three souths
latar: ho >-i*d boen standing vith Di-g and Dictssch at tho sn=o
table when the secret doctaaents were sorted for destruction,
"uddonly Ding had pushed tho dla^y and other papers towards hiss.

Ho had taken then end carried then to Block 60 together vith
Din*. Ding had not known at this tiac that EOfon had tho diary and
the other doc^aonts with his but he h*d told Ding thin on tho oaao
day.

A »ore atrlkins contradiction than betvoen thono two otatononts
about the


11061


17 July— 'A-aZ-J-l-Xeebrs. (Xnt. Ton Schoen)
Coart To. 1


saving of the iipcy la hardly possible. If Zogon had really
fared the di^ry really In the wry he described In the phyeicinnt'
trial then the sosent when he threw the dicry Into the box and
hla reflexions during the 2 days before he tole Ding thr.t the
diary had not been burned would here regained In hla nenory
unforgettebly. The wry frost 3lode to Bloch 50 to fetch the

diary and the wry bade with the diary would hrre been renerhered
by hi-, ao well that r different description would be lnoosoible.
Alao if the preservation of the diary had occurred in the way
deacrlbed by Eoron In the ?ohl trirl it certainly would have.boon
recollected by bln ao cleprly that a different deacrlption would
be lsr oaeiblo too. So the two descriptions about the prencrvatlon
of the dlrry, differing so fundrncnt-lly froc erch other, can bo
er/lrlned but In two v-ys. Zither logon's statement is untrue
rnd ho didn't save tho diary at all. In this caso , if ho told
the Tribunal r falsehood about such an lnportant point then no
credit is to be given to his whole stntenont. Or Kogon cost have
such a bed ner.ory that his contradictions in his testimony cm be
er-ilclned by that. In this cos# too his entiro testl .ony would
bring no probative value on account of his bad iieaory.

An argunent against the correctness of Zoeon's st-te:jcnt»nbout
tho saving of the dlrry is also the ftp. tenant nr do by Dietssch
rod produc ed by ne, that Ding tor* up the diary in his presence
end threw it into the lit stove where it wea burned, when the
secret doonents were destroyed. Dfetxsch declared explicitly
thut Ding aide sure thr.t all the docunents were burned entirely
a-ter the destruction of the papers hed boon finished.

I should sry that bf Dietxsch's statement conbined with the
contradiction between the two stntenents of Kogon's, it is proved
that what logon said about the erring of the dlrry is a falsehood.

It. -y closing brief I in detail dealt with still further points
Where the strtenents cade ty Zogon in the physicians' trial on


11062


1 T J -1;-'— y~2 -&b e hen (Iat. Von Schoea)
Court Jo, 1


one bead and in the Fohl trial on the other are in r. similarly nark¬
ed contradiction as in respect of the preservation of the dipry. It
will not be necessary to reoeet hero all these arguments. I should
like to refer to then.

The second main evidence of the Frosocution against kru^-ovsky ia
the diary which ia anid to have been saved.

The phantnstic deacrlotion of the saving of the diary given by
logon in two different relations deserves no credit. Therefore,
Dietssch is to be believed who said that Ding burned the original
diary of Block US in his presence. This statement is supported

V the opinion given by the handwriting experts, Zettaer and Hast-

•

vogel treated in detail In cy closing letters.

In the neantiae the Prosecution declarod whilst discussing the
Belglboeck docoaents of evidence thrt it had tho possibility to
hsro the handwriting oxacined as to their ago in an institute at
Frankfurt and also to h-ve docusonts investigated into in every
way. The Prosecution thereupon stressed explicitly that I also had
the Ding diary ex/r.lned by experts.

The Ding diary is of Importance for the prosecution for tho charges
agrinst several defendants. So tho Prosecution ought to have found
it sore important to have tho genuineness of tho Ding di^ry ox/ninod
than the Belglboeck docunents. Ding slp»od in irJe. So the institu¬
te* at Frankfurt would have been able to ascertain without any
difficulty whether the signature on the first page is several j*era
older thm thi signature on the last page, Further, the institute
eould hr.vo rseertnined without any difficulty whether the whole
diary froQ the end of the year I9U1 till sprlhg 19^5 wes written on
exactly the sene paper or not. *ut the Frosocutioa did not hand
the diary to this institute for examination. This fact shows that
it was convinced itself that such exmina.tion would not have given
any result which was favorable for the Prosecution.


11063


17 July'-H-3JE-^-3’-K««bra »Int. Ton School)
Court ?o. 1


In ny opinion this la a particularly strong ergnnent for the
rasur^tlon that the dlcry vna really conoosed end written down
altogether .-f ter the event a. Tor the rest I nlao wont to refer
to ay closing brief.

fhe strength of the evidence of thla diary laodue to the fnct
that the nan who wrote It cannot yet foresee the future developoent
when asking his entrtes. Therefore It Is to be presuccd that the
entries render the events objectively and comletely. If a • >1.
docor.jnt which la composed later Is ande up externally re « dlrry the
the*Intention Is to bo deduced therefrea to influence the roadcr
In a certain direction, end r.Iso to decolve hlr. for this purpose.
This Is tho reason vhy my record written lntor rnd erde up In
the forn of a dlrry la of no probative value.

How the Prosecution tried to show that tho Din* dl-ry is of probrv-
tlvo vnlyo by coep-ring its contents with a nuabtr of documents
which hrvo the erne contents ns the entries In tho diary. In ay
closing brlof I dealt with theee document a Id dctr.ll rad proved


C


thrt th.-sa all cane froc Din* without exception^All docunintg
which the Prosecution conpared with tho diary. Din* hrd nt hand
still when ho ande the belated conpll/tion after the ori,^nal diary
had been burned. They ore vouchers he used for the entries he
nrde In the dlrry we hrve now. Therefore It cranot be doduccd
fro. the c^nfomlty of these documents -nd tho dlrry thr.t the
latter Is £ood evidence.

One of the docuacnts the Prosecution eor^> red with tte diary
Is the so-c-lled work report of Din*. This work report Is really
only n draft which was not been signed nor was sent to iirugowsky.

I explained this in detail In =y closing brief and offered
ovidenec for It.

According to logon's stcteaoat this dreft of the report was
vritten In Slock 50 by the second coapound clerk. Such drnft hr.s
no probative value -unless it was slgnod V the person who Is to

1106 1


i? Joly-K-3Z- 3 -q-l t egfciB (Xat. 7oa Sehoen)
Court To. 1


Bi?a It. Ia this lac trace thlc voold here been Ling.

Ar - admitted that thlc work report vac only prepared for

Blfar.ture by Ding. He thereby rdaltted that it woe not cl^ed. There¬
fore the draft bee ao pro bp. tire value.

If theca three raeia eleneatc of evidence fall, fogor.* a ctr.ter.eat,
tho work report end the Ding dlrry, the chief prxt of the evidence
brought forverd against Krugovsky fails.

?ha Prosecution contra ted in lte car. -in^-un that the experlneatal
■Objects volunteered neither for tho ty-'hue ex-erinants nor for the
oth. r erxrlnentc rt Buchenvrld. Ia. respect of the other experinente
thlc lc not correct. X ch*ll dorl vith thlc letor.

Ir. rsspoct of the typhus experlccatc It uny be correct th-t aost of
the exp crisestel eubjectc did aot volunteer for th*c.

On tho other krnd It reculte froa the closing brief of the Frosecution
thrt it Is aot rlleged for the period till the fall I9U3 th-t Hrugovsky
h-d -nythlng to do with the selection of the prisoner* for the fxperi-
oentB. Thlc is correct rnd vp* further put In evidence ia r»y closing
brief. In nattsa I9U3 recording to tho cxitontlona of tho Prosecu¬
tion which refers in this respect to logon*■ deposition again, Bing
1 b Bnld to hr.vc rddrcsBed tho request to Krugovsky that tho ©xpcrlnont-
*1 Bubjeots should be chosen b 7 the Hclchsfuchrer-SS. This etrbenent
of Io-:on*t is clso untrue. X hnv« pointed this out In dotr-11 In ay
written strtencct.

In this connection the Prosecution nontlons ELunlrr*s order of Ttbr.
27, IQUU relating to the selection of tho prisoners by tho Roiche-
pollxolar.t. But this order of Elcnlcx vrg not given pursurnt to r
■Uf* tst&aa nr do ty Krugowsky. It rsrlly is due to the r.ttecpts of
Dr. liorgen. He explained this accurately la his affidavit of Kry 23,
19^7, vhich I offered ia evidence.

So It is an established fact thr.t until autumn 19*+3 Krugovs ky hr.d
nothing to do with the selection of the prisoners, find thr.t froo this
ti=.e on the prisoners for the typhus cxporirxsts were chosen by the

v


11065


17 Julx-*-3£-3-5-Heebpn (Int. Tea School)

Cjurt 7a. 1

/ •

Be^chs-Krinlnel—Polixsiaot pomoit Hfcnaler's order suggested by
Sr. Korgia, to that rfter this tloe Hrugowsky 'had 01 bo nothing
to do with the choice of the prisoners.

The Prosecution cells ths typhus experiments crlaical, in pcrtic-
ular becr.uao control persons were used -nd above fill because of
the alleged •passage persons".

as to the control persons I explained in cy closing brief at
length that such vaccine experinents ere inpossible without the use
of control subjects sadilead to no practical result without then.

If ont trices the Din? diary for info rant ion it rpwa that in a
r.ur.bor of test series the cultural virus used w^s no rare pathogen
out for huo-a beings. If co control pereons had been infected the
fact that thr experl rentrl persons woro not taken ill would have
born explained c.s n consequence of the irotoctlon obtained by the
racolnatlon. This would have led to entlroly wrong deductions,
md to the use of inferior vneclnos in practice. If ono consldcre
tho typhus oxpsriasnts as ndnisslble the xftio of control subjocts
is therefore indispsnsablo. I cxplninod this in dotrll in uy
closlr. brief.

On the other hrad the use of passage p/rs-.ns who were lnfoctod
only in ordor to hrve living virus always at hrad could not bo
Justified. I have dcoonstrnted in =y writing that such pnssago
persons were never used. Tfctil April I 9 U 3 tharo vns no reason to
use then. Tor until April I 9 U 3 it is said explicitly in ths Ding
diary at each series of exnerlnents that the infection vrs carried
through b 7 neans of cultural virus bred in the yold sace of hens'
eggs w-ieh Ding got froo the Hobart Koch Institute in Berlin. After
april 11 , 19 U 3 Ding infected with fresh blood taken fron persons
who v'-re ill with typhus. 3 ut also during this period the use of
passage persons v-s superfluous because Ding always had persons
at his disposal who had contracted typhus spontaneously froc whom
he could take the fresh infected blood.


11056


17 v-lr-K-3Z-3-t>4Ccthan (1st. 7on Schoea)

Court Jo. 1

f

S

If the Prosecution had vented to bring evidence that passage persons
were need In Block 46 it coaid have done eo beet by Din’ rnd Dietzsch.
It produced stetenents free both In which the qiestlon of the poser-go
pereone le not sentioned. The Prosecution knev by the examination of
Krugowsky in the witness stend that he denied the uce of passage
persons. Vhen I said at the end of the production of ny evidence that
I did not call Dietzsch to the witness etnnd but only offered an
affidavit fros hin, Mr. Errdy asked the Tribunal for the porolesion to
interrogate Diet tech on certain facte.

However, he sever produced a record about such an interrogation. Tide
is farther ovidenc# that Dietsech did not confira the uee of pnsongo
persons. AH the wltneeses who cade etatesents about the use of
passage p-rsons did not work in Block U6. They thereforo know nothing
froo their own observation, but only through third persons. Dr. Morgen
investigating as rn examining cnglstratc in Block 46 in Suchenvnld,
nade no rscertninneat about passage persons. So thcro Is no conslu-
sive ovldencc of any kind thrt pass-go persons wore used in Block 46.
On the contrary I proved in =y closin' brief th-t pi sear poreons
wore really not used. •

If thi Tribunal would assise that the uso of postage pirsone wns
prosed in spite of that there would be no fault of Mrugowety*• In
the use of passage persons, because I demonstrated that Ding was not
his subordinate in respoct of his activity in Block 46 and beenuso
there is no efidence whatever that he even as such as knew about
tho use of passage persons.

In ny written etatesents I then dealt in detail with tho oxpericonts
with acridine preparations in the frnce of the typhus oxperiaents. I
proved that Ding got these preparations not froo Krugowsky but fros
the I.O. Tarbenindustrie A.O. There is no evidence whatever that
Krugowsky had any knowledge of these ex^erioents carried out by Ding.

Dia^*s report of the acridine experiments submitted for pibliention
was handed to Krugovsky by Crawltz only about 18 sonthe after the


11067


17 July-4(-3Z-5-7-Keehea (1st. Ten Schoen)
Court So. 1


termination of the experiments. Therefore for the cxcerlnents with
acridine preparations which caused e particularly high nuaher of dead
no charge can be cade again«t Krugowsky under criminal lew.

In reritet of the poison experiments I proved in =y written state-
nent that Ding*■ assertion he had received en order froa Xrugoweky
to be proeent at an euthanasia ty phenol is not correct. Prof. Killian
who according to Ding's statement was present when the order was given
said that this statement of Ding's is not correct. I showed that the
examination of the question whether soruas containing phenol have n
noxious effect Can be carried through- by the uso of serums with md
without phenol for comparison and that a series of experiments with
serucs containing phenol was never ^carried through.

The experiments with perritlne woro carried out on the initiative of
Dr. Horgen and Dr. Vshns. according to the Ding diary. I proved that
by theso experiments no harm was dono to the herlth of the experiment¬
al subjects. ?ho experiments were mrde with pervltine which is to bo
had in any chfteist's shop without « prescription, and consequently
Is no poison. In the experiaents it was used together with e soporific
bocause the authority who Investigated Into the death of Hauptschar-
fuehror Koehler vrntod to find out whether by this treatment the
effect wno increased in


11068


17 Juiy-l*-FI/—1-Cook (let. von Schon)

Coert So. I

one or tru other sense. Tat eoly effect was that the experimental sub¬
jects fell to a disturbed sleep for up to 20 hours. Also for this Per¬
vitin experiment which was not ordered by krugowsky, in which he did
not participate in any way and in respect of which the Prosecution did
not ever, contend that he knew of any responsibility under criminal law
which any be doducod against hin.

About the special experi- -nt or. 6 porsor.s mentioned in Ding's Diary
it is again the witness hog on alone who stated particulars. In ay clo¬
sing brief I pointed out that also in this ease the depositions of 3(o-
gon about tho ori;in of this experiment in the Pohl trial and the phy¬
sicians' trial, cro in cortmdiction (p. 191). Thus hi3 oyidcncc has r.o
prebetivo re. \o, Kortovor what Kogon said about this experiment is only
based on Ding's relation except tho sealing ar.d tho burning of tho pros¬
cription. In respect of this special meporlmor.t any evidence is lacking
with which poison and ir. which ernner tho special experiment was carriod
through and whet was to be ascertained by tho ojq^oriaont. Aftor tho col¬
lapse Ding told tho dofendont Siovors ho hp.d filled towards tho ond of
19 UU 80 bottolus with prussic a die but ho unfortunately had taken nono
of then with hin to naku an end with hinsolf.

If Ding carried through his "special experiments" with thcoo prussic
acid capsules cannot be clears * because Ding left no report about tho
wry the special experiment went on.

Ir. tho Ding Diary it is said that the experiment was made by order
of 'irugewsky and of th. Hoichskriainalpolixeiaat. As the diary has no
p-obr.tivw value the truth of this contention cannot be proven by this
docuaer.t aior. . Other evidence that Ding poisoned 6 prisoners by order
of Urugowsk7 .'ails. So there is no conclusive evidence that Urugowsky
ordered this axperim-nt or that ho even knew about it.

The Prosecution further indicted drugc*sky for tho sako of an exe¬
cution carried through at Sachsenhauscn whore three higtaaynrn sentenced

11069


1


17 Juiy-:f-FL-4-2-Ccok (Ir.t. von Schoo)
Court So. I


to death wore executed with projectiles poisoned with acaiitira, I havo
-rovor. that 'S-ugoisfcy attended this execution only as execution physi¬
cian. I further demonstrated tret the execution was carried through be¬
cause in an attempt on the life of a superior civil servant in tho Ge¬
neral gouvenrs-r.t revolver asnunition hr6 bean used whero tho bullets
Ir d a hole ir. thus and were poisoned with aconitine. By this uoa of
poisoned Russian bullets ard the book by Hondorson in which the prepa¬
ration fer the us- of poison- projectiles in the.-first world war was
doachib-d tho cor.com had boon increased tie*, shortly poisoned bullets
would also bo us;d at the front. I proved that the uso of poisoned arv-
auniticn at thw axe cutler, served the pruposc to find out if pure aconi¬
tine or blend had fco-n used and how such bo avail/blc in case of mod
to uso count r-poiaa.s.

I have brought evidence that all executions in c or.ee nt rat ion camps
wuro ordered by tho Reich skrinirr lpolisolvtt ar.d that th- prooonco of
an exocution physician at ouch executions was prescribed. Tho execution
nt Sochacnhauscn had boor, ordered by tho Roichskrininalpolizoia/nt. No
charge can bo dodocod against Ifrugcwsky from his cttendanco as nr. execu¬
tion physician under criminal law. I have oxplainod this in dct-il in
ay closing brief.

In respect of bacteriological warfero I want to be very brief. Tho

Prosecution only produced a lc'tur from Crawitz to Hiaaler with which

*

Grnwitz sent to Hlsnlcr aeacrandux -bout tho define., against bactcrio-
logic warfare, ihe-ro is no evidence at all that /irugo^sky busied hirv-

•

self in any aay /itfc tho carrying of bacteriological warfare actively,
Fraa tho do-liae rith ocas’yus of deforce a; ainst bacteriol.ogic irnr-
farv. no roTOoncibility under criminal law can be d-duccd.

The Prc.-cution c3su3os that Ifrugocsky was Ding's superior for his
activity ir. block 46. It therefore trios to make him responsible for all
the oxperiawnts carried through ir. block 46 at ouchenwald besides the


11070


17 July-lf-JL-4-3-Cook (tit. von Schctx)

Court So. I

typhus oxpori^xints. The irdictaent for these experiments fails like tho
izdictasnt for tho typhus experiments if Urugonsky was not Ding‘s su-
porior for his -ctivity in 46 . By way of precaution I showod in ay
closing brief that he had nothing to do with the otrhonin experiment.

(p. 214) The drherein exporiae-t was brought about by Conti, tho Secro-
t.-ry of State in tb» Uinistry of tho Interior, via Grewitz. Ding sent
the records direct to Christiansen, the technical exn-rt of Conti. T'.icro
is not the slightest hint that Irugowsky knew about these experiments.
(Closing lottors p. 214).

In 46 c:aoritier.ts with incendiary boobs wore further aado by Ding.

I deaiorstraced in ay closing letters that thoso experiments with bombs
won. initiated by ti»e superior SS - ard Police Lcador won Woyrsch
tnrougr. Gr-witz. There is no evidence of any description for a parti¬
cipation of Ijugcwsky.

In rcsnuct of all experiments carried through in block 46 there¬
fore all ovidonce fails that krugowsky ordered these experiments, thr.t
he pnrtici.jrted ir. then in any fora or that he hr.d beer, in a position
to prevent t.vase experiments ordered by his superiors Himmler end Crawltz
or is.flutr.ee then in any wcy. Ho pjnal guilt against krugcsisl'y has
been proved, ire owsky edaitted that he initiated the vaccinations
against aarllpox,typhoid fever, perntyphus A rnd B and diphtheria as
W..11 as the high - imir.isation experiment with Fmcnkcl vaccines, tho
dysentry protective vaccination rnd tho testing of yellow fever vac-
cinos. At mot® of these protective vaccinations artificial infection
w-e carrie: three *;h. That artificial vaccination was adoporated «ould
h-Vw to be proven by tftu Prosecution. It brought no evidence for this
cont.ntien. For “21 the* experiments volunteers were available as it
is s.iown in ny closing brief.

All tnesc vaccines wore tested ir. numerous experiments on animals
and on human beings.


11C71


17 Jai^-tf-FL-A-l-Cook (Int. v_n Schon)
Coart Bo. I


Tho Prosecution has not cor.t_r.dud that th. medical treatment of
'.11 vaccinated persons was blameless as far as vaccine reactions set
ir., So at ti-. a experiments all requirements wore act which the experts
cf the Prosecution, Prof, Ivy ar.d ^rof. Lcibbrand enumerated for expe¬
riments on human beings so that these cxpori.acr.ts cannot bo callod cri¬
minal iridor my aspect.

'•.hon the sobnissicn of ay Document Book II was discussed Hr. Hardy
admitted cxplicitoly that also tho Prosecution car.aiders the carrying
through of aodicel experiments on volunteers as admissible.

So tho chcrgo that the above a,ntioncd protective vaccinations
were criminal oust be dropped.

In addition I have ahou- in ay writings by producing affidav.it of
the cost eminent physicians that these protective vaccinations are no
unlawful experiments and must be called absolutely necessary freo a
..Ldicol point of view, in particular if or.e considers tho conditions
of life in ti*. concentration carps.

As to * e use of blood ourun prooerves I haw shown in ay closing
letters that they wore .-riopted in tens of thouarndo cases amongst tho
troops with tho greatest success end that they never did any harm to
he lath. At Bucbeomld the blood scrum preserve nas used also exclusi¬
ve ly for t’.wrrpoothic pruposes. Under no aspect this use can bo called
an “exp-rlw-Rt''. Per there was no experiment to bo made with this ap¬
proved thorrpouticua.

n s to tho drawing of tlocd from c-nvnlosconts of t.yphus for tlio
production of convrlecccr.t serin for th<. concentration camps and of
blood for the production of elood preserves I h*vo coa^untcd in dotril
in ay closing lott_rr. (p. 239 ciid following.)

Thu trHn g ol blood from convalescents from typhus is under co
condition a so-sure vhich ccn injure the patient, ith typhus the blood
circulation is durys impaired and th- relief of tho circulation by

11072


17 July-M-FI-3-Cook (Ir.t. von Schon)

Oo'irt No. I

t ak i n g son blood which corresponds to a blood letting, is to be con¬
oid, red ns a therapeutic measure. Dndwr no condition the taking of
blood in such a y 11 quantities as it was dor* at 3uchunwald. I have ex¬
plained this in closing brief.

can tho drawing of the sanll quantities of blood inquired for
ti e prod ictior. o: blood senin preserves bo harmful under r.i\y conditions.
This also is efcoun in detail ir. ay written statement. Moreover the
bkod donors ‘.ere volunteers who offored thooselvep because thoy "ot
additional food. So also th-se bUv-din a which were carried through
under itrugondry's responsibility wer- no offence of hie under criminal
lew.

Finally the Frasccutixi has charg-d reproached to IfrugcMsky ;dth
h-ving order- . the "Cyclond 3" for fcbo gas chambers at Auschwitz. I
hrvu shown in ay el-sing brier, that thoro nro mistakes in the affida¬
vit :f H^ira wh^i 2 cannot ask any aore for cross-examination boenuso
he is dead enc that W*ug»sk y nuwr hod anything to do with the order-
in? of g's for the Ausclwitz gas chambers. This was also confirmed by
Dr. Morgan nho acted at Ausclwits also as an examining magistrate.

As to itua IV of the indictment ur.djr which drugowcky is charged
to hav^ belonged to the SS as a criminal organization I have slu*m that
he beL ngje to the Baffen-SS of which Gcnoral Taylor himself said in
his introductory speoc.a th‘t its members wore trained and equipped os
regular troops ant fought in regular ailitrry unite at tive front. Tho
HTT ruled that a arm c -mX be punished for having belonged to tho SS
if he was ir.c-r?orated in it after Sept. 1, 1939 in such a nay that
nc had no choice.

Urug-PKE • was an rctivc !!odical Officer in the Baffon-SS. As such
be had no eh: ice rf .r the war had broken out whether ho nantcc: to re¬
nin in tro «affi-:>-SS or -withdraw froa it. Therefore the decision of
the lifT ab-Ait its critical character ic not applicable- to Mrugowsky, In
addition I have shewn ir. ny closing lettors that lie practised no SS _>o-


11073


17 JttlT-V-fL-w-6-Cook (Ir.t. von Schon)

Court Ko. I

Utics ir. any nay nor J&de propaganda for the Party or wbrked for it.

(p. 247 ff).

I trerefore an convinced that he cannot be punished either for hie
haring oelooged to the SS.

To son up I want to say that aU evidence brought by the Prosecu¬
tion against ^rugoeaky does not hold up under exaalnation, for the rea¬
son of the particularly great quantity of facts to be diecussod in res-
pcct of the Bing diary it was not possible for jo to discuss each item

in detail within the tine available to ae. But I also think this is not

•

nocessary because the Tribunal has ay arguaents at hand in wrifcting,
in which I consented at length to all charges.

I aa convinced that the defondant Mrugwsky is guilty of none of
the crLnas he is Indicted of.

1 there re petition to acquit the defendant Hrugowky in respect
of all the crinaa he is Indicted of.

THS PRESIDE’:: The Tribunal wiU no*, hear frca counsel for the
defendant, Poppondick:

DR. BGSHrt (For the defencfcnt Poppondick):

Ur. President, Your Honors I

After the proceedings havo lasted longer than 7 aonths, Case 1
against the SS doctors and Geraar. scientists is coning to an end. Keny
a sad chapter of hucan erring* has been disclosed here. Tlore will
hardly bo excuses for aany things that happened, rfcwover, will the pro¬
secution's evidence be sufficient to accuse every one of the defendants
of having beer, ccnnocted with crinos that were cemitted and thus be
able to construct an individual responsibility? Is Uoliere actually right
with regard to.this trial and those defendants here when in his -,;oll
knoin work .e ina^, inary patient" he allows the doctor's cap to be pre¬
sented to tbs young doctor of oedicine and thereby in Jest lets the
doctor's ocnipoicr.ce be recorded with the cynical words:


1107U


i? JaljMfr-ITXi—7-Cock (Ir.t. -von Scbon)

Court Ko. I

”1 present you with the venerable and learned cap and with
such concedo to you the technical skill end power to heal
with icaunity all over the world, to purge, to venesect,
to puncture, to cut, to bore and to kill"?

Should the doctors on trie', here rosily have abused the professional
position of a doctor in a shameful way that they cannot be adjudged any
longer with, this honorary title of a helper of mankind, but that rather
together with the otter defendants, as it has happened-, already boforo
the trial had started, they nay be referred to as "those 23 oporoasors"
in a German r "vspapor?

No doubt the prosecution in their tendency towards generalization
tried to attribute tho answer to this question to us.


11075


17 July 47—M-F y~ 51—Gros s (Von So bon)
Court I.


-be indictment would like to sec a distinction drawn
between*

The non—Gernr.n doctor who In the past decades
has held c_dlcal othloe r.t a high level;

b. The Gern-n doctor who, In 'eh- ye-"rs from 1933 to
1945, stood under the complete sway of blologlstlc thinking,
as Professor Leibbrr.nt put It;

c. Those indicted her., th. lncrn.nce of humane
f-.lings In whom has been a prior denied th„m etnd wiio are
alleged to have bonded togothor In order to commit crimes
against humanity, without purpose, without moaning,

and without success.

This orude picture of the German medical profession
after 1933 was strengthened by Professor Lelbbrandt’o
testimony who, perhaps uncounsolously, made of his
testimony a blanket accusation of the German medical
profession.

It Is unavailing to us here that Professor Leibbrant
later, in a Gornrn newspaper, attempted to revise this
point of view.

However, nothing better illustrates the ouoooss of
tho goncrrliring tendency of the prosecution than the
spontaneous remark of n dclcg"tw to a recent session of
tho Bav-rlan Parliament who sank so low as t> exclaim:

■There is no crlo; to which a doctor in Germany would
not have contributed."

It cannot be the ta : of the defense in this trial to
throw the" proper light on th- German physician after 1933
and tc cxtoll his services. L^t the millions do that who
wore treated and h-alod according to the precepts of
medical science and medical ethics by a conscientious
stalwart C-.raan doctor aft^r 1933 to whom they ov/e their lives.


11076


17 July 47_:4-PK-5-2-Gross (Von Sofcon)
Court I.


Forhrps ther. are several 1COO foreigners "Cong then, too.
let tliose people do It vhe can tell of th_ sacrifice, the
silent heroism of the Ge»nn physician in times of pence
and war, and his self-denying service for humanity. They
can probably tell you that it was not cs if a oortaln per¬
centage of National Socialist thinking was injected with
every hypodermic needle which was cddlnlsterod a patient
to cure him, ca sometimes appears to be suggested the
Prosecution.

The understandable tendenoy of the prosecution to
generallio should not* In the end, result In lotting
entirely socondnry matters emerge os dominating onos, and
In mailing people responsible for things for which they
do not have th- least semblance of responsibility. It Is
Just In n criminal action "8 important ao this ono against
23 men of the health service that It is the greatest took
to prove the Individual responsibility of each defendant
and thus find a bdals for the presentation of the ovlaenoo.
This task may not bo "ltogother o~sy, because of external
conditions If for ox-mole these defendants are simply •
dcsorlbvd In German newspapers cs these 23 German hangmen,
without knowledge of the roal facts and the nct6 with whloh
they are ch-rgod and without grading the responsibility
of the Individual, and moreover If at the end of the
presentation of th. 1 ndiottoont, a book Is published undor
die title "Dictate of contempt of human beings, 0 which
one—sldodly contains only th: presecutlons documents, then
right from the beginning the task of defense does not
appear'exactly simple.

The verdict against Erhard Milch gave certain indications
regarding legal concepts In Anglo-Saxon procedure by recom-
eendlng to the German people appreciation -ni veneration for


11077


17 July 47-H-P/U5-i-JroaG (Von Schon)
Court I.


those 1-gal principles upon which Democracy Is founded. In
this connection It mentions the significant principles which
lie at the root of these legal concepts:

1. Every person charged with a arise Is In the first
place presumed to b- Innocent.

2. He re sal ns under the protection of this legal
presumption until his guild has been proved beyond a
reasonable doubt.

I wish to use th-so principles, too. In the final
arguments for the defendant, Poppendlok, In order thus
to give the High Tribunal as clear a ploture as possible
of the legal and actual foundations on whloh tiio Prosecution
bases Its Indictment of the defendant Poppondlok.

The defendant, Helmut Poppendlok, rale-d In th, rural
vicinity of Oldenburg, attracted to the oedlo.al pro¬
fession by the example of to family physiola.n, an honest
f-mlly p..ysiol-n, spent tlio years of hlo education a.s well
as tn- first years as a practicing phyclslan In sanatoria and
clinics In Berlin and its Immediate vlolnlty as a ppocinllst
for lntorn-1 dloo/'s-s, until stimulated by the personality
of Prof. L-r.g and his own Inclination for natural scionoe,
ho turned to hereditary biology. Thvn he soon b-oomes
j.nealoglcal physician In the later Ka.ln Race and Settle¬
ment office -ni thus attained a more or l«.ss administrative
medical position which ended uo in the mere medical handling
of marriage applications of meab-rs of the So, an occupation

to which he remained loyal until the end of the war, except

%

for f period of war service.

Purely as one of th_ personnel, he coses under th;
supremo authority of tne Relc.is Physician 3o, Ora.wltz,
to whom the shyslclans of th„ Main Race «nd settlement
Office wor. subordinated ir. the year 1939.


liTT?


17 July 47_M-PH-5-4-0ros6 (Von 3chor.)
Court I


In line with the reorganization of tha medical
departmon: of the S3 Popp on dl eh then b-con-s loading
physician retaining his position and occupation In tho
Kiln Race Scttleoont Office from 1941 on with the formal
title of "Chief of the private personal Office of tho
Relchsphycioian 35 and Police" In order to permit Grcwltz
to create yet -nother office In r staff already too largo.

This one connoction os an occasion! co-worker of
Grr.vitz, which he remained even after hi3 foraal appoint¬
ment as chlof of the pereonal office, appears to the
defense os the reason why Poppcndlck Is sitting her- In
the defendants' dook.

Tho defense does rot deny that some of the experlnento
referred to here In Court came through by way of Grawltz.

It docs not fall to recognize tho position of the Prosecution,
which, when It summon .xl tho defendants to thlo trial, was
alslod by the high sounding title of "Chtef of the personal
office of the Reich Physiolan So and Police" to the
assumption.

That after Gr-wltz' death a co-worit-r with that title
could properly share certain responsibilities, or rt the
very least bo able to show t sharing of knowledge of tho
aost Important even;a r-Iated to this trial.

The fact that this talc, however, did not correspond
to PopDcndlck's actual notlvitles -nd position in Grawitz 1
office could not remain concealed even from tho Froseoutlon
In course of the pres-ntatlon of the prosecution document's
and th- testimony of their witnesses, ~e well as l~tcr In
the presentation of evidence for tho Defense. In spite
of the fact that -mple documentary material was av-llablo
to the Pros-cutlon, and It was In a position to o-ll witnesses
lr. unlimited n:rf>er6 from everywhere, the material given In


11079


17 July 47-H-fcy-. 5-5-Gross (Von Schor.)
Court I.


evidence la surprisingly Insignificant and is of a kind
which face oxtroaoly little in coneon with the natters
mentioned In the lndlctn.nt.

An explicit description of oy position with respect
to Court I of the lndlctaait is contained In my writ ton
argument so that I con spare myself here the trouble
going Into further details In this natter. It coy
suffice to suggest that th, notion of conspiracy used
lr, this trial Is probably entirely untenable from a
legal .o well ns an actual viewpoint, as for Counts
II and III of the Indictment It cannot be maintained
seriously and with legal consistency that the defendant,

Dr. Poppcndlck, carried out the experiments n-med In tho
lndlctnent, orders then or supported th;n. Tho Pro¬
secution, to be suro. In a summary of Its closing
brief contended: "Ho supported such experiments and
■ovorol were Instigator by him".

And thereby laid It on pretty thick even fron thoir
point of view. In Part II of Its argument, In which It
refers to the Individual experiments, It presented no
conclusive evidence that even upon critical examination
actual support for even orders to make experiments can
be attributed to tho defendant.

Essentially, what the prosecution wishes to prove
under Counts Two and Thr^w 16 fcnwlcd_.e of tho experi¬
ments discussed here In court. A support for my case
the logical deductions : fron the Hllch Judgement appeared
quite serviceable to me which stated th o following pre¬
requisites for knowledge of the experiments and a conse¬
quent responsibility according to our*Coucts Two and Three:

1) It must be proved th-’t the defendant In question
h-d knowledge criminal ocporlncnts.

2) That tile defendant, on tho basis of hl6 knowledge.


11030


17 July 47-X-?>i-5-&-Gross (Von 3<jhon)
Sour* I.


knew that these experiments wore criminal in aim and
execution.

3 ) . That ho had this knowledge oarly enough to be
able to toko stops to prevent the experiments.

4) . That ho hod the power to prevent than.

Those prerequisites fo r a Juridically significant know¬
ledge In thw sonso of Counts Two and Three r.ro stated
verbatim in Judge Mussaono's concurring opinion (page S2,
German Text), -»nd also In essence in the actual Hiloh
Judgaont (pages 2 and 3).

Tho defende will state its case regarding the
experiments discussed in the closing brief of the oroo^cutlon
In the sane order*

1. Incendiary Bomb Experlnonts. The prosecution assorts
that reports revealing the orinlnnl nature of suoh ex¬
periments were oont to Foppendlck. It does not assort
that ? opwndlck know cf those natters oarly enough to be
able to prevent then.

In Its fin l written statement the dofwnso has
proved that Poppondick could have had no knowledge of the
Incendiary botob reports and that tha evidence presented
by tho prosecution la not Sufficient consluolvely to
provo the contrary.

Even If wo admit th-'t the defendant Poppondick saw such
an Inc-ndiary bofib report with photographs '-ftor tho
cxpcriixnt6 wore already concluded, however, how Is ho
then to mnflortrkc steps to prevent tho experiments?

Even the knowledge cf thv. Incendiary bomb experiments
which the prosecution alleges h v had wauld not suffice to
cr.kw Ihc defendant, on the basis of this alleged knowledge
responsible according to Counts Two -nd Threw for execution

of tile Incendiary bomb experiments.

UCCl


17 July 47—X-f X-5—7—Oross (Von ScfconJ

Court I


II. Homono Experiments. The prosecution ".s orts that
Po“pendick ord_red these experiments and consequently had
knowledge of them before they beg-n.

Regarding taeso so-called experiments, which were
not mentioned in the Indictment, the defense has b-cn quite
exhauotivo. It believes it has proved!

1) That the alleged hormone oxporioents were not
crlaln-1 ocperlnents but n method of treatment -lr^ady
recognized in nodloal science;

2) That this method of treatment waB in no way
dangerous; th->t no fat'litles occurred or ar„ concolvablc;

3) That the orders for these experiments ooanrted from
Himmler and Lulling, bat that th. single letter w 1th the
signature "By ordor, Poppendick" is by no mens an order
that those oxperloents whould be undertaken, but is.a
letter in which Gravltz tolls Dr. Ding to assist Dr.

Vaemot In the pr-llmln-ry chomlcal rwse-rch by giving

him laboratory material, after Dr. Lolling had asked
Oravltz for this assistance.

4) That no cgular cxporioental reports went from
Dr. Vaornet to Poppendick.

Since this method of treatment was not criminal, and
since furthermore the defendant Poppendick could not
reg-id the alda and execution of this method of treatment
as criminal, how can h~ lx xxld particularly responsible
.according to Counts Two -rxi Three bvoause of this alleged
knowledge.

III. Typhus Experiments. The prosecution assorts that
Poppendick asked Krugowsky to tell Ding to ‘cxgln typhus
experiments with sulfonamides from the research department
Vonkc.nncl, ~nd bases Its contention on documents NO 1182
to NO 1185.

11062


17 July 47-X-PK-5-8-Gross (Von Sohon)
Court I.


Those facts any bo true, but the prosecution is forgetting
the followings

c. Profess or ifonkonnel asked the Reich Physician to find
hl»'.o clinic with so Idler 8 infected with typhus, at which
V nkonnol's already sufficiently tested sulfon^nido drug
was to be further tested. In other words, he w-nt-d to
hr.Vo the director of a typhus clinic, which was not
available to hlaself, onrry out a normal clinical test
such r.s Is undertake dally In large hospitals.


11033


17 * uly-J :-IL-6~ 1-Leon or d (Int. Ton Schon)

Court I

b. ) The eich Hiysieion requested such opportunity :‘rom the
competent hygienist, Mrugatsky.

c. ) ne°sures necessary for this purpose wore initiated.

*

\h-ther such clinical experiment was actually carried out,
cannot be gathered from the entire body of evidence intro¬
duced.

d. ) This contemplated clinical experiment, even from the
pur-ly factual point of view, has nothing to do with tho
typhus experiments of Dr. Ding dealt with before this
Tribunal.

So far, the intermittent -otivity of Poppendick by order
of the .l-ich Riysioian constitutes no connection with
criminal experiments, nccordingly, all four suppositions
of ccaplioity through knowlede-, which night be of inportnnee
within the scope of Counts II and III of the indiotnent,

.are aissing.

The prosecution further contends that Poppendick was
r.-.nr- of the typhus experiments proper of Dr. ^ing which

have been discussed in detail here.

• •

The defense ha3, in its closing brief, in sufficient

•

detail expressed its opinion concerning this contention,
being able to prove beyond doubt that Poppendick was not
in a position to hav- such knowledge since he n-ither

attended the lootare of Dr. J ing at tho Third Consulting

• •

Conference, nor could he, froa the Document IIo.5C2,

•

Prosecution Exhibit 286, the publication of Ding on Acridin,
gather that the foundations of this v/ork were -llegedly
criminal experiments, Neither hes the prosecution b ecn
able to raise any justifiable objections against these
two last-nam-d facts.

17. Sterilization Dxpcrimmts. Tho prosecution maintains,

nocfc


17 ‘-17 ~ ::-I T --6-2-L~cn~rd (Int.Von Schon)
Court I


without being in possession cf the necessary documentary
evidence, that Poppendick was familiar with the criminal
sterilization experiments performed by Clauberg, and that
they v/ero even supported by him.

As previously during the taking of evidence, so •'Iso
in its closing brief the prosecution attempts to confuse
the two groups of pertinent features: Prevention of
female sterility, i.e. treatment of 3S fiancees who had
bee one sterile through disease, end th- actual sterilization
experiments of Professor Clauberg. This confusion must be

ascribed not least to the erroneous translation.

• •

Therefore, the task of the defense, in the detailed
exposition of its ooinion on this question, consisted in
separating these two groups of facts properly from each
other, in actual accordance with the -vidence introduced.

'/hoover knew about Clauberg that he was a physician
for treatment of female sterility is not, through this
'inowl-dge, foroed to possess knowledge also of Clauberg's
other activity, p.rformance of sterilization ixperimenta.

So far this mere -ssumption of the prosecution that
Poppendick nu3t h-ve known also about the steriliz-tion
experiments of Professor Clauberg cannot possibly be main-
t-ined, in particular as no evidence to this effect i3
available.

Consequently, th- def-ndant ?oppendick cannot b~
charaed with a special responsibility for the sterilizat¬
ion -xp riments when not »-ven positive proof of hi3
enowl-igs of these experiments could be produced.

V. Sulfonamide 3xp-riments. The prosecution maintains that
Popoendiclc learned about the experiments prior to their
caapletion and supported them.


U0S5


17 * uly-I >11-6-3 -Leonard (Int. Von Schon)

Court I

As to the last-named contention of support, no conclusive

evid „nc- has been produced which could in nay wry be

applicable to this fora of participation.

Concerning the first contention of knowledge of the

experiments before they were completed but after they had
started, I nr be allowed to refer in general to my det-il-d
reposition on this alleged knew ledge of the sulfonamide
xeperinents in my closing brief. Let us,however, for once
assume that the contention of the prosecution is correot:
that Poppendick really h'd l.arned of the sulfonamide
experiments through the intermediate report of Professor
Gebhardt. The question is: did he g..t this knowledge in
tine ir. order to h^v. the experiments stopped?

Part of the experiments are described already in this
intermediate report, -ven though the more difficult
iroerinents were carried out only subsequently. Undoubtedly
the possibility of preventing the following experiments must
still have existed.

Put did the defendant Poppendick, in his position at
th~t tin- of occasional assist-nt, poss-ss the parer to do
so? T;iis particular question must undoubtedly be "nsuered
•. ith 'no-' in view of my subsequent exposition concerning the
position of the defendant.

71. Phlcgaonc ixperloents. The prosecution m lnt-ins that

Poppendick must h"ve known about th.se experiments. To

what extent this contention is not true I have discussed

in my answer to the closing bri-f of the prosecution, ^ut

l,t us -ssume for one- that Poppendick had really, through

•

the final r-port of Dr. Gr-wita, learned abcuth the phlegmon
experiments, was then this knowledge obtained early enough

to establish the possibility for him to pr_v-nt the

11066


17 3’ , :ly-!I-IL-6-4-Ieonard (Int. Von 5chon)
Coart I


experiments? This can b~ deni~d without further argument
since the :xperiments described in this report were already
completed.

It is cons equently not possible to consider his fcnowl-dgv,
alleged by the prosecution, to be legally significant in
relation tax Counts II and III of the indictment.

VII. Polygal Jxperiaont. ?he prosecution maintains th~t
?opo»ndic!c oust have known -bout th-s- .xperiacnt3 and ~ven
enocurng-d th-m.

The last-named contention h's been supported by no
piece of evidence,

Now, concerning the contention of Knowledge, it appo-rs
to the defense above all inportant to separate clearly on
one side the polygal experiments of Dr. ^oetner and, an
the oth-r hand, the exporiaents of Dr. rfascher, In oonneotion
with which shootings arc said to have occurcd -lthough it

0

is .not possible to Know for sure, an the basi3 of the
jvid.nce produced, whether they v/-ro ".ctually carried out.
Hv,rc I -xx interested only in the blood ooagulating
experiments of Dr. Plootn-r described by the prisoners Neff
and ?uzongrubcr who p-rticipnted voluntarily as completely
innoccus and customary. 1 here refer to my exposition in
answ.r to the closing brief of the prosecution.

O.n the basis of the evidence nroduced by the prosecution
and the defense, not even a -..ell-founded assumption to the
effect that Fopp-ndick must h«ve Known about the blood
coagulating experiments of Dr. ^loetnsr can be ontert-in-d.
Still less can he.be charged with a special responsibility.

THJ KGSID2NT: Counsel, as you are starting a new
subject of yaxr argument, th- Tribunal will nav be in
recess for a few moments.

{ a recess ~~s taken.)


11037


17 Jul-a-'jn-$_l_«4»eh?r.
Court So. I.


THE I'RSHAL: The Tribunal Is again In session.

THE PFESIDENT: Counsel say proceed.

DP. 9CEHU: Sr. President, your Honor, I a a now cosing to VIII
of my statement, Hslaria experiments.

Here egain the Prosecution maintained that the defendant Pcp-
pendlck sust haw known about Professor Scnllling's nelarla experiments.

-s to the entries in the diary, Slexers did have reference to
Poppendick. In his affidavit Slavers, as well as Poppendick himself,
in the witness box, have pronounced their opinion on this natter.

Their state-rents are undisputed. Fro* no evidence in possession of the
prosecution can knowledge of allegedly crinlnal activity on the part of
Professor Schilling be deduced. Even if one were to admit that Popoen-
dick h*d heard of these experiments e»rly enough, it cannot be proved
that he had the power to prevent then. Ho re about this later.

IX. Seawoter Experiments. The Prosecution neglected in its closing
brief to assert that the defondant Poppondick knew anything of these
experiments. Now is there any evidence whatsoever that he did. Con¬
sequently I do not have to enter upon thi? question.

X. Freeting Experiments. The Prosecution asserts that the do fend not
Poroendick had knowledge of the dry cold experiments before their be¬
ginning, and of the wet cold experiments after their conclusion. I
believe that in ay closing brief I have sufficiently proved that Pop-
per.dick could have had no knowledge of the wet cold experiments. Ifore-
over, such knowledge would be of no import.nce in determining r partic¬
ular resDcnsibillty according to Courts Two *nd Three, because at the
time of the Gr*witz-P»scher discussion, to which PorDendick was later
called, the wet cold experiments h<*d already been concluded. So far •«
the dry cold experiments are concerned, it can be unmistakably seen from
the evidence presented by the defense that in this conference there was
undoubtedly discussion of additional exoerience in cases of freezing
suffered by troeps in the East; this exoerience was to be collected; arid
by no Wans was there discussion of intended experiments in concentration
cases. Even if we were to gr.-r.t th=t Popoendick found out about criminal

11063


17 Jul-H-lM-2-Vfceh=n
Court Bo* I.

dry cold experiments at this conference, before they begun, where is
the ox-oof that he really, on the basis of his official position, wos
in » Dcaition to stco these dry cold expe riments ?

IT. Epidemic Jaundice Exrer -ents. Here again the Prosecution in its
closing brief neglected to -. 33 ert that tho defend-wit Popoendick was
guilty. It merely asserts thrt at the tire th»t these allegedly crin-
inal experiments took piece Popoendick had long been »n important
associate of Grawitx's.

Since no responsibility, according to Counts Two and Three, can
be deduced from such assertions without substantiating proof and without
legpl significance, I need not enter upon this question.

If I have dealt -with the individual groups of experiments in
the same order as in the closing briof of tho Prosocution, I have not
done so in order to agree that the groups of experiments that arc not
mentioned in the indictment, so f«r as they here pertain, namely, hon-
uono exporiaonts, phlegmon experiments, »nd polygal experiments, are of
’og'l weight within the frar* of Counts T-o and Throe. Or. the contrary,
I rexer you to -y statements on this Juridical problem regarding the
exporiaonts that arc not -*ntioned in tho indietw»nt.

The defense recognises the experiments that arc not mentioned
in the Indictment, in tho ovent that they really were criminal, only so
far as it depends on tho defendant's knowledge of them whether the de¬
fendant is guilty or not under Count Four.

So far ->s the already treated oxoerirents are concerned, it is
apparent that knowledge on the part of the defendant or, sere than that,
support, an ordr, or execution by the defendant h»s not been proved.

The time at ,iy disposal docs not permit me to refer to the ex¬
haustive treatment of these counts of the indictrant in closing brief.

!n view of all those deductions from the evidence put in, I
apply, with reference to the charges under Counts I, II, -nd III, for
the acquittal of the defendant Popoendick.

I -11 the more Justified in making this application that I -m


11059


17 Jul-H-iF-?-3-fc:h?r.

-ourt So ■ >.

In the position In wfc*t follows to prove that the defendant Poppendick't
position it’s not th-»t which the Prosecution *3crib to him, furthemore,
th*t Poppendick also in his oosition in Grawitz' office did not hove
the power to prevent not yet concluded criminal experiments if he ob¬
tained knowledge of thee. *hnt I -a about to 37 oppeers to * of
great inport’nee with reference to Count IV.

■"he Prosecation describes the defendant Poppendick in Its clos¬
ing brief -a "s veiy old oceber of the SS" nd *s "closest /nd most
trusted collaborator of Or»witz." 'side from the fct th»t » member of
the SS who entered the org.»nlz»tlon only » few months bo fore- the Nptionsl
Socialist accession to power c«nnot be described -s • very old member,
the f*ct Is not disputed th«t Popoendick Joined the SS in 1932. But
w»s he the closest «nd most trusted collnborrtor of Or»witz? In 193?
through * purely inner office-tr-nsfcr in the SS, Poppendick c»rae under
the feich Physiciiws Authority. *ftor his return from tho front ir.

191j 1, Popoendick, in addition to his sain activity as doctor in tho
Sippcnaat, became at tho same time an occasional collaborator of
Grawitz. This p^r-llel activity in several edacities, during which
the work with the fetch Physicians always ro»»inod the least iaportant
of “11 his “ctlvities, continued until 19li5. Even tho Proseoution hrs
grwvtod in its closing brief that tho defendant's activities remained
the s ~ai before and after tho reorganization in 191*3. It thus agrees
with the defendant that despite the title "Chief of the Personal Offico
of the feich Physicians SS *nd Police" PoDoendick's main activity still
took place in the Marriage Bureau of tho SS, «nd tht he ws only in¬
cidentally Grawitz' occasional collaborator. The Prosecutor has said
that the defendant called himself nothing more than Grawitz' messenger
boy, this expression is certainly incorrect. But on tho other hand, one
oanr.ot conclude eisaly from the defendant's rank in the SS that he must
perforce have occupied » le»2ing position in Grawitz' organization. The
defendant owes his rank -nd his promotion only to his -activities in The
F-co »nd Settlement -’In Office, in which w=s appointed lending phy¬
sic! an in 191*1.


11090


17 Jul-¥-lE-3-L-Sfeeh.n
Court So. I.


Nothing proves this aore conclusively then the recosnend-tion
for pro notion, ohr-sed in ex-gger-tions, "hioh Grmritz a-de in 19lili
(*■0-1120, Exhibit 5Ui), in which he states, first of pH, th-t the de¬
fendant joined the S? in 1931, although he re-l’y joined In 1<>32, -nd
in which -Iso he places Pepoendick's activities in The P-ce »nd Settle-
Tflnt in Office in the foreground -nd de>ls ir. hollow phr-scs with
Ponce ndick's -ctivities ’s Director of the Person-1 Office. The Pros¬
ecution theaselves h-ve a-id th»t the -djut-nt ?nd the sccret»ry wen)
.-iven the uniaport-nt work to do - then wh-t work ren-lns for Poppondick
to do, in view of the alight -aount of work there w»a In Grwvitz' at-ff?

Nothing shows better th-n the file notea of the lottors sent
out by Orewitt, in coap-rison to tho respective periods of tiw, how few
offici.l letters were sent out by tho Jfcich Physic! w. One n-y oelievo
*-hc Cefendwit whon he s-ys thrt Gr-witz g-/c hiss this title, "Chief of
tho Person-1 Offico", with tho following wonls:

"I" (Or-witz) "ah-11 continue to hpndle tho sn -11 nnount
of a-il together with ^ secretary. You" (Poppondick) "c-n e o
on -bout your businoas in the P-ce -nd Sottloment tt-in Offl^s.

I juat w-nt to keep thla 'Person-1 Office' so th*t I c-r. use
it in sons w 7 1-tor. But ao th-t this offico la not t-ken

T "” 7 I h-vo to h-vo soneonc to whoa I c.n give this

title."

The secret-ry -a woU -a the -djut-nt were with Gr»witz -11 dry,
while Poppondick in gener-1 continued to work -t the M-rringe Office.

If Popoendick h=d re-lly been the close -nd confidonti-1 -ssoc-
1’te of Grnwitz -nd even, toget-V r with Gebherdt -nd Wrugowsky, s the
Prosecution -lieges, one of Gr-witz' three »>st iaport^t -ssoci-tes,

-hor. wjy did Gr-witz a»ke hia a I*-ding Physician in the P.-ce -nd Settle-
aent H-in Office -t -11, -lthcugh Gr-witz knew very well th-t then ho
"ould not h-vr Popoendick working for hia -ny aore? Why did Gr-witz in
:*::2 c»ll Dr. Wile b-ck fren the field for the rost of Chief of St-ff
* hich he intended to set on, although Pbnocndick w=s in Geramy -nd it


11091


17 Jul-fc-*-3-5~M:chsn

Cent t Sc. I.

cert'Inly would not have been difficult for Grvwits to have Poppendick
released from his work with the Marriage Office of the SS? Why did
jr«witz only assign one clerk to hia md the office of the Chief Dentist
together, if Poppendick w«s really Gr?witx' closest *nd tost confidential
■asoci »te?

nhy did Poopendick not represent Grawitz whenever he went on an
official trip or on leave? Why did he not «»ke Poppendick his adjutant;
then he wjuld have had his alleged closest >nd post confidential assoc¬
iate with hia d-ily.

"hy did Grawitz give Poppendick no goner-’l authority to issue
regulations or orders, which would have been binding on coordinate or
subordinate offices? Why was this supposed post confidential associate
only in a concentration c-ap for one hour once during the war?

Why did Pot>oendick never -ccon^^ny the Jfcich Physician on of¬
ficial trios?

I could go on with these questions indefinitely, in ordor to

• 4 4

lo-d the idea of the Prosecution, whiefr is not attested by a single
document, ad ebsurdua. One would imagine, in the closest and most con¬
fidential associate of Grawits a different oosition from the ono which
Poppendick held «s occasional worker for Gr*iritz.

In no case, however, did the nofondwit Poppendick - and herewith
I come back briefly to the questions on Counts II and III of the Indict¬
ment - hold • position under Grnritz such that he could have prevented
oxperi^nts which Hla-ler, for ex’-asle, ranted to cany out, if ho had
learned of them in time.

If the ‘ribunal In Cago II considers it i”sx>sslble that - nan
like Field Marshal Milch had the power to prevent experiments of Luft¬
waffe ?«dic*l officers, if he had had knowledge of these experiments in
time, how then cc cne conceive the idea that xi occasional associate of
Gr-witz, who worked in Grawitz' office only now and then, could h-v> h-d
influence cn the execution or non-execution of ~ny experiments which were
ordered? The various descriptions of Gnwitz’ chapter »11 agree on one
ooint — that Gr-ritz didn't ’Ho* anybody tc strike » bargain with him.


11092


17 Jul-'t-lff-S-^-Hwh-n
Court Xo. I.

fcreaost for fe«r of Hlaaler for whoa he cherished »* dog-like loyalty
(The obedient dog retrieves the h»re.") Tid th»t not one of Gr=wits'
coll»bcr*tora succeeded to obt»in ven » ainor confidential position
which he could h»ve used to exercise * sdtig»ting influence on the
course of events. At the end of ey tri»l brief I went into th^t


11093


17 July-f-KJ-9-l-Cook (Lea)
Court 1


\4iole ccnple* at great length; I therefore can content syself with
that short reference.

Vitkin the frecework of Count X-. IT the seebershlp of an organisa¬
tion declared criminal by the International Military Tribunal io
not decisive alcne, but, according to correct legalistic viow,
the additional re^uirecent oust exist that every individual ac¬
cused waiter khereef rest hove had know.'odge of or oust havo parti¬
cipated xn orinc.fi ccnuiUM >y this organization after 1939. It
is tho task of the Prosecu;ion to prove their allegations (cf. ny
logel stntoccr.ts in ry Closing Brief). Tho Prosocution certainly
has tdeen on this task in our proceedings and they have trlod to
provo that tho defendant had knowledge of certain crlsind expo^-
isonts. Aa far as I have stated cy point up to now concerning tho
quostion of knowledge of crl^insl cjporieonts, I havo olrocdy doriLt
with it asfar as it cocoerr.c tho defondant Poppondick, I may, hov-
e70r, stats one© again that tho horeono end PoiygdL oaperiaouts cro
to bo disnissod as noa-crininal 'roc the vory start, in tho sonso
of tho indlotaent, and that it could not be provod that tho dofondant
had ay laoulodg* whatsoever of criminal storllczatloa, typhus, ncr-
loria, 60a water and opidecic Jaundice oxporuronts, oven if ono ro-
vio\fi the evidence oubnitted with on utterlycritiool oyo; that fui'-
thoraorc tho krewlodge of lnsta&ery brab, sulfonic id, phlogaono
and fee- sing -'xperlctjnts could net ’jo provod by the Prosocution bt*-
yond the shadow of rean enable doult.

Part 1 culaTljr with a vi«“ to tho exporicents nosed just now it i/ill
bo left to tho judgment of tho Tribunal whether or not a knowlodgo
on tho uort cf the de< irdant Pcppendick of these oxperlBents car.
bo deduced, beyond certain boguo assumptions and without tho firn
basis of undisuutabie facts, once ono has arrived at the conclusion
that those lest ncsod experinonts havo really been crininiL


11C9U


17 Jul^:-W-9-2-Coor (Lea)

Coart 1

Should the Tribunal be convinced that the evidence submitted
la sufficient to deco the defendant guilty under Count Ho. IT, thon
I third: it advisable to refer to oy written statements about the
scope of tho punlshBeot to bo noted out. She judgment of the Intorv
actioad :Hlitary Tribunal has given a certain guidance for future
proceedings agedast coshers of circinal organirations concerning
tho aeosuro of puaishaent. I quote;

■Che Tribunal recomends that tho punishaent nctod cut to
naabors of on orgiizatlon doclarod criminal by the Tribunal
on tho basis of Low Ho. 10 should in no coso bo higher thon
stipulated by tho Denazification Low for tho daorican Zone,
'Jobody Is to bo punished according to both laws."
at. over-oil regulation of tho problee even by procedont, has not
boon node yot in tho ^roricoa Zono, whilst in tho Eritioh Zono it
haaboon regulated by lowin the seaoo of the rocosaandotion quotod
abovs. This Hoaoroblo Tribunal will then bo tho first of tho Mili¬
tary Tribunal in Hurnborg to Judge acobors of crininal orgonizationo
and thoroby crooto n procodont for futuro casos.

If ct tho conclusion of sy spooch which brlofly suacorizod tho
rosult of tho ovidouco ogainst tho defondant Poppondiclc I nay turn
to tho Tribunal I do to-only with tho knowlodgo that tho High Tri¬
bunal uill carefully scrutinize the evidence which has so assidouoly
been curuiittod end will decido about guUt or innocence of tho ce-
cusod without favor.

In this sense I plead for a Just Jud^sent of the defondant

Helcut Po ’pendick whoc I represent.

ZH2 732SI23T: The Tribunal will now ho a r froa counsel for tho

defoadant, Bose?

FRITZ; For the defendant Sose;

Hr. President, Tour Eonors:


11095


17 Jaly-i^HJ-e-S-Cook (Lea)

Court 1

In ny opaiing address, which I bad tho honor to deliver before
you on GO J®ary 1947, I did express the hope, that the evidence
night .-.rovo that the defendant Lose neither took n part in the plex>-
ning nor in the porfomoice of the nedical experinents which aro uft-
dor indictnent. Sow after die closing of evidence* you. Your Honorp,
will have to cucine and to decido whether ay hope has been fulfilled.
Boforo you retire to consider the vordidt, 1 wish to say to you that
I do not think I was wrong in tho conviction then exprossed, cud
t&at for tho following reasons:

1) As far os tho allegation is concornod that ny client took
part la a conspiracy for tho cccaitol of war crinoo and crineo
ngoinat hicanity, I hevo explained In the closing brief which I
subsisted on behalf of tho dofondant Roso, why ay client could not
havo hai a prxt in such conspiracy for roacno of law and of facto.

Concerting tho aootins of tho consulting physicians which
Mr. nc Haney considers a* typical noetings of conspirators, I did
wrlto:

Tho participation of tho defendant SDSS hicsolf at the consultant
conferences is shown clearly in his printod locturos lying boforo
us and hie ritarks during the discussions ot theso conferoncoo. 7vm
thcx: it Is quite clear that the activity of tho dofondant ROSS at
thoco c inf or one es was purely scientific and in no wry objcctionnlbo.

To this oust be aided that, aftor DISC'S locturo at tho third
consultants conference in tho year 1943. in which tho latter report¬
ed concerning his experiaentoon Quoin beings in the concentration
c:cp of Suchenvold, Professor ROSS protested publicly against tho
undertaking of ush oxpericcnts, co fact which I shall have to go into
nore closely later on. This uncontest&i fact is not in any way in
keeping with the behaviour of a ccnspiartor.

rurtherr.ore the lecture which the defendant 3D3S delivered or.

17 Pobruagy 194*1 - in wartime therefore - in Switzerland to tho

11C96


17 JbM X J-S-^-Cc oit-Lec
Court 1


nolicri association at 3aale spooks again«t his participation in
the alleged conspiracy. In this loctnro ha reported not only con¬
cerning lila own JET - research, but discussed also, aaong other
things, the typhus exporinents carried out on huu&n beings in 3uch-
ecuold by Ding. This locturo, which cause* a stir in nodical circlos
abroad, both in naxtral and hostile countriea, add c further looturo
on the actao subject, which ho delivered in Turkey in the succor of
194-*1 - also in war tine - ore the beat proof that Professor BOSD
■■•'as cluing In his work at holplng the whole of nan kind - without
distinction botwoonfriond or oncoy - in the coabnting of epidaiics.
3ius for inatcr.ee the utfjuecript of his 3aelo locture wus iuuodiato-
ly, with his consent, put by tho Swiss at tho disposal of the inter¬
national Rod Cross and, through this, at the dispoeal of the nodical
servico of tho allies, so that the experiences nontionod in it on-
countorod in ccoboting typhus end nolaria should bonefit all without
distinction. Hero it is clearly shown that Professor J0SZ octod,
not as n conspirator, but as a froe doctor and scontist, which ni^it
nluost lutvc led to crisinol procoodlngs being instituted cgalnst hin
for treason.

it all events it is seen both free uy previous dctailod nrgu-
nonts ns ciso free those which I still hove to dolivor whon spooking
of tho nelnrin and typhus exporlconts, that tho defendant B0S2 in no
ccso belonged to the plotters. But oao who is sold to bolong to tho
group of conspirators mist surely have a shoro In the plot. Tor in
tho coso of conspiracy surely only he should ontwor fully for tho
actions of others vfco - even if only in a subordinate position —
has id:an part in the fenegtion of tho plot. Tran this, hovevor,
it oust be concluded that Soever does not tako part at all in tho
Shying cf a cosoa plan, cm also not boar full rosponiability for
-Act others have done. Thus if proof is lacking that eoneone has


11097


17 JuliM:-*CJ-9-5-Cook- Lea

Ciurt 1

tciccn part in a ccccon planning, thee too it cennrt bo established
either that he had a share in the alleged conspiracy. Tor thoro cust
bo a licit to collective responsibility. I an of the opinion
that the ccccon plan Just forou. this Unit-Whoever does not belong
to the planners does cot belong iithor to the group of conspirators.

Tho Prosocutlon vents to hold cy client responsible for tho
nclc.ria oaporicents of Ur. Schilling in Dachau. My point ie pri¬
marily that you, Tour Honors, for technical reasons alone aro un-
cblo to oxmihs all of the esscntiol cetorid.

Xn tho indictment no charges to this effect ore roisod ogninet
Profoosor Soso. Ee has not been indicted at all for this nottor.

It is not onough for the Prosocution to hove undo an oral accusation
againet cy client in the course of the triii. Only a new indlotucmt
c-rald fom the basis for a netoridl doolsion. In tho event tho High
Tribune! should not btliovo this phase of tho lav, I shall in uy
clooiivc brief turn to tho question as to whether the sppplyinc of
tho sonars for tropical diseases constituted a participation in thio
rosoarch. I novo <oong other things stated:

Tho Tribunal will havo to docido whether theoo abovo mentioned
ectivitios of the D< 5 >artnent of Tropicjl Diseases of the Robort
Zoch Instituto undor the manage. -nt cf tho defendant BOSS or his own
ectivitios conetituto participation in the meaning of the Ponri Code
ir. tho accounts of Professor SCHILLING on the part of tho defondant
ROST. In cy opinion this decision con only bo a negative one, for
the following reasons:

The delivery of enteric! necessary for nalaria research such ns
anopheles ojgs and caloric cultures was one of the official duties
of tho Top arte eat for Tropical Diseases of the Hob or*. loch Instituto.
This Department has a section Wiich dealt exclusively with theao
natters. This cua bo seen from both tho yearly reports 6f the Hebert

11093


17 July-h-ViJ-^-fr-Cook- Lea

Court 1

loch Institute.and free the report covering the third conference Has?
of consulting specialists discussing work projects, (dritter Arbcit-
ategung Ost der 3eratenden Pacharste). Delivcrisos of this kind ore
internationally cotxson practice and were never denied by tho defen¬
dant POSE,. It is elao cocaoa practice to uso the organs of hue on
corieoa for the carrying out of acitwfific resoorch. *ho supposition
for such deliveries aro, that they are requested either by woll known
institutes or by renounced roseorch scientists. It cannot bo doniCSd
that SCHI1LUG, a co-workor of Robert Koch and a uoubor of tho nrl-
nrla cctuiission of the looguo of Rations, was fanous as a ualaria
rosonrch ociontist. In a c^so of this kind tho non-dollvory of Duch
nr.torirl vculd hove boos an express violation of traditional practice
and of official duty. It Is also not international usago for tho
ordoror to bo quootionod qbout tho intondod use of tho notorial bo-
foro its delivery.

Concoming tho quostion as to vhother ny client shculd hnvo
cortain nlsgivings to giro tho natoriol to Schilling, I state that
tho defendant Soso hicsclf is a well known nol .ria rosoorch sciontiot.
Kolaria rccoerch was tho aoir. study of hio dopartuont at tho Robort
Zoch Institute in 3orlin and also later in Pfafforodo. Professor Rooo
tic nn oiqicrioncod oalario ociontist know of courso that this foru
of nriuria is not a dangerous ono and that no coaplicutions aro to
be crpcctod fr<xi it.

■I fomed the opinion that tno experimental work carriod out by
Dr. SCIULLnC- *ns in rathor a different category from tho majority
of experiments which have been describod in tho trials at Sumborg
nod elsciiiorc. It tqntars that this investigations wore carriod out
carefully and with a reasonable regard to tho safoty of tho subjects.

As ho una working with begign tertian uolaria the allegation that
throe hundred people died in the coerce of tho experiments is obvioue-

11099


17 Jul; -: l-iiJ—3-7-Cook-L ea
Court 1


ly grotesquely untrue. *

-hus, Tour Honors, the fanous Zctocologiat, Professor Hoanoth
Kollonby at the Jaoous Hygiene Tropical Inltitute in London wroto
no a letter dated 9 July 1947 after the close ef tho cvidor.ce. He
ste, ad in BlAberg a week during this tricl. Hoso» s spociol field
is, as you know, solaria research, end regarding it's concept and
aothod of research, Z said in ay closing nridf that Hose porto nrlly
was tho irototype of a worker abovo reproach in tho field of uelario
rosoosoh end with regard to his car for the woll-boing of his nolavia
pctio.-.tc, os shown by the investigations undertaken by tho coupotant
^erican aithoritios. He risked his own lifo, in order to assure
tho orderly handing over of his kalaria Research Institute in Pfaff-
erodo to tho Americans - and also to insuro ointinuod regular ocro
and nodical treotasnt for his patients. It would bo cc^plotoly incou-
prohondblo if such 0 oan were to bo nolo responsible for tho tochni-
cen orrors aid negligence of onothor who wasnot ovon under his in-
fluonce.


11103


17 Lea

Court .1

Is the ladictaont ay client it charged with responsibility for
tho typhus axperlnents of Professor Eacgen and with participation
in the;.

In ordor to reach a decision concerning tho question whothor c
punishable behavior on the part of the defendant Soso is eetublished,
tho court will have to cxoilae the following;, •

1) ttiether Professor Bose, in his capacity as consulting
hygionist with the Medicd In^oction of the Luftwaffe, hoi ony
can;ending authority or the right and obligation of supervision at
oil over Professor A^en Eagon, at tho Dhivorsity of Strasbourg
end

2 ) liothor thedefoedont Hoso was a participant in tho oaporl-
n«uts idth tophus vaccine conductod by Ha^cn in tho concentration
crCiS at tfctzveller and Schiruock in a penally rdcv.-ct foro, in
tixich coso it ccsj bo loft cocplotoly undocidod whothor flc-igcn hii>-
oolf liablo to punishuont or not,

Ir. :sy closing brief cad in ay written reply to tho closing
brief of tho Prosocution I havo oxxulned this question carefully and
cspocially In regard to tho oxchango of corrospoadonco botwoon Ha.gon
end Soso. 3occuso of tho lock of tiuo it is co^jlotoly innossiblo
within tho fraio work of this plea toaqploin thoso difficult quon-
tions, I, thoroforo, resist free doing so but shell at loast nev
thit.

Ir. ny opinion it is absolutely lcpoosiblo, according to tho ovi-
donco subuitted in this diroctlon, to orrivo in our trial at a do-
cision -iiich would elinicate all mistakes. questions under cx^-

e

aination vhich wero cuisod by the gctunl pourse of events as well
ns by their connection with cedicl problem, ore bo cocpllcatod
that at Shis juncture they simply cannot bo docidod by aedicjlly
untrainod jurists without the expert opinion of a suitablc^iad nox>-


moi


17 Lea

Court 1


pcrtlson nodicd export. It ii regretted that such an export opinion
is sot available. One cannot take the responsibility for punishing
n nan like Bose who had so vaguo a relationship to Ha.goa, before
la c trial egeinet Professor Kaagan the question has been docidod
whether tho latter oinsfclf had ado himself puaishoble.

Pinnlly, ny client is node responsible in the Indictaoat for
typhus experiments in the Concentration Cacp Buchcnwald and is
charged with participation in these experiments.

IXiring the verbal proceedings tho Prosocution hasuado the fol¬
lowing assertions in this connection: •

On 29 Doctcber 1911 Profossor Rose took port In tho conforonco
at tho ministry of tho Intorior during which the anttor of the
carrying out of tho experinents for tho purpose of tooting tho ef¬
fectiveness of typhus vaccine was docidod. In ordor to substantiate
thio assertion, tho Prosecution referred to the affidavit of tho JCapo
(erupt pollcearn) arthur Liotzech, datod 36 Doc arbor 1946, who of
course did not take part in this ccnferonco and who is now, after
five roars, repeating what ho oleins to have heard at thatitiuo.

In this connection tho following it to bo said!

1) Pirst of all. Professor Rote has, durirg Ills direct tnr-
tfiiactiin vehcnontly doaiod that he ever took part in ouch a con¬
foronco or that he ever heard of it before tho end of tho war.

2) In the report on this conference, writton by kiniotoriolrrlt
Biobor, thoso who attended are listed. Professor Rose, howovor io
not ruong thee,

3) In the entry of 29 Decomb or 1941 in Ding*s diary, which
deals with this conference and lists the participants, Profossor
Rose* s nrue is missing.

4) Neither does Professor Reiter, of wfccci tho defense as veil
is the prosecution submitted un affidavit, mention the defendant


111X2


\


17 Jul^-fcJ-ltXJ-Gros®- lea
Court 1


2 ose in this connection.

Zr.oao chore uaationod facta alone ore entirely sufficient to
rcfuto the contradictory assertions of Capo Dietssch.

2:e Prosecution furthermore oleins "that through the defendant
aoso the Sobcrt-Ioch-Institute delivered she bacilli" with which
part of the parses to be exporinonted on in Buckonvold wore lnfodtcd.
Ihis stater:eat was node aftertho entry on 26 January 1943 fron Diners
diary had boon rood out. In his affidavit of 26 Docccber 1946 tho
Zips Arthur Dletzseh also cl gins under figure 5 that tho act oriel
for lnfoctlon hod coco froc tho Hobert-loch-Institute in 3erlin.

But neither the above n<nttoned note in Bing's Diary nor Dietxsch
state that tho anterid for Infection vaedollverod through tho de¬
fendant Hose, jkM is veil known, tho typhus department of tho Box'¬
ll &-Kod>-Insti tut e, it cen only have botn dor.o through Prof os cor
aildaiolstor, ospoctally slnco Dr. Ding fortorly rocolvod his trail¬
ing in the typhus department and not in tho doparkiont for tropical
aodicino of the Hobert-Iocb-Inslitute. If tho Prosocutlon links
profossor Roto with this, then vo havchoro merely a statement for
tho corroctnoss of which no proff has boon submitted and tho 1 fl¬
oor octnoea of Wilch already is rovoalod by tho fact that in hio
department Professor Hose did not havo any typhus virus at all.

On account of Professor Hose's ono and only visit on 17 March
1942 to the Doportaont for Typhus and Tirus rodoarch in Buchonwald,
the Prosecution nsde statements which u. o as incorrect os they aro
unproved. 3ius tho Prosecution claimed first of dl that Professor
a>so node this visit in his capacity of originator of the plans for
tho exiOrlnaats, The real roason for this visit, howevor, is rovoalod
by the tostiii ny given by Professor Hose himself. Ho occe^tod on
invitr.tic:: Oild<meiatcr h_d commanded in order to dispel tho senylos
Hose h.-d in regard to the experiments whi ch till then wore carriod out
on volunteers. Tho Prosecution's furthor assertion that durian this
visit Professor Hose took part in tho infection of parsons to be


11103


17 l&-4-Gros8 (lea)

Ccure l*o. 1

esqjorimcnted os, is Incorrect dso. In reality this one and only
ri*it took place as the entries in Sins'■ diary reveal beyfed n
doubt, on Kerch 1943, Is the middle of the process of carrying out
tho esjioriuajts, at a tine when all persons to bo experimented on had
fever already, *Aile the infections had boon carried out as early ns
the period between 6 January and 3 Kurch 1942.

If Profossor Hose hnd really participated in these infections,
his oco cad only visit to buchenvald could never have caused in him
tho rcrxtiou it did, for, as zanerous testimonials and affidavits hnvo
provod beyond a doubt and as by the •. tho Prosocutlon, too, has
admitted this visit la accordance with his basic convictions partnining
to this prdbla: uleo expressed olsewiere, cousod him to protost not
oal; to the Seich Health Leader Dr. Conti, and to President GUdcuoietor,
but .-loo before a lor*© circle, that is publlcl;, during tho third
convention of sedicol consul tins specialists in Hay 1943, 4V,Qlnst tho
eerryiag out of the typhus experiments in Suchonwold. ' Ho novor Coniod
this visit to Aichenwold, since exactly this visit was tho starting
point for hie efforts to abolish experiments on human beings as a
basic c-ittMtioa for the approved use of the vacclr.o.

•

Those protests play an important part in Ju’ ;iug tho Prosocu-

tion'o accusation oglnst Professor Hose that for the carrying out of

r. sorios of o>po rim cuts in Aicheavald ho is supposed to hove put

nt tho disposal of Dr. Ding typhus voccino, produced according to

•

the oroceso discovered by Coabicscu and Zotta (tho so coiled
Bukarcr.t vaccine). To prove this assertion the Prosecution first
of all roots its accusation on the entry from 19 ia^ust 1942
to So?tother 1942 in Ding's diary, in which it is stated otoeg

othor things that this vaccine had btc made available by Profos-.or
Hose ’ho in turn h_d received it f ran n:.val physician Professor Hugo
of Sadmrest. In this connection the Prosecution furthermore intro-

HIO^


17 July^i I-iU-l C- 5-G ro s B-Le a
Court 1


disced a lefctor, d-ted 16 H<y 1942, free krugowsxy to Bos* in which
Profos'or Hoao is asked to send the vaccine. Tho rest of tho letter
rovods that this related to typhus lung varcino. Therefore it can
no csssrial that the staples of the Bukarost vaccine woro tieunt, 2he
Nearest vaccine is a vaccine produced froa the lungs of dogs. It
is true that at first sight the contents of this lotter, in connec¬
tion vita the above uentionod entries in Wag's diary seal to Jus¬
tify the Prosecution's statement. * closor exanination of the facts,
however, t £owe that conclusive oroof of tho accusation that Professor
Roso undo available the Bukarest vaccine for tho 'uipooo of tosting
it on hx&cn boings in Buchenvold, ccnnot bo considered aa having
boon established. «e I nontioned beforo, it canr.ot be ignorod that
as loto as Key 1943. that is ono year after ho hod received »nigw
eky'n lot: or of 16 Key 1942 and about half a year after tho sorios of
c^joriuents with the Bukarost vaccine had boon carried out in Buchon-
vfcli, Professor Hose protested at the convention of tho consulting
cnodinlists against tho carrying out of thoso oxporiuonts. o did
so ir-jodlctoly aftor Dr. Ding had, at this convention, dolivorod
his lccturo or. tho rosults of his caporincnts carried cut in Buch-
onvald, including those with Bukarost veccino. nod Professor Soso
really undo available tho Bukarost vcccino, thon it con bo assumed
aluost with certainty th<t Dr. ^ing Oio was known to be very angry,
would, in answering tho protests, havo rmonstrntod Profossor Bono
with having hincelf (Bose) put tho Bukarost vaccine at this disposal.
But nothing of tho sort htsponod. ¥o know froc witness logon that
for days aftor ho hod returned to Buchcnwdd, Dr. Ding occupied hia-
salf with Professor Bose's protest. To this witness he oxprossod
his aager about Professor Soso in very drastic words and told hia
that at tho revisory convention there raaainod nothing for hin to
do but to defend hinsolf by stating that a -top secret* natter vns
Involved and that he hoi node it clear to Proffossor Bose that thoro


11105


17 v—0-6-0no b 5 (Lea)
Ccurt 1


existod field* of activities which even Professor Hose would have
to hold in respect. It tecs obvious that he would have told the
witnoas Sogon that hs could not understand what was the natter with
Profes or Eoao since Hose hie self had put the 3ukoro*t vaccico at
Jos do^psn;/ Hut Ding reported on the testing of tho ftikarost
vaccine not only to the 3rd edvisory convention but also in his
publication in the cago*ine for hygiene. Here, too, he failod to
ner.tion Professor Hose's ubs. On a foot note, however, he oxprooD-
ly reforred to his cooperation with Profoe^or Gildasojstor.

iftor oil this I on of the opinion that the Prosecution's
s tat scent that Professor Hcse put tho Bukarest vaccine at disposal
for tosts in th* series of experiaents in Buchonwnld has not boon
provod.

z-.o incidents discussod Just now which oro connocted with tho
tostioc of the Bukarest vaccino happonod in 1942. But the war con¬
tinued an: it exnctod ovory dey and on all fronts, froof riond and
foo ns uoll as at bono, aany thousjhds of hucan llvos, o*y of th«n
os victiDs of a typhus epldcoic, tho existence of which was oduitt-
od by tho Prosecution. It is a historical fact thit for thousands
of years opidaiics, and especially typhds, have ployed a devastating
part in tho life of nations.

iftor the langor of typhus hjd alrouly beun a serious problon
during tho world war of 1914/18, a cat as trophy of unprocodentod
proportions occurred in Hussia afterwards.


121C6


17 July-v-.-GJU-l-L J -aird-(Lca)-
Cfart 1

Professor WASSEVUCH ustimtcs that Jurin. 1910 - 21, 25 t
30 iillicn bco-ck. typhus ccsualitics of which 21/2 to 3 aillicn died.

0

During this trial, not only ay client, but also other persons well
equipped with expert expert knowledge have consented on the catastro¬
phic typhus situation during the last war. In this connection it
aight suffice to refer to a letter, dated 3 lebroary 1912, froa the
president of the «eg .onal Labor office of hest halls, according to
which until shortly before the date of the letter about 15,OCX)

Russian prisoners of oar died of typhus eve ry day .

It stands to reason that in view of this catastrophic typhus
situation the Responsible authorities tried by all aeons to increase^
t-.e production of vaccine. It was clear that it would be impossible
to produce by the <elgl process in sufficient 'quantities the vaccine
obtained froa the intestines of lice, which is known an^ recognized os
bein' effectivo. The defendant RGSL has clearly described the difficul¬
ties of its production. In this situation, that is la September 1913,
ROSE was concissioned by the brigadier general SCKRLIBL?. to go to
Copenhagen and to try to enlist the Statens • Serua Institute thero
in the production of typhus vaccine. There he case to know the 1. SEN
xurino typhus won fro* the liver of nice which, according to Professor
IfSEN, was not only far nore effective than ail hitherto known
vaccine, but which also could produced aoro easily in larger quantities
Prefossor BOLE did not succeed in inducing the Statens-Serun Institute
t? produce typhus vaccine froa lice, hut everybody will approve it,
after his return froc Copenhagen, he considered it his obvious duty to
infora the experts in Gernany of the knowledge which ho had -ained
on this trip about iPSEd's vaccine which so far had boen unknown in
Gernany. .-a did so in his report on hia ais3ion dated 29 Septenber
1?L3. Convinc'd of the correctness of the explanations ^iven hia in
Copenhagen and in view of the enoraoua nusber of victias dyim; of
typhus every day, ROIE asked _?. : J3CN5KI on 2 December 191*3 whether


U107


17 Jul7-t:-GJ-ll-2-Leonard-(Lea)-
Ccurt 1

there still existed a possibility of testing the vaccine ir.

Huclun—ld»

ks it can be clearly seen from the earlier nentioned report
on his official trip. Professor HttE tried to get no less than six
different departments interested in the Ipsen vaccine. Therefore it
at r ears credible that, until docunent HO-1156 was submitted to hits,
he to longer remembered havin' written in this natter also to *rtUuOTiKY
directly. The prosecution reproached Hose and said that he should have
reaer.bored an act of such importance as tho sending of this letter to
UKUC.ibKT. 3y that it wanted to und. raine the credibility of ay client,
however, t-.o prosecution forgets in this connection that rofossor
RC6 7 ccnc._-ncd hiastlf with tho necessity of testing this vaccine when
already drafting his report on his official trip of 29 September 19^3.
The facts that the name JjraXTSKl is not boing mentioned in this
r-port on his official trip, and that ha, P.OS*., nuver learned
about the testing of the Copenhagen vaccine in tho Tuchcnwald aories
of otperieents and about tho result of hxs test, nay be the reason
for the assumption, before the letter to Cr&lO.Vrl was submitted to him
not to hove realized the idea which he nay have bad before, naaoly to
contact also *iUOOon account of this vaccine.

However, aft-r this docuo^nt has been sutcitted, it is to be
assumed that this inquiry -.fas finally the reason for the order of
the *‘eich physician Sb OfttfXTl to test Copenhagen vaccine for its
effect or. human beings in the "uchenwald wxperia.ntal scries, without
?.C6h par*, aipating any more la the conferences and docisiors concer¬
ning this aattvr. It is not fcnewn which other departments were also
connected with this aatt-r end whether the vaccine which HOST-, had in
possession *03 used at all. Professor ROSE hiias-lf does not reaenb. r
to having supplied the 55 with any of this vaccine and the witness
“LOCK, who distributed the vaccine tests to tho individual departments,
does also not kn.~c anythin- about it. D: OESKO says that even the
usntity ;iv_r. ~~o EC5r war small. Therefore, it remains doubtful, whetfc


11108


17 July-, i-0J-ll-3-locaard - ( Lea ) -
Court 1.


the race in*, which was later used in Buchcnaala on the experimental
series for the testing of th_ Copenhagen vaccine cam- froc BOS" at all.

ih-n judging RCSL's inquiry froc UHijOrtSKi, one has first of all
to consider, that BC6E was always convinced that the prison-rs which
w-re assigned for the carrying out of these oxp-ria-nts in Buchenwald
rere exclusively criminals rtio were legally s.ntenc-d to death. This
was assured to nia not only by GIUSBffISTe?. and CO'fTI, but this
assurance was also especially given by Dr. Ding during the third meeting
of the consulting physicians in i*ay 19113, after RCST. protested, during
tr<- ajvting, afloat the carrying out of ocp-riaenta on human beings
in auchenwald. One reason for the fact that Rose did not d ubt the
correctness of thes. explanations was, that during his visit in
Buch-nwald, he was told that among the experimental subjects w„ro two
prisav.ro from the prison of Borlin habit, oho suffered typhus
already prior to their b ing sentenced to death.

For the rest, disregarding the above fact entirely, it ia
objectively without doubt that the *cich Criminal Police Selected
and assigned only prison .rs in protective custody and habitual criminals
- that is exclusively arch-criminals - of Ocraan nationality, for the
carrying out of the ocp riaents with the Cop-nhog-n vaccine in
Buch.nwald. ‘his is first of all clearly evident from the document
N0-U96-£xhibit 321.

Professor H- sc as hygienist knew, of course, already at that tim-
that also outside of Germany criminals Kei\. us-d for perilous medical
-xp-riew.ts and the physicians and res<-arcncs participating in th_Ou
exp.ria-nts wcTe not subjected tc legal proceedings. Based on his
research work of many years h_, for instance, did not only know about
th- eXDvria-nts of STSCSG with live plagu. bacilae and his Peri-Beri
exp-rim-nts, but also about other examples from world's lit-raturc.

In addition, in th_ fi_ld of typhus he naturally knew about the
fundamental infection -xp_ria_nts of Yersin in Saigoon, of SERCt-KT and

111C9


1 ? July-i-GJ-ll-aiconard-(I*a}-
Court 1 .

assistants in North „frica, of Lc Ok' 1A and BE . TON' in the USA. In .
addition, he also knew that the protective _ff-ct of typhus vaccin-s
w r- re-tested by BLiHC and SaLTAIARD in harocco and by VilHTDiILLAS
in -lxxco, who reinfected virulent groups. 4 hus, after his personal
point of view was not adopted, frof=3sor ROSL could have no scruples
after all these facts, to tell the departments coscission-d by the
State with th_ carrying-out of such exp-ria-nts about th- possibility
of an increase in the production of vaccines with improved effect.

Here rrofessor ROSE encountered the fact that th- civil depart-
cv.nt, coap-twnt for th- admission and testing of new vaccines in
Germany, did on no account ogre, to admit n-r v7.ee incs during th.
epidemic, if th.y not previously tested on human b-ings.

He tried - and this has boon established without a doubt - to use
his influence against this attitude and to change it. But hu remained
unsuccessful, even though he applied to a wfdc circle of -xp-rts
Th- majority of then surely a;r.ed with his point of view, however, r.o
one of them, including RC6E, had the possibility to dissuade th- really
decisive deportments -s e.g. HZXKLER, ORA ITe, Cu TI and his -Xpert
advisor, GILL:. .\I5»LR, from the decisions th-y had tak-n in this connec¬
tion.

Thus, h- had to put up with the facts. As hygienist cf distinc¬
tion, he regardec .lias-li as partly r-soonsible fro th- combating
of typhus. Ore can not doaaod free him that at that time he should not
have tried to do th- utmost for -very possible progress in ti-e deVclop-
=* nt of typhus vaccin. during this during this catastrophe --hich d.ia-
and-d millions of victims, and this Just because he did not agree
With the testing principles of th- r-aponsibie Gov.me.ntel depart¬
ments. Ia_ inquiry ROSE-s to i-KOGOe'JO: of 2 D.ceab-r 15H3 oust be
judged accordinr to these points of view. Ihis inquiry shows cle3rly
that rrofeS.or RC6I cculd not riv. an orc-r for the cartying-out of such
:n exp.riea_r.tal series in Buch-mcld. It even shows that at that tin-


nun


17 July-L-C-J-U-5-Uoaard-(L;a)-
Court 1

rc was not even informed about tr. position of the typhus exp-riments
In Buchanwald.

If Professor OSS would bar or-itted to point out the possibi¬
lity for an increase of th- t.phus vaccine production which becanh.
knosn to hin, he would have acted against his duties towards the
general .thic. *his onission would not have resulted in o personal
disadvantage for hi*, but in a disadvantage for the bulk of those
endangered by tnyphus. *nus professor RC6E ctcd as r.e did, in ora-r
to protect a great nonb-r of persons of Uertaan foreign nationality *
froc a serious danger.

As clr- :dy st tec, rrofessor ::05E tried repeatedly, .nd hardor
that it could b- -xpectea iron hi.:, to change tn- principle attitude
of his civilian sup.riora. He did not succ.ed in this, because here
he -d no influence on decisions concernin typhus. »ow.v-r, in his
dir-ct aillt&ry spher., he successfully carried by his ndviving
influence and he recat ended and gained the aonisslon of a nuab.r
of vaccines *iich were not t.stcd first on hunan beings.

The action of the defendant ROSE, which car. be s.on froc h*s
sending th. lctt.r of 2 December 1?!»3 to j-.rugowoky, 1 can Judge
leg lly as follows.

Considering the a.r- facts, o.'ly that person can be the perpetra¬
tor of, or accessory to, a punish.:' action who hiaself p.rforas
executive act! as.

I have air.ady deconstrated previously that neither during his

single visit to such.nwald nor during the foil or Lag p.riod of time

did the defendant HCEE p:j icipa^e L the actual execution of the

typhus experinuita in Pucharxsnld.

*

Considering the case subjectively, only h- car. h. p.rp-trator
cr accessory who intends to p_rlor: • deed as his own.

Above 11 , it has been positively proved by his -ttitude, after
had learn-d that experiments of seen a nature Were conducted in


11111


17 Jaly-^-3J-ll-6-teCnard-( D- -) -
Court 1.

coopliunc- with orders by "-o organization of which ho was not a »u±*r,
QOpjly the SS, that thw defendant ROP* did not c.nsent to the typhus
ucp-rin-nts in the Buch-xmld concentration ccap, but that, on the
contrary, he disapproved of «ui, 3, that all the less ha intended the
actions there as such. This declining attitude is furth.mor- shown in
his behaviour after his single visit to 3uch.nwr.ld and after Lr. DLiC'a

report on the third Deliberate luting in -ay 19li3.

According to the forgoing independent or accessory action
of the defendant RCS& as regards the typhus cxp.riaents in Buch-nwuld
is to be eliainated.

H. retains to be examined as an abettor or lM inq perso n,
r iAt of all, ns far as abetment is cone. rn.d, in my opinion
the inlluv.nc. upon the will of t: p-rpetrator, e.ft. in Iona of a
d.sJ r. or a ration or a k* t*, can b- considered as such, how¬
ever, If th.


■


13132


17 July 47_H_MSn_12_l->:eehpn
Court I


perpetrator hM decided positively already to co=it a c ertain deed,

It lo no longer possible to Influence his will In this way rjid thereby
It Is impossible to induce ue perpetrator to conoit tho crime.

A- to the pro-=edltated Intention of tho abettcr 9 It Is required
that ho also nctual’y prcmedia.tcd all essential characteristic features
of tho pu"lthablo action.

In case tho crip© cc=nitt*d does not conform to.^tho one which the
hotter prc_sodltated, tho abettor dolus Is lacking.

*or tho case of the defendant BCSi it ensues In this Instance that
ho did rv't co an It a deliberate ar.d nu-lshablo abetment through his lot-
tor to MEltr-CVSIT of 2 December 1943. lor at that tico In Buchonwald
the experiment scries for tcstlrv r cl* typhus vacclrcs had been In opera¬
tion since alstfot two years, and al*, mc-son« conccrnod with the plann¬
ing and execution of these experiments wore firmly decided, prior to
tho tiso when tho letter had been nailed to ean&nct tho oxperinont sor-
ioa in the way planned by thee, and. It is true, with tho intontlon to
toot all typhus vaccines r- rui as to their pr'-toctivo offoct which had
not yot boon adoquntcly tested. Jx ;rthcrooro ; the defendant ROSi cculd
not know that tho per on ns uoed f«r those experiaents wero n*t oxclusi-
voly criminals who had been legally rontonccd to death and vh" h-d ro-
perto^ voluntarily. I shall explain this in dota.il in another p-sargo.

litLllaCi it remain® to bo examined whether he knowingly aide d in the
execution of the typhus experiments in Bcchonwnld by nailing his letter
of 2 Dceeabor 1943.

'-‘here 1 , no d-ubt that, It lo tr^o- such assistance c»n bo
rondored by psychical scans, e.r. living PT . rdvico. But for the
purpose of fulfilling the requirements '•f the CXlstencO of tho stato
-f affairs of punishab le nrslstar.co It Is necessary that the assistant
in C'BO v»y psych “logically Influence th© perpetrator in the sonsc of
inducing tho perpetrat'r tr o“r=f the crime, in which lnstanco It nay
: - iffice if thereby the last checks and rbjccti ns pre eliminated. But


11133


1? * r u'y 47.JC_MSZL_i2-2JJ.iehe.. (7r* Cat-,)

Court I

-his result i« the einima which ii to be deeanded of the psychical
influence of the assistant, to be ablo to speak of assistance in the
critical sense. .

Beycnd the*, the deliberate rendarlni: of pg3l-tBr.ee talet he in connec¬
tion with the concrete deed which was coasitted. If the perpetrator
actually comit# another deed than that pre-cedltated by the aiding
perion, the way of acting of the aiding person lo not punishable.

Aa I have already cxpMsed in dotall when erasing tho question
of pbeteent, that the typhue experiuo-.'. serieo in Sucheavald had been
in operation for a long tixe and the persons concerned vith the
execution of these experiments had boon flrrly decided to conduct oaso
until such a tine as the result at which thoy woro sizing had boon
achieved. So, the letter 0/ the defendant 30SE was not fit in any way
to ha”c a psychologically influencing resit.

Moreover, it chowod pru-eediation as to a deed other than tho
ono actually ©omitted, nanoly tho execution of nodical experiments
on hucan tolngs by utilizing criminals lorally eontonced to death, who
had reported voluntarily. Thus, whon sailing hie letter to KHl’C-CWSKY
ho did ixt do so under full realisation of the unlawfulnoos of those
ixporisonts cn human beings. Ee le hot guilty of a eubjoctivo guilt
and there foro ho is not guilty cf py.lafr/ifrloela‘.dace.

Thus, on thotasls of the lejal detailed cxplantfions Just erdo, I
coso to the conclusion t hat the dc r « — HOSE has participated in tho
cxocution-cf tho typhus ©xperimente in the 3uchcn*ald concentration
corp asllhcr r s‘"eI oTj. rs r gfi.a£clt^r> j?r ». tu.air.taai. 7urthor-
torc, that he c-r&iclpaic l.vthc plaani.v: :i sitrr. raid the*, ho

ild sot tfen. mprsvfi_pf. *.hr ti.-a thrrjA-lhr 5C« of 'tt.cL hft

~-t area a. soaker.

So the crc-rccuisites ee listed under A r ticlc II, per. 2 of the
--“trol Council Lew jo. 10 are 'ackinr, which sh-uld to existing if the
‘cfor.dant SCSI wore to he ccnside-rd as guilty.

In the case that tho Tribunal is not going to share my local conccp-


mill


17 July 47JUtSILl?_3-J(echan (Zatx)
Court I


tier which I explained ju*t cow, and steiuld answer the question of
participating of the defendant HCSZ la the typhus experiments In the
Bucheewald Concentration Carp In a crlsinally relevant fora In tho
affirmative, It la furthermore to be examined whether the defendant
HC3I has reasons on his part which elInin*to the culpability of hia
actions or guilt, or both.

Cue suet arrive at thla result if one considers It tote proved
the t the defendant BCS acted in a emergency.

Scuh a escreency exists If there remains no other way than cocrr-
lttinr an action which constitutes the seemingly state of affairs of a
crlslnal action for tho purpcao of protecting a legal value, or to ful¬
fill a duty lep'sed or acknowledged by tho Lew.

In all civilised states the Internal lorlslatl n and Jurisdiction
deal with tho solution of problcas of tho crlslnal law which ariso from
cases of such emergency.

In ny closing brief, I will give a brief comparative) application
of International Iteeestlc or Smorgency Law, together with assumptions
or dotalls, in order to be able to affirm such an ororgoncy. I cono
to the following results:

The principle of recognising an cccrgoncy within the limits
drqvn hor. as a reason for exculpation, which excepts tho person acting
in a state of necessity from puniohmnet, consequently is so firmly
anchored in tho legal consci utnoss of our tlso th"t it must bo accepted
as a generally recognised legal prenciplo of the civilised Nations.

As such it can claim to be recognised in this trial too.

But there is 7 c? a second reeson for this. Recognised Internation¬
al Law accepts the legal concept of 'self proscrvatl-n". Theory and
practice agree that tho Infringement of lari and prohibitions of
Interneti cal Law arc edmiesable when such infringement Is omorfcncy
to P7GT7 actual or. ent danger which threatens the essential values of
life end no oth*r way Is evaileble to recc-rc this danger.

Substantially this Is nothing else tut tho emergency concept of

nil 5


17 July 47_K_X3H.12—4-Moehan (let*)

Court So. I

the dcsettle lev.oxecpt *hat the prerequisites for the oxlstonco of the
right of tclf preservation according to International ~nv aro somewhat
aero lenient then these required for a state of eaerfc&cy according to
Dosestic law.

The ea-ca usually quoted In this connection In lctcrory works refer
elsoat without exception to violations of the rights of territorial
sovereignty of another etato for the purpoac of warding off sono evil
to ono't own nphcrc of legal values. Hovor has it teen asserted, how-
cv»r, that ths case of the rights of self-preservation was restricted
to ouch cases. There l a aorcovcr no Intrinsic reason whatsoever, why
t'-ls right sh^ild not he acsertcd also in tho case Of soso dangorous
opldeslc.

In t v ls respect the right for oolf preservation sours oven noro
Justified, since tho squashing of tho typhus epidcelc In tho further
course cf tho last war was not only In tho lntorcets of G 0 reany hut
also of Gersany's onoalcs, tholr civilian populations, tholr aralco
and especially their prisoners of war in C-ornan cnptlvivy to when
tho epidemic had olr.ady spread end night easily havo sprond further,
thus afflicting the vholo world. Thereforo tho objection - which by
the way Is rcjoctcd also by the expert witness for tho Prosecution, Frof-
cssor IVT, thrt tho neccsoity of war doos not Justify a violation
of rights cannot bo rolaod bore. Focausc after all, fighting this ty¬
phus cpidc-lc was not a war operation In tho Interests of Gornany only,
but it was dlroctcd to check a danger for the whole world which h>d n_
risen during tho war.

The leading aacual of International Law by Gppcnhcla expressly
conflr-s th-t the rlcht of «clf_pr<oervati n Is a^nlsslblc also for tho
Ollnlnatloc of states of emergency caused by forces of nsturo.

It will fare to be cxaninid whether in the er e of defendant SCSI
rll of these prorcoulsltc8 are present In order to h^re to affirm a sta.tc
cf eeerroncy.

I have air. edy pointed out before that during the second half of

11116


17 July 7JLXSH-12^y.eibah (Xat)

Court I

the year 1943 an actual danger to the life and health of Billions of
pocplc in Germany and the i-astern territories urdur C- c rnan occupation
did exist due to typhus. Tfci* fact 1 8 absolutely indisputable and has
already been accepted by the Iribunal, whon the President, on tho
occasl n of tho hearing of Witness 2 * JfcrE * at the sossion of 18 June 1947
declared:

"The 7ribu-al is quite aware that typhus is a very serious and
danrerous disease and constitutes a groat aonaoe to huoanity and
that it was - very gTC»t danger «d nonnee to Oer B my during tho last
war. Vo have repeatedly heard about that and it's not denied."

Hundreds of thousands hare already succuabed to this dooeaso during
tho last w«• up to tho year 1943 as can bo scon sioply from document
SI-8223 - Hose Exhibit 56 already uontirned by no. 1, tho history of
typhus With vfcich defendant HCSk was already familiar of courso at
that tine shews and as ho further knew froa his own cixpcrionco fron
his activity in cosbativ typhus in Astern Asia, there existed at that
time tho danger of a catastrophe of undreast of sngnltudo.

It vss coreover certain *hat tho danger could "Ct bn stossaod by
dolouslng. Vaccinating all ondangored poroons also v ft8 not pooolblo
to the extent which would h'-vo been noccssary, at the vacclno of
Soigl which was known to bo efftetivo could not possibly be produced
in tho rcouired quantity. As re/ar<’s the other known vacclnoo tho
necessary cr:crior.cc concerning their effectiveness was lacking, to
underkc tho responsibility of their production on a larro ncnlo and
to use then.

To await the cpidculolo ical evaluation cf these vaccines v no not
fcasiblo. It world ha~c taken years and claimed untold sacrifices of
human life* A conclusive clerificatiT. of the problem, alono in tho
oxperlacnts with animals, is not pcssiblo for ecicntiflc reasons. The
competent scientists did -ot arreo at all on the effectiveness of tho
vari ua vaccines. Por the authorities responsible for tho checking
of this danger, there rosained nothing else to do therefore in order


11117


17 July 47-KJ(SIL.12.6-Me< has (Sat t>

Court I

to clarify a'l &>utful queptlin# with the least possible doloy, but to
iIre order* for these vaccines to be tried out on human beings. The
ca r r y ing out of these experiments on human belrv a consequently vjuj a
necessity caused by the typhue catastrophe which «ea spreading as
''ItrcM r?Y also has recognised necessities conditioned by tho war.

It had bicono Impossible to find volunteers for this experiment.

Incidentally It night perhaps not at all hare beon Justifiable
froa a moral as veil as fron an ethical viewpoint to uao foluntoora
fer this life endangering experinent. For tho C-oraan Penal Codo
contain# In Its Art. 316 tho 'sllovlng stipulation:

*If soacbody hr# been prevail.d upon to kill by tho expreso and
serious demand of tho killed a eontenco of irprlsonacnt of not less
than three yirxa is to be pronounced.

Tho rttenpt la punlohablo.*

Since "expreso and strl^uo demand* Is a much n»rrovor doflnltlon
than r i ro consent, It follows qulto clcirly that according to
the C p r=an uatorlal crlalnal law tho killing of a porson ovon with hlo
consent Is net oxc-^jt fron punlshacr.t. According to this It would bo
qulto lnposalblo In Oerrany to carry out a life endangering nodical ex¬
periment on a huaan being a* 11 , except if th® atato ankos nvr.llnblo
tho person on whoa the *xtcrlnont lo to be carried out, for lnstnnco
In tho fora of a crlalnal sentenced to death, and thoroby assunos tho
responsibility protecting the ocpcrlnc tor froa crlalnal proceedings
as tho staro aloe docs in the c»so of Its soldier# who during tho wnr
auat kill Intentionally lr. action.

Thus also In the present ease 43 persona In protective custody and
professional criminals were n*do av«ilp.blo by tho Belch Ordinal Pollco
Office In Berlin for the carrying out of this experiment, 30 of whoa
wore selected md used for the tcr-tlnr of the Cepenh^on vacclno.

Taking into consideration the average death-rate with typhus, there
could be counted on the deaths of a few persons in the course of this
experiment lr. the worst ease, whoreax on the other hand tho livea of


Hilo


19 -ily 47-JOCSIL12-7-Xeefaan ;Z a tx)

Court I

tesa of the user da wore saved, and that quite Independently of whether
the C 7 pcnha.cn vecelne stood the teat or cot. Tor If it had proved pood,
It would without doubt have been produced and Injected In largo quanti¬
ties. If, contrary to tfco expectations that had been nouriahod with ro-
gard to this vaccine after the coinal oxpirisscntB, it did not provo
rood - *1 it then actually wa B the ca B o _ thc a lta production and Inject-
ion without a sufficient protective offcct wet prevented rad therefore
likewise tho lives of ucnuncrablc persons were saved. Thus, there
can bo no doubt it that - already with regard to numbers - no inappro¬
priate ncans was used for tho averting of an lnnimrat lose and that
tho loss to bo cxpocted due to the orporlncnt was by no nonne greater
than the innlnoct loss.

•ho defendant HCS1 could not bo expected to watch inactively how
tho catastrophe was ccspletcd. In this a>nnoction thorc oust be takon
into consideration that he, in his capacity of hyglcnst in an exposed
position, was under the obligation to do everything in order to hoip
evert the tcnlncnt driver kno^ to hln. This obligation to fcolp hun-
dredo of tho> Jands of persons threatened by typhus wa B 0 n the other
hand faced by t»-o oblirrtl-n always to act according to tho ethical
principles cf the ncdlcrl profcsslo-. lhc-e can bo no <toubt at all
that the defondant ECSL has suffered cxtrencly undor the conflict of
those obligations and hat tcrl-uely and o»rofully wol^hod thoso two
obligations. This is guaranteed by his personality deocrlbod to us by
different parties in the hoscland and abroad. If ho decided in favor
of the former then ho regarded it -t that tine to bo his prlnary duty.

'ot the least re-son for his ->aking this decision waa that ho hed spont
tho greatest and nost decisive part of his career ns a research cdontist
not in C-oruesy but abroad. Thus he knew thet also abroad lifo-cndangcr-
ing nodical ixptrl=«n*.s have been carried out in nunerous e-cos on
vclurtccra with whese genuine volunte y status n»y be regarded as highly
doubtful and or- crlninala sentenced to dca*h.

^cr in t Is connect! n I w‘ s h to stress c-phatlcally _ end that


11119


17 July 47_R_XSL~12_^ y.c. hon (Sat*)

Court I


relates to the sul.'ective part of this case - that the defendant BOSF
at that tine pro needed frer, could and had to procc. d iron the tollof
that with the '%chenwaid typhus txpcrimccts exclusively criminals were
used who h*d bjeen sentenced to death and who had Toluntcored.

In ay closing brief I explained in detail why the dcfondnnt had to
hold such 'cpinicno and I =or:e to the conclusion that a punishnent of
tho defendant i 8 out ol tho question, not merely becauso of a lack
°t par'ticipation in the c:.-pcri=cnts on human bclnr* in a fora rolevant
to p'*nal law but also because he a tod in a state of cacrfcncy.

Tour Eonors, the tve Prosecution experts, Frofessor ITT and Fro-
'/ossor IXIrRlifL, both hare, testified that nodical expcriacnts on
liviry huoan bolnys -ay r rly be carried cut in accor<*«nco with the
orinlcplcs of nodical ofhics only on a voluntary basis, Neverthe¬
less wo have loarr.od fr jn numerous witnesses and documentary evidoneo,
th» t this principle haj not always been observed in tho vari us epochs
ol nodical research. This ray h*vo to do with tho fact that ro formal
r »ula.tion by law ha# been found for this subjoct in moot countries
including Goynany.

In --craany the Mfhest fovornment authorities held tho opinion
during the last war, that ir. tiocs of war, which demands from ovory cit¬
izen tho oacrificio of his life, tho crlcinal -ay bo fox cod to submit
in tho intcroot of tho state to a medical exporinent d«x gcrous to life,
since by the fart of his imprisonment tho criminal is protected funlnot
tho dangers of w r r to a larrc extent, -he defendant BCSL unfortunately
could not crxrt influence® this attitude. As frr as has bccono known
during the.© proceeding, =y client is one of the few physician*, who
fought t v J.s opinion durir.~ the Ka.ti dictatorship. Sot only did ho
protest /jralnst this attitude toward his superiors, but he © ,f on rcpcat-
odly do*sandcd in lnrfc circles before numerouo listeners in sharp
manner, that these human experiments for tho testing of vaccines should
bo discontinued. Hay I remind you in this regard that Professor H0EI2C
told, his friends that he cculd not understand at all, why professor 3CSI

1 _


17 July 47-X_M3II.12-6-Mech*n (l Pn t x )
Court I


should he Indicted. Tor It was ROSE, tfco only one, from vfcon he himself
fcicv through poraocel experience that ho had hrd tho courage to
oppose publicly the human experiments during the reign of HliQtLiB.

» the one who then maintained the food old traditions of German
physicians.

Hot only the Chinese Hirjster of education CEU CHlA-hua spoke for
Profoe sor BCSZ and described him as an honorable r.»n, but fron the
nost Various countries statements of rcsoarch workers nnd other
personalities of public life, were sent to no during this trial
only the smallest p*rt of whleh hag bocn included In =y doeunont bocks.
All thero letters show that It would cause tho deepost concorn if
this emlr.ont scientist should be sentenced In this trial as a t41atcd
•lctis of the Hntlg.

Would It not be tragic beyond corpnrlson*' If this vory man should
bo sontenccd by you for just that afainst which ho foughtj

THE PRESIDENT: The afternoon sosslon of tho Tribunal will hear
fren counsel for tho defendants. Buff, Romberg and Bcckcr-Proysong,

IB. WILIZ: (Counsol f 0 r defendant Wcltx.) M r . Presldont, I
would like to »oll you that I Just wont to tho translating department
to find out about things. It ws considered that tho ordor would he
followed that tho case of Rose would cono after the cases of Ronborg
"nd Welt*. How, this business abort the translation is tho following:
the eases which h-TO beon translated rrc Ronberf, but not Ruff and
Welt*, but there arc i-ec other cases which have not boon translated.

It is also doubtful if the translation can be co-plctcd today or oven
tomorrow. I Bay perhaps tell tho Tribunal the following creos
arc rc-dy: Romberg, Pokorny, Beiglbock nnd Schaefer. Theso casoa
arc at your disposal, but the case of Romberg has not been translated
nor have the cases of Schaefer, Brock, Seven, 3ecker-Proyscn£_ Huff
rad Welt*. Tv Oa0 transla.ti ns will bo forthcoming later, but the
Tribunal sight decide about the order of the eases.

“ -H^'T: Well, counsel, whnt arraents did y?u sta.te have


11121


17 July 47-K-X3ILl2_10J<cehrn Unit)
Court I


teen fully translated so the Tribunal night have than?

HE. VILLE; Those riady are Hoaborg* Pokomy, Belglbock and Schae¬
fer.

TEE PRESIDES!: Tho Tribunal hpd been advised that none of those
translations ver© reedy. If those translati-ns are ready oo the
Tribunal su*y havo then on the bench, then this 'fternoon wo will
proceed to hear councol for Pokomy, Bclglbock and Sehaefor. I prosumo
that arpuaents on behalf of Buff end Boabor,* should bo presented in
noquonco if posalbls. If there is further tiao available this afternoon,
then vc will procotd with aoao other arguments. Tho tr'-nslatorn hove
all the translations evon if they arc not ready for tho Tribunal. This
afternoon wo will proceed, if tho translations arc available, with tho
'•rfVROr.ts for tho defendants Bciflbock and then Polorny.

TEE I STUPE! 75 R: This Is tho interpreter. Tho translation of
tho Boiglbock ploa is not yot completed, perhaps it would bo host to
put that at tho end.

TEE PEES mans Tory well, vc will prococd then with the nrguaonto
for Schaefer, Polorny and B 0 lflbock if theso translations arc reedy.

Tho Tribunal will now be in tc cobs until 1:30 o'clock,

(a rccoso was taken until 1330 Hours.)


11122


17 July 47-A~?H-l3-lr-Heehan (Int. Katz)
Court 1.


Afternoon Session.

IKE HaRSKaLL: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDES!: The Tribunal will now hear fron counsel
for the defendant Sc beef or.

DR. FZLOKMjSN: (Counsel for the defendant Schaofor)

Hr. President, Your Honors: I nood not deal with tho
quostions why tho general, political and organizational
bach-ground as alloged by tho prosecution does not apply
to Schaefer. I need not do this as, for logoi roasons, the
logoi torn anspiraoy is rvst applicable in tho Trials
boforo Hill tar y Thihinals in Kurnborg.

In tho question which concerns us solely, nausly
whether Schaofor 'has been guilty of a orino against
huuonlty as 118tod under Control Council Law 10, wo
suat tcJco into oonsldoratlon the principle of all
civilized nations quoted ropo-tedly in th3 verdict of
tho I.M.T. Quilt under crlalnal law Isa personal ono.
Thoroforc no punlshoont without guilt.

In view of tho va .uoness of the definitions of par¬


ticipation listed under Art. II, 2 a logoi brldgo oan

only be established through a very striot subjootlvo ooanlssion

of an act. by a very strict oxnninatlon of the whole of


tho ovldonoo as to whether and why the defendant can bo
found ullty, md whethor and why a chargo can bo raiood
against hia fr.Ea given situation taklne into oonsldoratlon
all clrauastarices which have had influence on his psychology,
his acts and cocsalsslons. Finally, tho question has to bo
lnvcsti^pT^^her - provided tho defendant has conducted
h 1 .^^fa^th^^tnaat he is now oxpocted to - other con-

sQ^ohoes would* have resulted, i.o. the actual event could

|Tx 7 Uo|

have been prevented. :

Chat do we fln^> if we examine such facts as are

11123


17 July 47-A-?M-13-2-Meehan (Int. Katz)
Ccurt 1.


applicable here?

Schaefer, called up as a soldier In 1941 and promoted
to Unterarzt, l.e. not an offloer, wia given the order of
dealing with problems connected with Sea-Dlstross end in
particular wltfc the problem of thirst.

It wns with great pleasure that he carried out that
ordor because he Know that to solve that problem would
onco and for oil finish the tortures suffered ty all
shipwrecked pooplo nil over tho world.

Ho sot tied down to his work with that aolontific
thoroughness for which I have offered detailed proof. By
roadlng tho entire literature for months It beoano pooslblo
for him, at the orders of the Chief of the Hodloal
Inspectorate to hold a locture on thirst and tho fitfit
against thirst In Sea-Distress r.t the Numbers Conforonco
of 1942. Tho lecture was a puroly academic ono and not
a report on experiments on human bolngs. Tho prosecution.

It Is true, alleged on 12 Decombor 1946 the opposlto, but
tho oompleto document #401, Pro. Exh. 93, provos that this
cllogatlon Is wrong* (rot Schaefer Exh. #17). I should
llko to mention here that no prodf has been furnished for
tho fact that Schaofor hes hoard, or hoard about Holzloohner' o
and Rescher 1 e lectures at that mooting.

In dealing further with the son-water problem, Schaefer
mado Investigations, whlbh hod already been made by 1.0.

Farbon. Through scientific collaboration with that firm a
method wae finally found which made soa-woter O.rinknblo without
any lnjurty X o health. Many chemical and pharmcxologlcal
Investigations and experiments lead to this result. There
was no need for experiments ^n human beings, beoauso on tte
basis of 'll known scientific methods cf research, Schaefer
realized that this method was entirely Innocuous.

11121 .


1? July 47—o—PH-13-3-Meehan (Int. Eats)

Court 1.

She method was called "Wofatlt 5V*, “I.G. Method" or
“Schaefer Method".

In principle and Its oonposltlon It Is, with c. very
few snail deviations the sane cethod cs invented by tho
American Dr. Ivy and used by the U.S. Forces. This was
confirmed by Dr. Ivy as a witness.

The Schacfor-hothod was completely finished by the
end of 1943 and the Inspector of the Medical Survlce of
tho Luftwaffe, Schaefer's highest superior wanted to
Introduce It In tho Luftwaffo.

Tho Technical Office, another branch of tho Luftwaffo
opposed tho Introduction, giving as a r-ason that there was
not sufficient silver available to produce tho no tho d.

Tho lnportant con In the technical Offlco, Obor-
otlngonlour Christensens and Stabslngonleur Schichlor
insisted on the Introduction of c cethod lnventod by
Borfca. This consisted of food-sugar which reaovod or
lcosoncd the salty t^sto f sea-water, but nrdc no ohnn^o
In the salt-coo tents.

I have proved how Schaefer, sinco the beginning of
this plan fought ggalnst tho "Borka-Method" as a plooo
of sharlatanlsc.

Ho wrtoo a loaning report on tho results of cjqscrlmonte
carried out by Obcrstarzt von Slr-'ny on behalf of tho
Technical Offlco on voluntary patients of a Luftwaffe
hospital with tho "BERKA-METHOD". Schaefer had boon
ordered to carry out this exnclnatlon by hie superior
officers In the Medical InsDectorate.

The result of Schaefer's attitude was that tho
Technical Office end officers of the Luftwaffe suspected
him of being saboteur.

SCHrtEFER realized what that accusation meant in the


11125


17 July 47—A-?;i-l3-4-Meehan (Int. Ka tz)

Court 1.


third Holch and the fifth year of the war. Ho knew of
oases where Medical Exports wore persecuted by the R.S.K.a.
fi.o. the Gestapo) cerely for deviating scientific opinions
in l=partant ailltary setters.

Nevertheless he cxplalnod his opinion that the “Bcrka-
'.-Lthod n was point less In the aonforcncos of 19 and 20 Hey,
when the su^oetion was -ode to test that method on concent¬
ration oanp lnnntes. <>e an extreao warning he oxplainod
that the Borka-Mothod would load to death on the 12th day
at the latest. This has been proved by prosecution
docunont #17 7, Exh #133 and Schaefer Docuaont, Exh. #19.

That was *31 he could do In his position as ron-
conalsslowd o'floor, ns the oocllost aaang the
rosplondont unlforss of the 13 hlghor officers.

Schaefer does not aake a<bolsion In that conforonco.
Ouxt Is net don*. In ailltary circles. Iho hlghost office
chlers order an'. ooaaand. Tho defendant Sohaefor do^c
not receive the order to aako cxporloonto on concentration
ca^p lnaatos. Ho lo not even bolng sont to Joint the
cOiDlsolon Investigating the oondltlons of the oxpcrlnonts,
because ho la woll known os an op onont of the wholo
affair.


11126


17 July - ■ - IL- 14 - 1 - Cook (lnt.Xatz)
Court I


Another chance to prevent these conplototy senseless experi-
• •

nanto, -a Schaefer saw it, on hunan being3 with the 'Burka-

—athed*, be it in concentration caaps, be it in Luftwaffe

hospitals, passes by. On 25 1944 th« world famous Prof.

Zppinrer of Vienna stated that Burka's idea, regarded as

utt-rly ofcsured by Schaefer nanoly that hi3 (Burka's)

sothod would dr-ivc sea-water through the body without any
horn, was not entirely wrong. Three other professors,-
famous aedical experts, concurred in Sohoefer's opinion.

This is proved by Schaefer documents Sxh. 19, 35» 36.

This lost Schaefer another modiccl rensen openly to
oppose the carrying out of those exporinents.

No law in the world can demand that Sohaefcr should
have done more than he has done, if one takes into consi¬
deration the situation in Hitler Germany and Schaefor's
particular position, and his rank in a corr-ot and under¬
standing nonnar.

Nev:r was thor-j in the conferences mentioned in the
prosecution documents a word said or an order issued that
the Schaefer method was to be tested on concentration
c&np innetes. Only for that would Schaefer have boon res¬
ponsible In view of the excellence of his n-thod he
would not have shied clear off that aedical responsibility
although he would not have approved of using concentration
cans inmates.

The exporinents with the "3urka Method" for which
he was not responsible were carried out without his help
and his knowledge. It is therefore not incrininnting for
hin that he listened to the lecture of Prof. Bcigiboook
which completely reveeled the uselesness of the ^arka-
Method.


11127


17 July - A - IL - 14 - 2 - Cook (Int. Katz)
Court I

I


X make the motion therefore to acquit defendant Schaefer
and release him froa custody.

TH3 HTJSI ZE2IT: The Tribunal will now hear from counsel
for the defendant Beigelboeck.

I would ask that some German counsel kindly notify ^r.
Sauter that his argument on behalf of the defendant Ruff
will be called following the argument submitted by Dr.
Steinbauer.

ER. KICKilANH : Uay I add something else, U r . President,
my colleaguo Gawlik has asked me to report to the High
Tribunal that the time which has not been used up by my
plea, he would like to use up himself.

Tin PjGSIDSNT: That is probably true, but the Tribunal
does not extend the time saved by one counsel to any
other particular oounsel.

DR. STiINBAIJZR: For tho defendant, Boigelboeck:

Ur. President
Your Honors

Paragraph 5 of the Law for the Protection of Animalo
of 24 November 1933, -Reich Legal Gazette I 987 prohibited
interference with or treatment of living animals for
purpose of experiments which are connected with considerable
pain or damage to then, for the territory of tho German

•Reich in it's entirety, ./hile thus protecting horses and

• •

dogs, cats and rabbits, for reasons of humanity one did
not shrink at the sane time and at the same place from
doing such things on human beings. According to the in¬
dictment, human beings were cruelly murdered by the tens
of thousands in the extermination camps, and all this was
diabolically done in the name and under the cloak of
science or misusing a method connected with science. And
there was the aggravating circumstance thaimost of the

11128


V


17 d U ly-A-IL-14-3-Cook (Int JIatz)

Court I

victims were defenseless people whom political fanaticism or
the war had led into the hands of their torturers. It is
therefore not to be wondered at that all these cruelties
which in addition have been exploited by propaganda in some
countries produced new ways of contempt and indignation and
fanned the thoughts of hate and vengeance smouldering below
the coals to bright flames]

Under such circumstances it is made very difficult for

0 0 0

the Judge, v/ho is only human, after all, to arrive at a Just
judgment. That is where the defense must come in, and where
it will be their high moral duty to contribute thoir share
to scrutinize with dispassionate objectivity the subject
of this trial, which is so rioh in horrors, and to arrest
the glance of the eye for th guilt and for the responsibility
of each cne of the 23 defendants. The external ciroumstanoes
alone entail the great danger that the deep shadows which
seem to fall on the one cr the other of tho defendants will
oqually darken tho whole lot of them.

The Chief of Counsel, however, said in his opening
speech: 'We cannot be contont with proving that those crimes
have been committed and that certain people committed them.
Our deep responsibility towards all peoples of tho earth is
to show why and how those things occured. ' As a defense
counsel, 1 profoundly agree with the Chief of Counsel. T his

0 0

trial, with its toil and labor, must not be confined to tho
nero purpose of punishment, it must also contribute to
making such crimes impossible forovor and everywhere by

exposing their causes and connections. The Chief of Counsel,

^ *

howevar, sees the cause in national Socialism alone, tho
criminally demented error which has wormed its way into

s

avcry sphere of man life, and the consequenc® of which
ware devastating. Though it is correct that National


1H2?


17 July-A-IL-14-4-Cook (IntJCatz)
Cour t I


Socialise magnified certain pathologic degenerations of our

.'-stern fora of society up to paraxism, it is not tha only

cause and the evil springs froa much deeper sources. To

expose then all would go far beyond the fraae of this trial.

we have to be content with drawing a sketch of th3 situation.

'Te all fool we are treading on swaying ground and are in the

midst of a serious crisis of our order of society. Its

causes are twofold: spiritual-moral and social economic

which overlap, supplement and conneot one another. The

heirloom of our forebears seems to bo used up: sceptioism

•

steps into the place of faith, nihilism ontars the plaoe of
rovorence, a certain spiritual vacuum is seemingly bridged
by aotivism, but everything becomes relative and the denial
of all metaphysios is called positivism, “an is only a
conglomeration of bones, nerves and muscles, and entirely
rolinouishos his place as a soul-ondowed individual. Hq
marries acoordine to selective brooding, ho nourishes him-
solf with vitamins and oalorios, his sensual life is hormone
oontant, and his ethics is psychoanalyzed. The masses with
th3ir lack of Judgment and their intrusion stop into his
placs and show thoir proforenco for the super-dimensional,
hrorything bccomos unique and great: The economic conse¬
quences are proletarianization and mechanization. But
human dignity and roal freedom stop into the background.
Technique oclebrates triumphs, but thorin lies the danger.
*nd science? It al3o celebrates triumphs. Natural

science hes reached undreamt of heights. l^an tears asunder

• *

th6 veils of nature, penetrates into the stratosphere,
smashes the atoms, creates nitrogen out of the air and
uses it to fertilize th3 soil, and synthotically produces

• * 0

fuel, gold,and jewels. Aye, the science of our time has


my -


17 J uly-A-IL-1 4- 5 -C oofc (Ir.t. i-atz )
Gourt I


beec»as void of poosie and void of soul. It has offered but
little resistance to its subjootion to politics, and th6
Austrian Vilhelm Roepke, who lectures at the University of
Geneva, is Justified to quote from Rabelais In his book
'The Social Crisis of our Tioe.'t'Uno science sans conscience
n'est qu6 ruine da l'amo. '

Th3 German peopla, after so many years of suffering and
a long way of the end of its trials, refutes the cruoltios
as sot forth in the indictaont and speaks with Montaigne:

J- hais oruelloaent la cruautoi *1 cruelly hate cruelty!-'
Therefore it v/ould 'understand if the mouth of the victors
would pronounce a severe Judgment also in this trial, but
it demands that the millenium-old commandments of the
Dooaloguo should also olsowhcro bo valued more highly than
the biologism of our present day. For, while talking of
poaco, the scientists of the world are mobilized to croate
newer and more effective woapon3, millions of Gormans

•

expelled Troa their native soil orr hither and thither,
hungry and cold, v/hilst woman and children who were frozen
to death v ’ro carried out of the unhoated rofugoc trains
from the last, and millions of prisoners of war suffor a
fata which is ono singlo outory cf violated human dignity.—-

All this had certainly to b6 contributed to th3 question
put by the Chief of Counsel.

Before I go into the details of the charges against ray
client Dr. 3oigelboeck, I v/ould like to talk shortly about
two problems which seem to me important for the judgment.

1) The legal ba3i3 of the indiotment, and

2) the question of the medical-ethical basis of this
trial, or, in short, the r3lationship : Physician and
research-worker.


11131


17 ouly-A-IL-U.-6-Coofc (Int. Katz)
Court I


But one can go a step further and determine whether the
Control Council law as a whole can fora a ba3is for the
indictment. Vftien the law was published it aroused a lively
discussion, and I remember that the American chief prose¬
cutor in the err trial, J ustico Jackscn, severely ctriticized
the law.

For Control Council Law N 0 . i0 i s a law of the occupying
powers and goGs back to international law. The Pro3ocution
oven raters to this law in this trial, when thoy accuse the
defendants in Count 10 of violations of international agree¬
ments, especially the Hague Convention of 1907 and the
Convention on the Troatmont of Prisoners of .far ( G onova 1922).
With respect to the Justification of the Control Council in
issuing this law, it has been pointed out that through the
unconditional surrender and the termination of tho Rolch
government, tho rights of sovereignty warG transferred to

the occupying powors. (Kelson) Others refer to the French

• # •

principle: Oii eat lo drapeau, ost France, that is, tho
occupying powor brings its own law into the occupied terri¬
tory.

On the other sido, it can bo said, that oven in case of
an unconditional surrender the vanquished does not loso all
rights. On the oontrary, ono reason for surrendering un-
conditinally nay bo that Gven in that case the standards
remain which the civilized peoples of the oarth havo
established to regulate international relations, such as
those on the treatment of prisoners of war, protection of
private property, ato.

This to rofor to a particular case, also results from
the Rules of Land Warfare of the United States of America.

Ihe G :rman laws offer sufficient rtans and ways of punishing

11132


J7 J u 1 y- A-IL-14 -7 -C ook (In t iK a t z)

«ourt I


war crimes and crimes against humanity coamittod. It con¬
tradicts his legal regulation to create new laws, without
military necessity and about act3 alien to the laws of the
country.

* •
Furthermore, it is impossible to return to acts and

deeds of the past. In Proclamation Ho. 3 of 20 October

1945 of the occupying powers about the principles of re-

0

constructing justice in Germany, it is cxprossly stated
• •

in II, paragraph 2, 'Punishable responsibility only exists
for acts declared punishable by law.-' This is, therefore,
a solem proclamation of the principle nulla poena sine
lego.

In addition to that, tho legal concept of conspiracy
is entirely alien to our continental legal system. It is
of American origin and originated frcm tho fight against
gangsterism.

But there is 3till some more to it: my client had
nothing to do with the planning of a conspiracy, not oven
according to the indictment. Perhaps ono might allege that
by carrying it out he became an accessory later on and

took a consenting part in it. How Boigelboeck was a medical

officer in the rank of lieutenant. Vfoll, you can't call
a soldier who carries out a military ord~r of his superior
a conspirator, if ho remained at the place accorded to
his rank. He did not mako any plans with his superiors,
but he only did within the framework of military regu¬
lations what his rank demanded of him. His activity
during tho war was governed by regulations from above
which were independent of his ovm will. This fact alone
speaks against the assumption of a conspiracy. 'That may
be of int-rest to us from a penal-legal point of viev/
is the qu-stion where are the limits which call a halt to


11133


17 J ul7-A-IL-14-8-Cook (Iat, Xatz)
Court I


the military ?ow:r of command. And thus I arrive at the

second important legal question of this trial, as far as it

conc-rns ay client on the question of 'higher order-'

• •

I submitted proof that the defendant, Jr, Bjigolboeck,
ta3 carried out the experiments against his will by-ordor of
hi3 military superiors and as a soldier, and in my opening
speech I referred to the judgment of the In-t-rnational Mili¬
tary Tribunal in Nuernberg, which created a precedent in

0 * 0

this respect. In this present case, however, this question
is of such decisive importance that it is absolutely nooess-
ary to discuss it onoe again in detail. To arrive at a
correct solution we have to inquire how this quostlon is
regulated in the Unitary penal codu3 of important civilized
countries. Siaoe the defendant was a member of the German
ormod forces, let us start with German law. Th« problem is
regulated in the German Military Codo of 10 October 1940,
rfoich Legal Gazotta I, p. 1347, Par. 47. Heading Par. 47
is the principle: 'If by the execution of an official order
within the frame of official competence a penal law is
violated, the commanding superior is alono to be held res-

•

ponsiblo.* If we take a look at th- laws of oth»-r countries,
we hove first of all Art. 114 of the Coda penal which says
that a civil servant is excused if he acts by orders of
his superior within the frame of his competence, where he
i3 in duty bound to obey within the hierarchical system.
?urth-r let me rof^r to Art. 122 of the Italian *-ilitary
Penal Code, to Art. 30 of the Swiss Military Penal c ode,
anl to No. 11 of the 3rd Chapter of the British Handbook
of Military Law.

Since the defendant is on trial before Ae-ricon judges,
wo would lik3 to make an inquiry which point of view the
American Law takes with regard to this question.


1113L


17 Jaly-A-IL-l4-9-Cook (Int.Katz)
-ourt I


official "Military law and Precedents' by Colonel
•illiaa './inthrop, ^aafaingtal, Gov^raacnt Printing Offi co
192°, 2nd edition, says the following on page 296:


11135


17 July L7-A-FjC-l5-l-Oross (Katz)

Court I

■Thougr obedience of subordinates is the basic principle of
military sorvico, it is till roqiircd that only a la-.rful command
should be obeyed. Should ht subordinate, however, bo required to
jud^v whethar or not an order given by his superior is lawful, it
would if adopted as a general principle, in itself overthrow all
military discipline.

Exceptions are only oases of obvious violations of law, *hich,
however can occur only soldoa. Should tha subordinate suppose that
the ordor was lawful and authorized and consequently obey it, ho can
expect to bo justified buforo a court-martial." Further Opponhoin
International Law (London 1935) Vol II, p. 1*53 and furthor: Ernst
J. Cohr. "Tho Problem of TTar Crimes today in Transactions of tho
Grotiua Society Vol. 26 (19U1) pp. 125, lll.

Therefore, we say that in the interest of tho striking power of
tho armies unconditional duty of obodionco is the main rule is all
military Laws and only ir. very few excoptional cases can wo depart
from it. In accition to that wo have to consider the qulto unique
conditions which thj diet torship in tho Third Roich cruatod during
tha war. It is evidonct from tho documents suhnittod by the Prose¬
cution that, next to Hitlor, Kianlor was tho most powerful man in
the Third Reich particularly during tha last years of tha war, and
oxorcisod unlimited mastery over llfo and death. Concorning experi¬
ments on huaan bc&ngs, he declared expressly that people who rofusod
to carry out such experiments aro "traitors to King and Country* 1 .

"hoover has boon during the dark years in silonco in the grantor
Goman Reich of Adolf Hitler, the lardaarks of which were barracks,
wooden huts, concentration camps and slaughter hou^s for humans,
whoever has boor, within Heinrich Kinalor's sphoro of power, whoovor
went through tho prisons and the interrogations of tho Gestapo, who¬
ever a.T.s frightened when his doorbell rings at an unusual hour, only
he can full grasp what it means to offer resistance to such an
expressly emphasized will of Heinrich Himmler.


11136


17 July u7-A-FjC~l5-2-Gross (Katz)
Court I


In agreement with the Charter of Augu3t 19l2, Articlo 2, I, b of
Control Council Law No. 10: -The fact that any person acted pur¬
suant to the order of his Governaant or of n superior does not froo
hin froo responsibility for a crime, but cay be considered in miti¬
gation." Already in qy opening s poo eh I referred to the judgment of
the International Kilitary Tribunal with reference thereto. It noants
that the law intends to say: The aoro oxcuso with an ordor is in¬
sufficient; it has, however, to bo considered as regards tho nwasuro
of punishment, whether or not somebody comits a crino on his own
initiative or receive an order to that offoct. Responsibility would
be tho greater, tho higbar one stands on tha rungs of tho laddor of tho
hierarchy of tho Stato. The soldier j±o is ordor to tako part in a
firing squad will hardly bo hold responsible for tha sontonoo of tho
court nartlal. Ur.Ukc per 52 of the Roich Penal Coda or Par. 2 of tho
Austrian Ponal low, this passago of Art. II, h b, doos not exclude
th-j gonoral uxtonu-ating and aitigating circunstancos. It will, howover,
bo docisive wliothor or not somebody blindly obeyed tho ordor or triod
to ovado it with all his pemor. For this reason tho Aoorican Court
in Dachau acquitted acebors of tho guard of the concentration camp
■ho volimtoorod for front-line sorvico in ordor to get rid of an in¬
f-sous Job.

Professor Donnodiou do Favro, ono of the main trials of this law,
s-ys: "If you act this way than in tho sar-so of individualism, tho
presentation of tho International Laws, it is ch-rgod with incrimina¬
tion to point out tho disciplino which is necessary for tho Statu.

Such laws should only bo usod'rdth precaution.

If nwcadays, in tha mdst of peace one would say "Boiglboock
should have 3hot himself rather than going into a concentration camp
nd Baking sea water experiments than this is a very cheap banality.

It was Kizalar who reigned in 19U: and apart from porson 1 prosecution
there was also the so-called next of kin responsibility. Boiglboock
didn't only have tho responsibility for hiasolf alone but also for his


1UJ7


17 July L7-A-FjC-15-3-jro33 (Katz)

Court I

xifo and children. Hero I Can only rapest what the American Judge
•hiaaarmo said in hia dissenting vote in the trial of Field Hors hi 1
Iliick (page 96): It nevar was our intention and it novor was
suggested that ho (Milch) should have chosen a *.ny which might hivo
ended with the loss of his life."

Tha Prosecution alleges the cosraission of war crises by the do-
fondant. Though this question is of no importance to ny client out¬
side tho scope of conspiracy, because war crimes can only be connittod
on nationals of tho Allied nations, I *ould still like, in principlo,
to draw l short sketch of tho problem.

The law of nations is a logal system between states up to the
present day. It servos tho balancing of interoats in international
relationships. Violations of tho law of nations cm only bo connittod
by states terra rds other states.

Finally, tho indictamt spoaks of crimes .against humanity. Tho
charter and tho Judgajnt of tho International Tribunal confino thoso
crimes to tho period of tha war and to thoir connection with tho
aggnassivo war, and in this point Control Council Law. No 10 obviously
transgresses its onr. basis and posers. Control Council Law No. 10
st*too in its prcamblo: "In order to give offoct to tho torms of tho
Moscow Declaration of 30 October 19U3 and tho London Agroonwnt of 8

August 19U5, and tha Charter issued pursuant thoroto.in ordor to

establish a uniform logal basis in So rainy."

Serious offoncos against human dignity particularly cruelties and
oppressions which cause general indignation and are usually orginizod
from above according to plan *nd in groat nizabors, can therefore bo
rer-rdod as crimes against Insanity.

They oan bo committed both in war and in poaco. It is however,
questionable, who -ad which Law is applicable to pur.i* this offense
in each individual case, according to tho Judgment of the Internation¬
al Military Tribunal in Numberg, tho application of Control Council
Law No. 10 scons to be excluded.


11136


17 July _7-^-?jC-l5-J 4 -Gro3s (Katz)

Court I


If we return to the experiments indicted end consider what is
seid above wp havo out of shoor respect for ourselves to exclude
those activities, the aim of which ins, as the prosecution alleges,
not to euro but tho extermination of human life. 3ut tte groat
majority of the ^xporirents were evidently intendod - this can't bo
soriously denied - to find now ways to cure diseases which hithorto
had b;on a pertinacious scourge of nanking. Tho succoss connoctod -.rith
the oxporiments did not only bring a char.co of recovery to tho indivi¬
dual pationt, but .also meant a step forw-rd in nodical art end there¬
fore a sorvico to humanity, and therefore, an act of humanity. 3y
tho omnoration of a long series of experiments of tho sane nature tho
dofonso has proved that the Allies themselves wore busy with tho snao
problocs. Ho who carofully foUcmod tho trial will thoroforo state tho
fact that tho point of gr-vity has boon shifted from tho experiments
thisselv os to tho quostion of tho execution and particularly to tho
kind of experimental subjects. Thoroforo, tho object of jxperimonts
on hoaan balngs stops into tho foreground as tho nost important cri-
torion for the Judgment according to criminal law. If we thoroforo
lnquiro whether or not those arc crimes against hwaanity , wo have to
answer a furthor quostion, loaving out for the tins being, narrower
nodically othical points of viovr; ho* far is it legally docisivo
whothar or not the .experimental subdocts are volunteers? Voluntoor
means to comit or to ccait an act according to one's am will. Tho
decision is up to the individual as an osanction of his freedom.

As long 33 mankind can roncabor, freedom wr.3 tho goal of human
hope, longing and desire, scoot ice a ->lso a goal of human planning and
activity.

3ut somewhere oven freedom cast have its limits. Scilion Bonaudi
of tho diversity of Perugia says in his book "Of tho limits of the
individual fro idea. L'orc than all it cannot b_- doubted that tho
limitations of individual liberty must b. determined by tho reasons of
tho society". It may be a democratic or an authoritarian stnto, tho


1U39


17 -July li7-A“?;JC-l5-5-Gross (Katz)

Court I

fj-osdon of tho individual finds its Units within -,ho sphere of
pov;r of tho state. Thcso Units rill bo drawn wider or narrator
~s tho system of the stato may bo. Just now tho comission for
huatr. rights of the tfaited Nations is in session presided ovor by
Ur. Eleanor Roosevelt. It is charged with forging tho rights of
atn into tho fora of a lav, which is to bo nccoptod and ratified
by all oembor states. Tho ^orld Coda is not only to doflno tho
rights of tho individual, but also to limit the power of tho state
ovor tho individual. What conclusion can wo draw from that? In
general, wo hiva to nofuse experiments on hxnan subjects who are not
volunteers, particularly on prisoners of war, the latter if only it
goes counter to the clear standards of racognizod international lax/.

And still wo will bo poralttod to discuss whether or not thoro aro
excoptions to this fundamental nilo. Tha stato which limits the free¬
dom of tho individual La order to mako an orderly coraunal lifo possiblo
has acreovor tho trek of protecting tho froodos of tha individual. If
this stato should, howover, find itsolf Li a stato of anargcncy, if
it fights in a total war until tho complete oxhauation of man and
material for its vary oxistanoo, thon tho limits of its power must bo
oxtondod and in sene eases different measures hava to be applied than
in peace. Boforo oa I have tragic roport: "Uission in the Fire of tho
Atom Bomb". And still the United Stato3 xront this x.—y in order to
shorten the war considerably and prevent their or.r. citizens from
indescribable suffering. Now, I hav^ submitted evidonco that in tho
case of my diont tho experimental subjects r v ro voluntoors. Tho
prosecution .alleges in principle, that people can't voluntoer in a
concentration camp because th- people wore deprived of their liberty
and were, no longer able to freely dot-raine their own .dll. But this
is incorrect. Per than it would not be ooreissiblo to carry out tho
numerous experiments which wora mentioned by other defense counsols,
in American penitentiaries and mantel institutions without constituting
crimes against hxmity. Th .re, toe, tho experiment subjocts wore not


llliiO


17 July U7-A-?jC-l5-6-Gross (Katz)

Court I

at liberty, in spite of volunteering. Tho surroundings will always
h 2V0 " groat influonco on every determination of r± 11 aid notivos
of tho nost hotorogonous nature (promise of froodon, pardon, in-
provcaont of food, etc.) will play a veiy important role.

I want to demonstrate this to a Military Tribunal by moans of
an exa m p le from ailitary lifo. A Company Coman dor is given tho order
to take an oncay trench with an assault squadron. Sinco nobody volun-
toors for this duty, ho chooses ton non. A youngor nan asks to bo
takon in tho pLaco of a soloctcd msrriod comrade. Ho is accaptod.

The ontiro assault squadron is killod. Hero wo have similar conditions
-Tono of tho soldiors woro voluntcors. Bach ono of them was undor tho
compulsion of tho poroanont lifo dangor in war. Just ovon within this
sphere of froodon of choico an act of voluntariness was possible.

As in count 15 of tho indictment also tho national criminal lav/s
of thoeo countrios in thlch such crises against bwaanity woro comittod
ore roforrod to, I shall at tho end .of ry argunonts briofly dofino tho
position of Goraan criminal law applicable also for tha Austrian
Hoiglboock in his capacity of a Wohrnacht rwnber, with rogard to tho
question of oxperiaonts. Sinco no doaths rosultod from tho oxpori-
aor.ts, tho laws concoming nurdor and manslaughter naturally nro oli-
cinatcd, and wo are only concerned with tho laws concerning bodily
injury.

Paragraphs 223 and 229 of tho Goman criminal codo contain tho
laws to hj consulted in connoction '.-ith this caso.


mJa


17 Juiy-A-FL-16-l-Lconr.rd (lot. Katz)

Court Bo. I


The scientific purpose is considered as being the justification for tho
experiments, in order to exclude the unlaw!ulness of bodily injury. In
this connection, I quote the legal concept: If tho state roco-nizes and
promotes the scientific purpose, then ".11 the r.ocessary and appropriate
neans for its achievement arc covered as far as the criminal law is con¬
cerned. With regard to this point, von Liszt is of th- opinion that only
the medical profession can establish what moans arc nood for the preno-
ticn of medical science . Siceerizing, it can be said that experiments cor>-
dirted in accordance with the rules of tho medical profession and with
the consent ofc tho subject do not violate the b-rc applicable criminal
Law. I think I sufficiently dealt with tho legal questions that are im¬
portant for this trial, as far as this w.as possible considering tho
short space of ti*., nnd rk» tum to another point, namely, tho quostion:
Doctor and research worker.

Tears ego, when tia.8 wore better, I strolled through Hollas and
stood cn the ruins of Epidcuros. Therv, in the town of Aoklepios, tho
priest oxercisod tho medical profession, and tho most important factor
for healing a sic): man was his belief in a higher pemur. Our present

•

time. Lacing those gods, tes removed tho priest's sash from the physician.
Tho medical art, hjwiover, remained a sacred office and is full of res¬
ponsibility.

0

Scbochauur vorv Justly says in his paper "Tho Medicnl Vienna", "Tfho
chooses tho medical profession has taken r eacrcd office .and has put his
force, hi3 health, and cvvn his life at the disposal of the sic!:, in
order to recognize their diseases, to cure and to help them."

The priest-doctors are n» being confronted in sc, oodic.al papers
with scientists or medical research w 3 rkers. Also in this trial, the at¬
tempt was made to construct a difference between physician and scientist
to the disadvantage of tJ xj defendants. Wit hin the fretwork of the do-
fon»., I briefly want to define =y attitude in thi* respect. It is possiblo
to evaluate correctly the proceedings cmly if one is acquainted with


in)i?


17 Jixly-A-:'L-16-2-Laorard (int. Katz)
Court ho. I


the general attitudo of the medical world with regard to certain profes¬
sional questions, if ora particularly takes into consideration the im-

• +

porter.ce of hunan experiments for the scientific research and, thus,
for the practical medicine ar.d if, finally, one does not forget the sui-
ritual currants of that time ar.d the economic and political conditions.
The problem of aLl this is not too difficult. However, it is not so sim¬
ply as to conjure - with a pious raising of the eyelids - the ghost of
old Hippocrates and to quote ore sentence from the Corpus Hippocra tic urn
as tne Alpha ar.d O-esa of medical ethics. Let us recall how helpless
Hippocrates nas, when the plague killed hundreds and hundreds of his
Attic fellow-cltixcns. At that tiae alroady the duty of a doctor, nnnoly
to treat the individual that turned to him for help, became tho noble du¬
ty of a helper of the coaninity.

Vory Justly says Schumacher, in his thesis, "About tho 'Jodical
Spirit", Abend landro ihc, Vol. 2, published by Johann ..llh, Kauoann, Aaag-
burg 19A6, pare 5£: "In accordance with Hippocratos* ideal, tho doctor's
attention is directed to tho wolfarc of tho individual as woil as to tho
welfare of tho state. To place tho woIfare of tho individual abovo the
wolfarc of tho coenunity would Itavc boon Just os contradictory to his
sense for oroor as the opposite."

If one conlronts the doctor with tho scientist who, with tho tost
tube in nis la oratory, with the scringe or tho surgical knifo in his
hand, walXs ov-r animal and human corpses, ir. order to satisfy fanati¬
cally scientific i. stir.ct, wo very docidcdly objoct to such a scientist.
Wo also found this type in the documents of this trial in tho ooraon of
Dr. Raschor, whore na*. casts a dark shadow over the material of tho
trial. Dr. L^ibbrandt, the protector of medical ethics, would thor.foro
have r»-ndcrcd a good service to German science if he, in his capacity as
a psychiatrist, ..as pointed out that Rasc..c.r, this sadist and psychopath
.ad nothing nimtsouVur to do with real science.

It is cy duty as a defense counsel to emphasize energetically that


lUi;3


17 July-A-re-16-3—Leccarc (Ini. Katz)

Court So. I

it is not pcr.drsable to construct fror. local coincidences any connect¬
ions between ay client ind Rascher and his eyst-n.

Tho scientific research worker sees his task in the discovery of
the unknown, in order to equip the doctor with a ix;w weapon in his fi^it
for the bunan life. I briefly want to dcoonstratc with ta:o oxe.-aplos shy
th~ nodurr. aoiical profession cannot renounce the scientific research
work th-jt jps irtpcss'blu ..itnout great efforts and sacrifices: 1. Giving
a brief description of the cfcvelop.re.nt of modern surgery; 2. Kcntior-lng
the schooL to lihich the defendant Boiglboock belonged ns a pupil and n
tesc.v.r. I do not give this second oxalic in order to glorify ay coun¬
try, but because the particular influence: of its teachers is decisive for
the spirit -..'l standard of the personality.

At the beginning of modem surgery stands tix. great figure of En¬
glish surgery, Joseph Lister, whose groat idea it was that the surgeon
did not have to fight the infiuaaotion of the wound, but to prevent ito
beginning cnuc.d by gcros ent-ring froa outside.

Thanks to actcriology, the anti-sepsis was changed into ao-psic.

Over the e .trance gato of tho Genjral Hospital in Vienna we read
the words: "Saiuti et solatio augrorua - Dedicated to the hoalth and tho
consolation of the sick." These words not only demand highest accomplish
Sent of the doceors's duties, but ore the active for the most successful
work in the large fi«.ld of nodical rosoarch. Theory and practice joined
in on-r to becoa. a piece of living huaanity. I would go beyond the li¬
mits of =y task if I ;*.ntioncd ell the nones that spread the gl^ry of
the Vior-ia University ill over the world. Put their penotration into the

w

world of the un-’x.cwm was always a hazardous enterprise, which c’onr.ndod
courage and sacrifice.

1 want to quote the words of one of the gruit doctors. Professor
Vr.g:^r Jaur.'j*., .iho says in uis book "Fev r ar.d Infection Therapy":

"The vaccination against anlaria was certainly a rish, the sutco-i- . “
which could not Lx. foreseen. It wrr dr_ngcrous for the patient hiaaell v.d

m.’J.


17 July-»-FL~l6-4-Leonard (Ir.t. Z&tz)
Court to. I


this to A men higher degroo than the treatment with tuberculin and
other vaccir.'-S, oi.d it also was a danger for the surroundings and oven
for tto caaaunity."

And, or. page 136s "Three petients died after having been vaccinated
• ith blood being infected with solaria tropica and not with malaria ter-
ticnc. Thu tra.'ic outcoe- of this exporiaent was discouraging, and only
a year 1'-tor could tho author dccido hias-lf to procood with tho aalaria
vaccinations."

Kooody tells today of those v' 'tins, but hngnor Jsurogge's revolu¬
tionary discovery is known nod adopted in tho wholu world and has b-como

•

tho cocoon property of aU peoples for tho borwfit of suffering mankind.

Those doctors who ks-w that tho fight pgainst dlsor.so and docth
was a thorny oath, wore more than all ready to sacrifice their own livos.

The roal sciintlet .*nd the real doctor, therefore, do not oppoao cacli
other. Hoievor, the scientist oust not forget that nr.turo is tho or.pros-
sion of tho divin- will and that only this cognition can save hiss frem
f - "hybris", th.o •xjur^llossroas which for tho Crock tragedians was tho
greatest vice of mankind.

-or- then all, the words of tho grcr.tost Gorman physician, Theo¬
phrastus 3onfcastus ven Hohenhoia, colled Paracelsus, must bo applied for
both sci-ntist rxd doctor: "Thu doctor grews with his hoart, ho corao
from God end is oalightuned by Katuro - the best of all the drugs is
Love."

Ky learned colleagues have coopilod a long list of documents on hu¬
man experiments especially fren th© Wostera doaocrecios. It would be in-
Just, hcxievor, to conceal tho enormous benefit of the human experiment.

The fact that Paul Ehrlich dared to release his drug "Sr.lvnssnn" which
had not >r.t boon sufficiently tested, saved thousands from the dangerous
consequences of one of tho ;«orst cpid-^ics. Th- ftet that Strong took
th- responsibility upon riaself to carry out the probably very dangorous
oxp-riaent with plague bacilli made it possible to vaccinate thousands of


11U5


17 Juiy-A-,rLr-l6-5-Lconard (int. Katz)
Court So. I


pcrsors and to savu them free the a Laos', certain death. Tho fact that
Strong was in c. position to prove that 3ori-bori was a disease caused
b/ a deficiency, and that Goldborgc;- proved tho sa sc for pellagra, -aedo
it possible to fight this deficiency and to liberate entiro countries
froa one of their worst diseases.

With regard to the criminal law, however, and the judgment of crimes
a s ainet humanity, it is the. decisive result that also in other countries,

0

under the tl*:ro generally prevailing scdicnl and ethical convictions,
doctors carried out similar or the sos* experiments for the benefit of
scientific remonrch or in consideration of c critical condition of their
country.

If I furthor said that the surroundings had an influence on tho doc¬
tor's position, I aid not think or tho second determining factor of our
individuality, not of the material influence on the organism that might
modify or mitigate the influence or the actual conditions at that tiro
upon the decisions of a physician.

Corcentraticci carp, militarism and peoples' court. Three important
columns of the T.iird Reich. They havo collapsed. They are not to bo for¬
gotten, however, -.'hen examining the guilt of the individual. Every Ger¬
man had to fear then in one fora or another. And then came tho war. War
was once called "the steel bath of tho peoples". Heraklit called it "tho
father of all things •*. I can only repeat the Judgment of the IMT that
"war is tho evil itself". This is true to the highest degree for tho last
war. It was a total, a terrible war. Sven the medical science on both
sides had to assist warfare. I have before rx the index of the host kr.cwn
scientific English periodicals from the war period "Lancet and mature",
Kcw, after the war. General T.I. Betts of the United States War Do-.art-
acr.t and Professor l.T. Sirs teat of the 3ritish Supply Offico have de¬
clared that the captured German scientific accomplishments during the
war were of t-te greatest use for tho economic progress of British and
American industry. Ever, the terrible freezing experiments of Dr. Rase ho r

nU6


17 Juiy-A-r 1^-16-6-Lecnarc! (Int. Katz)

Coart Ho. I


provod to be of greatest use for America in the mar against Japan. (Sco
Document So. 31, Bcckcr-Froyser-g.) And what about uo soldiers? Vo stood
in tbs air-raid shelters, tho Socialist beside thu Party neabor. Vo
did not c con la ir ,. Vo sax villages co up in f lanes, innocent women and
children become the victims of air raids. Vo saw our country, tho Father¬
land, in distress, ar.d wo believed, even if we hated liitlor and his fol¬
lowers like tho plague, we had to fulfill our duty to our country to
tho bitter ond. Ono cannot tell these things, they have to bo cxxiricn-
cud. In such iLzaa a doctor is placed against Ids will between Scylla
and Charybdls, between his concept of his profession and his duty aa a
soldier. It is ,osy today to say with pathos from an academic chair:
"nunquam nocorol" K<*, this san does not say: "I was n moabor of tho
r.sistanco. I was trying day in and day out to ho Ip persons who vjoro
racially ar.d politically persecuted." He says: "Thun, liko everyone olso,
I ouruly did ny duty."

Aorahaa Lincoln, one of tho groatost Ancrierns, said in l*-62, in a
spoach boforo the African Congress: "Tho dogzas of quiet tines ill sort
with our stormy present. Ir. tho fact of new events wo oust think and
act in a new nay."

s

i.ith this I intend to conclude my staUnonts about -nodical othicc,
and repeat tho words which Li«.k wroto at the ond of his bool:, "Tho
Doctor and Hifl I’issior.": "If we went to abolish undesirable conditions
in medicine, wo oust follow our cc -scicnco - to help are! to heal, that
is, today as always, the mission of the doctor."

Ho: to tho experiments thoasclves ir. brief:

The Chi-f Prosecutor let the weight of tho facts spook for thoin-
selres in other -xporia.ntt>, but b-causc this is lacking in tho seawater
case, hi resorted to poetry! Ke led us to the realm of Greek .cythology
and remindod us of Tantalus rho was punished with eternal thirst and
hunger because ho sjrvod his sen to tho gods as food. I will foilexf ciio
cx?apli- of Hr. Telfort Taylor and go am. step further and load you,

lUii7


17 J'liy-A-r L-l£-7-Lcooard (Int. Eatz)
9eurt .Vo. I


Your Honors, to Hell.

Thj orosceutior. docs adait one point however. 7.*>- purpose cf tie
eawater ajqaerlnenta was not meant to bo methods of killing an dcs-
truction, but i>ad a very clear connection with rescue problems, (pago 67
of the German transcript). Tho statement of the pros-cuticn, heaver,
that r,o t-ui^olo progress Cor modern medicine had been achieved .mat bo
denied cost emphatically. As an answ-r to this I would liko to suscoot
to the prosecution to roa<. two books which arc bound to disprove tho
basis of such a statcaort. The boo .d in question arc two En.Lioh jooI.c;
the English, the groat- :t seafaring nation quite naturally considered
his nautical c-obJ -a o' paramount importance. Shipwreck - survivors, n
medical study by hact x Id Critschley, London In .A. Churchill Ltd. 1943.
He maintains that l\. Se'faring tradition is built upon tho sacrifices
and sufferings o.' ;,erorr.tions of sailors, explor.rs and daring :,mrchant-
ur.. This compels t... medical profession to put its knowledge at tho
disposal of the i<nvy. He continues to describe the sensation of thirst
and the effort*: to conquer the lack of weter and finally is forced to
admit that r.o eolation has yet boon found for this problem. Tho second
book is Janes -nicy's "Ocean". He narrateo the odysooy of 5 shipwrecked
aun. frit u a ir the middle of the last war, this book is an epic of
caaradcarJp and huranity end at the sa*jo tin- a dramatic description
of t ri •■s »:f feulplosa drifting survivors of a shipwrock. As

cr-rt of y i-i documents I submitted two scientific papers >y Parker,
Doc. ho. 13, and La.d-11, Doc. f»o. 21, de ling with seawater c.: peri -nts
arri, further, Doe. So. 19, depicting a drama on the high SQQfl, underli¬
ning the .ecesGit; of such research. Tboy differ free other experiments
carried out by the defendants by the fact that the physician lied them
constantly taxer his control and could stop them at any time. A lass
of water ended the experiment. Helmut 'nrx says on this subject that for
quenching t.virst s-.lt solutions are superior to pure water, since the
time it re—nins in the body is greater and the balancing offect on tho


mue


17 J'jly-A-71-I6-3-Uorxrd (Int. Katz)

Court llo. I

intern.diary disturbances is sore pronounced. (The L'atur balance or the

Healthy and Sick Person. Springer Publishing House). The injections at

• •

tic end of individual exp..rInerts sore, therefore, not tortures, but
wort radically woll founded. The so'water experiments arc furtheraoro
basically difforont in that, in contrast, for example, to the bacterio¬
logical experiments, no diseases are caused in a healthy person >.itk
untested dr'igs or, as ir. the case of sterilization, the healthy person
is rendered per ancntly sterile.

Therefore, I can. Certainly turn to the question whether tho exc-
cution of those Justified oxporl^nts can be considored n war cri*. or
a crime against huacnlty. In view of tho consolidation of evidence ;>hich
I hx-vo sutoittod to tho court, I can prcsor.t its result hore in the form
of a few noxi-.s.

Its execution Lay in the hards of nan, woll suited for this tack
by reason of previous experience and specialization in the field. Tho
coat frawus Goman internist Eppingor, calls him his moot r.blo l Tho di¬
rector of the uxporinont had a nuaber of well trained aids at h»a disposal
and all necessary therapeutical Isplooents were at hand. Tula experiment
could not have been carried out differently in the b.st American ;:on.»l-
tal. Tho acted beginning of the oxporiuont was preceded by i.ito.xlvo
animal oxperirj its end an experiment on bins. If by tho director. The
treatment, housiig end nourishment of the experimental persona itoro good.
They volunteered ar.d wore informed about alia tend consequences of tho ex¬
periment by the director. If sceeonc wero to enphnaizc again at U:ia
point that volunteers exist in allied prisons but not in Goman concen¬
tration camps, then I do not want to argue about that. A3 defense counsel
it suffices Tor mo to point out that Boiglbocck suo,1.ctiv>-lj had defini¬
tely and not fcarolcsaly assumed that hJ mas dealing with volunteer a. A
judge of r. cdjrdnal court does not Judge the action, he judges chc :V-n
owl there!oro ho ccn not simply pass up tlx so-called inner facts of tho
case. Sor wca tr.erc any definite proof submitted that allied nationals


lllli?


17 Juiy-A-rL-lc— 1 9-Leonard (Int. Kate)

Coot '.o. I

wen. used in the experiments. The experimental persons »ero not selected
to persecute then for racial or political reasons, they wore the black
chevron of t h*. anti-social prisoner. A study of the American Land ^ration
and marital laws have tought a. tint especially in Ao-rica, the concept
of the "Ar.ti-socicl clea-r.t" is Weil understood. — Ho death cases cr.d
n0 pen t i a p ci r aer.t of health resulted from the sea-water <s vriment.
They aero certainly hard and troublesome and constituted an heroic act
on the port of the experimental persons, but they wore not torture:,
and crueltlos, they did not violate hunan dignity and thus, they are
not crime j against humanity. This is seen unequivocally from the state¬
ments of Dr. l*.3st, raosion, Pilla-in and L’cttbach and from the suorn
testimony of t & dofendaut as witness in his win behalf. Thooo testimony
disprove c«a>l~t..ly the oros-cution witnesses Vicaeg, Vorlicek, 3mttr
rschofonig. It is new the task of the court to weigh thoco tostino-
nies against or.ch othwr and to oxaaino


11150


17 Julc-i-v*?—17—1-I.aloy (int. lap)

Court I

their credibility. Apart froe the cany previous convictions of the old
Jail-bird “iovcg, ve nust not forget in the cpbc of tho other prosecution
vitnosscs, whet tho star witness of tho prosecution in concentration carp
quosti'ns, Eognn, ha* written about fooling of rovengo. Tho cast
ieportent clrcucstanco, however, is the fact that all the bo prosecution
witnoss Sf-rod only at tho fringo of tho action itself, that they woro not
absoluto oyo-witnossos, but depended on rucors and logondo as describod
V us vividly by tho exech physician Dr. Horn as a phonoconon of cass
psychology. In tho case of the oea-wator oxporlccnto I was able to find
tho original data shoots, and thus nako an oxport investigation poosiblo.
This investigation has now been carrlod out by tho internationally
rocoffjixcd autt^rity, tho export Prof. Dr. Toolbar!, and has confimod
tho stAtonento of tho dofon&ant aro unoquivocally. 9roa tho prosocution 1 a
oxport, Prof. Ivy, had to c'-ncod cany docieivo pointo to tho dofenoo.

This cor eludes ny stataonts about tho cxporinontc. In ooncluolon
I want to point out onoo r.oro that tho dofendant had no porconal intcroot
whatever in the expericents and that ho carried thee out agninct his will
as a cilitary ordor which he had to obey.

Tour great president, Franklin Dr. Roosevelt said on the 23rd of
Feb. 1942: "The Atlantic Charter does not only apply to those parts of
tho world which touch upon the Atlantic ocean but to the whole world;
the aL;s are dic.-*r=ing tho aggressor, solf dotorsination for nations
and peoples, and the four freedoesi Froodo” of Speech, Freedom of ~o-
ligion, Frcedon froe want and Froedoc fror fear." Tour coldiorc hevo
carried tho Stars and Stripes across tho ocean to put these wordo of
Roosevelt into action. If soceone says to you now: "I have livod in fear
and undor conpuinion." *ould it not bo tragic if you especially, as
liberators froc fear, would execute hero what Kirclor or Hitler have
not done 7 If I quoted the devil’s servant cephlstophiles in tho caoo
of Dr. liaschcr, then you shall quote Faust in Beiglbocck’s case and oay:

"hhoovar strives :o eake an effort hi= vc can savo"


11151


17 July-^J?—17-2-Kaloy (let. Lea)
Court :


or objective and Bubjoetire reasons tkeroforo, you vlll have
to acquit ny clients.

THL P2ZSI2ZST* The Tribunal will now bo In roccss for a few

cononto.

(X rocoss was taken)


11152


17 Jily-ir-I?-iS-^Kcohas (int. Loa)

C OUTt I

ZEZ VJtPSrJiLi The Tribunal is again in session.

~ P22SI237: It is the intention of the Tribunal to hear tho
personal statccanta on tho part of tho defendants or. Saturday. Tho
arguments vi 11 ho concluded by the end of tocorrow afternoon. Those
pertonel statc=;nts on the part of the dof-ndanta will he nado hy oach
def ndant fron tho dock. Sach defondant will stop to tho door of tho
dock hoforo which will ho placed tho nicrephono. Thoso porsonal otatooonta
on the part of oach dofcndant ero, of courso, not intondod to ho arguments.
The dof:ndants havo toetified at longth fron tho stand, tholr counocl
fcavo argued tho sattor, wo haro heard tho counsol or. oral argument end
tho counsol will filo a hriof, tho longth of which do-ponds upon tho
sound discrotion of oach countol. It appearo to tho Tribunal that under
the so clrduE stances that a porsonal statceont by oach dof. ndant not to
oxcood ton cinutos for oach one night bo sufficient. I would bo glad
to hoor free counsolasto whethor or not thoy think that this will bo
sufficiont and if not sufficiont, why not.

HE* SAUTTSi Kr. President, I holioro that in tho nano of all tho
dof-ndants and tho defonso that tho tico Halt of about ton minutes
per defendant is sufficiont. If a defendant would llko to haro oloron
or twolYO ninutos, I ae ouro eono defendants will toko oor.o ninutoo loss.

I believe that vo can bo in agreocont with tho proposal of tho Tribunal.

7H3 "^3": Ky oyo-sight possibly would not bo very good In
watching tho exact ton ninutos c»ck dofendant will spook, if thoy do not
oxcccd that licit coro than a ainuto or so. It will bo understood thon
that oach dofendant will cake his personal ploa fror tho box beginning
Saturday coming. Very well, counsol, that io understood.

I understand fron the interpreter that tho trenslatione of tho
argue on to on.behalf of the dofor.dant Huff have not yet been rocolvod.

1EL Toe, Tour Honor, it Just arrived.

-=-■ rT“3HZl*Ti The Tribunal will now hear the argue ante on behalf
of counsol for tho defendant Huff - tho translation has been received.


11153


17 Jul?-*JB-19-l-Cook (int. Lob)

Court I

IP-. SAZJTZ3: ?or the defendant 3offj

Tour Honors, I hare a dotailed pioco of writing which I have oub-
nlttcd on 1 July. I have submitted tho evidence in tho caao of Dr.

Ruff and Judgod thac obtJoctively, and than in a supplement of 1 July
1S47, submittod on tho 8 July 1947, I have also explained ny pooition
to the testinony of Dr. Ivy in detail and I have dotorr.inod that tho cor>-
eoption of Dr. Ivy in all important points agrees with tho views and
practices of Dr. Huff, and, that, thoreforo, Dr. Huff, is also from
tho point of view of Dr. Ivy not guilty in that viow oithor. Tho brief
for tho length of tico does not onablo no to presont thcco statements
of Dr. Ivy which aro also Important for this trial but I would liko
the Tribunal to tnko noto of cy writton presentation in tho caoo of
Dr. Ivy in tho trial hriaf of tho prosocution. I could not anowor to
tho trial brief-of tho Prosocution bocauoo I havo not yot rccoivod it.

If I con got thiaboforo tho vordict I would liko to anr-or to it.

Tov, Tour Honors, I turn to tho ploa which I have writton no an
introduction, froc which I shall quoto the followings

Tho dofoadnnt Dr. Huff is charged only with tho high nltltudo
oxporiuents which woro ®rrlcd out by his collaborator Dr. Romberg
in cooperation with Dr. Rancher in tho Dachau concentration camp. Ko
was nevor accusod on any other count by any one; tho coaplotoly negative
results of the trial sake it so oolf-ovidont that tho conspiracy an
alleged by the nroaecutioa does not includo Dr. Huff, so that wo nood
not waste a word aV>ut it.

This fact in itcolf already constitutes a cortain oxcoptional
position for tho dof-ndant Dr. Ruff la thia trial, bocauoo cost of the
other participants must dofond themselves against a sorioo of difforont
charges; on Ruff, however, only on this one.

Then frou -egos 1 to 12, tho first chapter of ny writton statement,

I have represented Dr. Huff as a nan and scientist, ac ho is doccribod
by all of his collaborators, and as a sciontict all of thee emphasize


iiV'U


17 v uiy->-J?-l3-2— Cook (1st. Lob)
Sr-urt I


his ncrs-usl courage Is those self-cxperl=cnts, his responsibility and
--Is consideration for experiacntal subjects and his scientific achiovuonts.
Ihosc roex n a n- dationg have to core valuo be cans o as far as the crldonco
&cb the Pres cost ion was not able to produco a single KitncBB who tes¬
tified against Dr. Huff unfavorably as a nan or a scientist.

I now continue with the second chapter of ny plea in which I havo
examined the orperiaonts. These presentations aro t *. bo found on pogo
5 and the following pages, under tho Honan Due oral IX. I have said
the following thoro:

The procc. dings of this nan;-’ nonths old trial havo clearly shown
that Dr. Huff is innocent and that thoso exports were right who fron
thd outset and in cpito of all suspicions woro convinced of tho inao-
cor.co of Dr. Huff, and who openly tostifiod to Dr. *b»ff , B Innoconco.

Certainly Dr. Huff agrood to and approved it that hlgh-altitudo
toe tc with a lo*-preesuro charber of tho Boieh Air : .’ini a try woro por-
foracd by his co-operator of cany yoaro, IT. Rooborg, togothor with Str.b-
sarst Dr. Hnschor, in a concentration carp, using O'nocntration canp
innate* as onpcrlcontal subjocts. Ho ngrood to it nftor tho porfornanco
of urgent oxporiaents in tho Dachau O'ncontratlon carcp had olroady boon,
on principal, rgreod upon and approved by Professor Dr. Hippko and Prof.

Dr. Volts.

Thoreforo, tho question tIoob whothor those hlgi^-altitudo oxpori—
r.cnta were already illegal for tho reason that THZT ¥2&£ PSaTCSKED 017

c<rs*3Aiior zac xnuxss .

‘This question cust bo donied; for only such inar.tos wero used for
tho experiaonts who had 701T7733ZL for the*, or who at least woro regar¬
ded by Huff as volunteers and could be regardod as such in view of
tho whole situation, and nn ono could roproach hlx for having orrod in
this respect because other porsons had porhaps deceived hie about those
facts.

2) Thcro are, however, cone witner.ee* wh- apparently naintain that


11135


17 JuIy-i-J?-19-3-Cook (lat. Loe)

C'-art I

the prisoners used in the aeff-Sneberg oxporirents were not voluntcors,
lh«To ell the witnesses Vievcg end Eoff are of this opinion.

a) During his direct exacinatioa of 13 Deceeccr 1946 (Cerean exa-
Einetita records pege 464 end following ones) tho vitness Vicvog coa-
*i«aod a s-rioc of exporlcer.ts of different kinds which were perforred
at the Dachau cr neon tret ion carp. Hoforring ir. particular to tho
higb-eltitcdc asperinents thore, which alono c-n ha C'r.eidorod in tho
lndictnont against Dr. Suff, he states firstly (pegca 475-476) that
high-altitudo oxperisent with the low-prossuro char her voro porforcod
on 10 pationts; "Tor those exporirents frequently els', patiento and
aalo nurses, also, vero ueod who during tho oxporiaente voro soon in tho
corridor of tho adjacent hospital ward.", with which Yiuvcg app«r c tly
waster V point out that th'-ee "pntiontc 4 and "ale- the nurBOo" voro
as Y'luntoors; tho ton "077:0111 ZXPD?.I:Z?-T11 SU3J2CTS* had been veil
fdd and cup li;d with tcokos. (pago 476/485) but in addition thoso
tsn so-ccllod "onhlbition-pationts", a large nuaber of ponplo hnd
beer, selected fron tho casp who were "always boing sent to tho high-
altitudo cxpcrlnont institute". In thr.t way a block loador (Blockaoltco-
ter) who probably suffered fr-c pnoua-nin a fox hourc lntor was In tho
sick bay nnrtuaiy"; tho sano happenod in the !alarlr. dcpa.rtnent of
tho vitnoss 7ic.wog;"one day a pationt who had had t’-r.o difforencoc with
Zill, tho loador of tho carp for protective custody, was oont to tho
oxporiucntal inctituto; ho (Viovcg) found hio in tho rortuary tho
next day. He (Yiovcg) by hoarsoy" that a groat nunbor of pntionto

who V-ofc part in those oxporlaonts had diod and ended up in tho sick
hay sortuary" (page 476).

Botwcon the linc3 '! this rather obscure end vague st«tcnont
one cay rend that, according to Viaveg'o ctatcaent thcco furthor
experimental subjects took end especially those wh' had diod during tho
expori ent3 DID ITOT bolong to the ten "official experimental subjects"
and had not been volunteers. H'-veror, in the direct os an i nation by


mS6


17 Jfcly- A-JB-lS-4-Cool: (i-t. Loa)
Court I


tbo Pr-sccution Vac witness 7icwo g did art expross hinsclf explicitly
eV.ut Vais alleged oonpnlsion of the so-caHod oxpori-ontal subjocto.

faring the cr^ss-oxsairation by the dofenso crur.ool of Ur. ?.oxbcrg
the witness Yiovog (j*o 485) oxplainod his expression the "ton
exhibition patients*. The ten s elec tod patlonts who woro used for the
high altitudo tosts had been acooreodatod in a special Tn->~ and had boon
well nourished (page 485); they hnd boon exhibited, and they had boon
presentod to Eitnlor during one of his Tisits. 21mlor nado then big
preniaos, if thoy surriYod, they would bo disnisood ....those 10 patlonts
had boon drawn into the exporiaonts; ... they had told bin (Vioweg)


Illy?


17 Jui;»-A-RZ-2&-l-0ross (Int. Lee)

Coart -o. 1

that they were very exhausted by the whole effeir. BUT aS 7a2. AS
HZ CCTJID —IST ALL ScHTITSD* (page US6/U89) oa questioning
the witness ^ieveg repeatedly stated (p.-ge Ug6/US7/US9) * th-t as fnr
rs he could r«eeebcr Dr. Rnscher had carried out the experiments
himself; the only thing “ieweg could state (page U67) about a prxtlci-
prtioa of "Luftwrffe officers" in these high altitude experiments,
wrs that aomo Luftwaffe officers "had also bean there". But he could
not say anything about the actual participation of the Luftwaffe
officers. ?roo the description on P"ge 501 " these 2 gentlemen of
the Luftwaffe" cortrialy were not identical with Aiff and Roaberg.

Eo hinself (Vicweg) had only talked with these 10 official experiment¬
al subjects, the so-c-llcd "exhibition pa.tlcnts". But not-.with any
of the other experimental subjects. Ec himself hrd novtr observed
that these othor Prisoners were used for high pltltude tests, but ho
hrd boor, told rbout it frequently. Viewcg repeatedly stated that the
10 official exoorincntal eub Jects had still been rlivo nt the end
of the cncr lr.cnto (page U«9) that EO DZaIKS hed occurred among thorn.

So much for the etrteaent of the witness Viewcg; of courso it io
unrolinblo bec-use it doos not eet'bllsh cl©-r distinction botween
these high altitude experiments authorised by Huff and carried out
with the cooperation of Dr. Roaberg, and other experiments in the low
pressure chamber which Rascher ’undertook by order of Kimnlor, without
the authorisation or previous knowledge of Dr. Huff and without the
cooperation of Dr. Roaberg. This distinction, which is of decisive
importance in Judging this case, only appears in Viewcg 1 s st-toment
insof-r as the ten official experimental subjects ‘ (the so-called
■ exhibition petitnta") were exclusively used for the first oxoeri-
centa (PRuff-Roaber^-Sascher) , whereas other prisoners were utted for
the other.exooriaents (Rrscher alone). Of course, the significance
of this distinction wpb no*, cle-r to V;- V og at th»t tine and could
cot be obs rved by him, because Vicweg did not know anything at nil
rbout Dr. Ruff»s -ctirity and since he did not know anything ‘ -L

lllSfi


17 July-^Bt-20-a-Oross {Int. Lee)

Court To. 1

r'ioat the agreements which bed bees rceched between Dr. *uff rrA D r .
2rscher.

Aprxt from these obscurities one h'8 to regard 7H2 STATSCBTr 0?

IH2 VI TTISS VISVEG VIIF TEE GHZJlI ZS7 CAUTIOT for another rersom Tor
Ticveg la the witness who, with unusual unscrupulousr.es*, connitted
nlrin perjury in the sessions of 1J end 16 D e cenbor 1Q46. He tried
first (page 47U fg.) to give the impression that he had been sont to
the concentration crap without any reason, tfcrt he had beer, coccitted
for "political Protective security." This representation of tho
witness Viowog is completely is record.-, -o with his previous behavior,
because foroerly be had generally pretoadod to be politically persecut¬
ed an innocent nan who had been thrown into o concentration carp
without ever having lc-rncd the reason, tfadcr this frlse pretense ho
offered hicsolf as witneso for this Trial, and because of thlo do-
reprsser.tntion he vns presented no a witness ty tho prosocution vhco
ha had docolvcd. However, in the cross exrxdnr.tion Vicwog had to
rdnit that in 195b he was sentenced to 4 respectively 6 years FZ2IAL
SSPTirUDS 70?. 7GH0S3T 0? DOCOOTS AKD 7IUU2), that is to sry for
CCnZL'S crlncs, which, ns a rule, have got nothing to do with politics.
On repe-tci questioning the witneso T icv 0 g stated again and egain (pry-
80 4?3 f ?> ) that he could rOH ES220E3 haying received nay other
previous conviction in addition to those 4 respectively 6 years pennl
servitude. He insisted on this str.tcccnt, even though he had been
repeatedly rordnded that ho vrs under oath; his otercotypc phraso woe,
he could not rencsber, he even emphasised: "That he deposed this
under oath" (page 434) ,-> n d he continued to insist on his stateoent
even though he was told that his previous convictions could be deterain-
ed without difficulty since his files had beer, sent for (page 484).

How, to compare the testimony given under oath with the list of
convictions of the witness ■’ieweg, which was submitted cs Document
Huff Fo. 24, in Document Book 23uff. Supplement Y, pego 9*.


11159


17 July-ir-3S-2C-3-Gross (lot. Lea)
Court To. 1


Beside* the U respectively 6 years of pearl servitude which he
admitted, the witness "leveg received la reality SOT LESS TEaH 6
FBI 937 7IS!S prior to 193 1 *. among then 5 years pearl servitude rad
5 ye'rs less of civil rights for reported severe thefts.

This extract of the penrl register shows *HT the witness Viewcg had
such n "bed memory": Ee never wrs politically persecuted, as he
pretended to he, hut he is the type of incorrigible professional
criminal who could not he changed or educated even hy the most
severe penalty. If .urTBCDT deserved to he sont to the concentro-
tico carp it was this Vleveg. 3ut even tho 5 years ho spent in the
concentration carp did not help him any. *or now he is again in
prison, in Bnebcrg, where charges were brought against hin on 5 March
19^7 at tho District Court of B»aherg for forgery of documents and
fraud, as well ns for 5 erses of repeated theft, for attempted
Abortion, for nctlve bribory and for Black Market dealings.

This incorrigible professional crininel allowed hinsoIf to be
presontod here as star witness for tho prosocution against nn honor¬
able, blrneloss cltlxen, ns which Dr. Huff or.erged in tho courso
of this Trial. Cm tho court base its verdict on the stntccents
of a person like Viewog, who on top of everything shanclossly lied
to the Tribunal and committed the worst possiblo perjury.

b) Tho other witness presented by the Prosecution for the Dpchmi
experinaats is Valter Feff; he is at present in the Dachau crr.p for
war cririnals rad will soon have to stand trial himself before the
.Ooericnn Tribunal, for experiments in which he took an nctivo part.

I skip the next few pages of the plea whore I state that this
other witness of the Frosecution, the witness Eeff, according to
his own testimony was a multiple murderer, that he is fully conscious
of his murders, without any kind of conscience he boasted of them
end believes he will escape by implicating other defendants, for
instance I-Siff. But I want to draw your ettention to the testimony

11160


1


17 July-ir-51-eC—h_£ r o«s (lat. Lea)
Court To. 1


which I regard irportmt thr.t a Jewish tailor - It is to be found on
prge 12 which I presented In ay plec. I reed or. urge 12 :

°pecil attention auat be r.ttr.cfced to the witness Beffs further
rssertlon regarding c Jewish tollor who worked in the sick bey. Ktff
crllsd Dr. Romberg' s attention to the fact thrt this nrn wr.s not
sentenced to de-tlj, rnd Hocbcrg thereupon i.-mediately went to Haochcr
with Seff in order "to set nutters straight". Coon Intervention by
Dr. Romberg, Hrscher then actually soat the tailor back; when the
r.ccooponying SS nrn again threatened the Jew, Hr.schor ngnln Interven¬
ed md "lnncdlately had the era (the trllor) brought to safety In tho
bunker" (p. 6$5) . Again, is the case of r. second innate, r. Czech,
who unjustly rnd without his consent hr.d boon brought In for tho
experiments. Dr. Rocberg according to Hoffs report intervened on
behalf of the prison or, with tho result thr.t Dr. Bcsohor entered a
complaint against tho crlnlnnl SS ana with tho Crap Cocronndor Plonowo-
ky. Thereupon the SS nrn wrs iraedlrtoly trrnsforrcd to Lublin; In
thrt wry tho Czech wrs Sr2D ntO'.: CZSTAli S2ATH 3T DR. 3013ZBQ (pr.go

$55. 719).

This testlnony of the vltnoss Neff pl^ys an lnportrnt prrt In
msvorlng the question whether or not tho experimental subjects uood
were volunteors, rad also, whrt Dr. Romberg, and therefore Dr. ftaff,
knew about thee, and whet Dr. Romberg's ettltudo wr.s toward this
question. In this connection, Hoff said: "Romberg, Huff's doputy,
tberoforo, did not wmt nay dangerous oxporineats; he tolerated no
nurder and considered only experiments with volunteers".

Thrt is literally wh"t the witness said.

:iy further str.tcaents on prge 12 and 13 of the pier then point to
the decisive fact thr.t Seff evidently could not distinguish on tho
one hand between those experiments which were conducted with the
approval of Ruff and were carried out without any deaths rt all, rr.d
between tho experiments which he conducted himself and which Rrecher

12261


17 July-A-3S-20-5-Gros8 (In*-. Lea)
Court So. 1


undertook on the authority of Hinuler and in which deaths occurred.

I rlso want to reed vfc-t I here written on page 13.

Eowerer, Seff' s testir.ony docs show that the selection of the
experisental subjects was carried out in two different wnye: Tor
the * dangerous oxnerlsests " 2 'scher ordered the subjects through
the local herdourrters, and they were brought by thp SS; they were
thereforo people condemned to death (p rfie 663 ); for the ■ serial ex-
perisents * on the other hand, ra d "for rost of tho Other experinontB
which took place that's whet the witness srid, tho people were
brought to the experimental station froa the blocks , that is, fron
the cnop*, (page 657) by the block leaders, etc. (page 663 ).

Those "serial cxpcricents" were obviously the exporinents approved
by Buff rad Hoff exprossly establishes that "v oluntoors report od
for these ox>crlsonta" (pages 657 / 71 2) He even gives the reasons

why tho prisoners voluntcorcd for these: because H»schcr, rnd
Hiarlcr too, had promised v-rious innates "that, if they participa¬
ted in the cxporlnants, they would be ~i 7 on a. hotter lebor assign-
oent* (pegs 657 ) and even -• Hlcnlcr pror.isod th-t thoy would be
discharged (pego 712 ). Such volunteers reported to Hr.schor on
their own initiative (according to the witness) as ho wont through
the carp, without any special efforts having been necossnry to find
volunteers (witness Heff, page 657 ).

There can oc no doubt that these volunteers, estimated by Kcff to
be about 10 , are idor.ticrl with the 10 "offici-l cxpcrlcont'l
subjects" or "exhibition patients" mentioned already by tho witness
Viewcg. rnd it is noteworthy that Dr. Huff, too, in his testimony
rlwrys told of 10 or 12 , or ct the cost 15 persons free the very
beginning, of course (he did not count then hlcsolf) who were
re : :ulrrly called in for the high altitude experiments and who ho new
hisself, when, a single tine, he wns oresent for observation and
checking at the experiments in Dachau; this number Dr. Suff had
nentioned et c tine when Heff 1 s and Tieweg's testimony wa.s not evcil-


11162


17 July—A-3&-2C—o-Gross (Xnt. Led)
Court ~o. 1


rile . He therefore could not hr.vc anticipated tkrt these vimeeses
vould confirn his figures re correct.


11163


Court I

If Jul 47-A-21-i-3Di-Leonard (Lee)


I have further stated on cages 15 end 16, vhere I first mention
the numerous contradictions in the testinory of Neff, on cege 15, under
*S, I continue:

There can he no douht that, if these statements by Keff were true,
it would have been easy for the Office of the Public Prosecutor to
oroduce numerous other witnesses, who, likewise, had been inmates of
the concentration case at Dachau, vho had perhaps experienced these
experiments thenselTes, or vho had scoken to subjects of these experi¬
ments or had even observed the experiments. However, not a single
outsider, not a single incontestable witness, hac been produced although
half a year has elapsed since the days when, here in the courtroom,
one could not fall to realize to whet an unreliable and untrustworthy
class persons of the caliber of Vlewcg and Keff belong. This fact vory
strongly indicates that obviously no other witnesses are available or
could be nade e.-.aileblo who could confirm that the experimental subjects
vho were used in the F.uff-Rcaberg altitude tests wore not volunteers.

Let the fact bo aentloned here, for the tries of comprrison, that in tho
case of tho Gobhardt sulfonanido operations, for oxamplv, one-hrlf
dozen incriminating vitnesses were brought from Poland rnd Rusfia and
wore interrogated here ao witnesses. Vhjr vat not a single trustworthy
witness produced from among tho Dachau experimental subjects and placed
in tho witness box? Because no one could be found who could confirm tho
untrue allegations of a Vieveg and a Keff. On the other hand, during
tho trial a whole series of persons, vho deserve u groat deal more
belief than Vieveg and Keff, affirmed with certainty that all tho
experimental subjects in the Buff-fioaberg experiments were volunteers
and that from the very beginning an indispensable condition which was
demanded and assured was that the subjects were voluntary.

Then, in this connection. Your Honors, on page 16 to 18 I have col¬
lected the testimony by e series of witnesses vho have testified here
regarding the subject of voluntary experimental subjects, Dr. Lutz,
Elelscher, Eicpfce. and General Volff, and I have then, on page 18. given

1116k


Coart I

17 Jul 47-A-21-2-ZHX-Ieonerd (Ida)


tha result of all these testimonies by witnesses and have collected it.

If one takes all these statements by witnesses together, which
certify that the experimental subjects in the Dachau high eltitude
experiments of Dr. Huff and Hocberg wore volunteers, it cannot be
doubted that the concordant statements by Dr. Huff, Dr. Rouborg, and Dr.
Veltz are absolutely true; those are defendants, it is true, but from
all sides testiaosy is given of their irreoroachable orofessional con-
cectlon. Although they are now sitting in the dock, their oreciso and
clear statements deserve far sore belief than the changing and contra¬
dictory stateaents of a habitual criminal, who has coaaittod a downright
perjury in this court, or of a eurderer, who actually belongs far aore
in this dock.

I then cceo to oege 19, to the results under *5:

There con be no doubt that the oroerlsentol subjects for the
Dachau high altitude exoerleents wore volunteers, at least as far as
the exr«rleasts authorized by Ruff are concerned. Whether volunteorc
reoortod for the extra-exoerlsents continued by Dr. Rescher, or whether
the prisoners were forced into these exporlcents by Dr. Haschor, dooo
not need to be exaalned, because Huff and Rceborg did not oartlcloato
in those experiaents in any way.

But even if any doubt as to their having volunteered were possible,
it cannot bo denied that Huff and Hoaberg were firoly convinced that
all their experlseatal subjects actually wore volunteers; this was
stipulated froc the very beginning and in all discussions of Dr. Ruff
with Eippke, Veltz, end the representative of the SS; therefore Huff
could always be convinced that only volunteers wore actually concerned.

Dr. Huff's conviction was strengthened through personal conversa¬
tion with various prisoners on that day on which he hlnself want to
Dachau to control the execution of the erocricents and to ascertain
that everything was carried out in a completely orderly manner.

And finally, in this connection, it cannot be overlooked that Dr.
Huff, as he has stated under oath, confirmed by numerous affidavits in

11165


Court I

17 Jul 4?-A-2i-3-i3t-Leonard (Lea)


Document rook Puff, never at any ether tirw in his life worked with
involuntary experimental subjects. Just because he considered it as an
indispensabla provision for the success of the axcerinents that the
ercerlsantal subjects were volunteer:, that they thecsalves cocoerate,

Dr. Puff never thought that the Dachau prisoners were not fully ar.d
completely in agroecent with the exoerinents, ceoocinll:' since Ponberg
told-his, during his first visit in Berlin, that all conditions for the
experinental subjects were .elfHied end that they were, therefore,

Oerssan voluntary and crininal cxperinental subjects.

In Chapter 3 of ay written plea I have then stated ny attitudo
toward the probles of prisoners as voluntary eroorinontal subjects and
I have written about this on page 21 as follows:

The expert. Professor Dr. Leibbrandt, has held to hie one-sided
opinion also In this resoect, and has advocated the theory that
prisoners can never be regarded as volunteers. This ouinlon is doubt¬
lessly false; in other tines, the expert perhnoo would not have sunoortod
It. Tor the administration of justice in other cases also accents
legally binding statements of prisoners end does r.ot think of declaring
then legally ineffective only for the reason that the orisonor in con-
cequenco of his imprisonment finds himself in an eibrrrrsslng situation
and therefore not coopletely aoster of his own free will.

One euroly is not cis’-ker suroosing that none of the defendants,
even if he has even such great exnerienco as a nodical nan, at that
tine thought of all the oossibillties without execution which ve have
to consider now, where since sany souths we have to search for the
legal beds of the whole problem of human eroeriaeats, and have to think
of all eventualities. According to his continent, at that tine, each
physician ar.i research nan said to himself: If the experimental subject
agrees to the experiment, everything ia all right. Tor this always
anpeerod to the physicians to be the highest orlnciplo: an eruerinent
is legal if the axr.Tinental subject agrees to it, nrovided that the
ofcyeician observes the necessary care when uerforming the exuerinent.


22266


Coart I

17 Jul 47-jU21-4-«H-Leosard (Lea)

It proven here by this trial, there exists In no country a written law
regulating the legal conditions of experiments on humans. On the other
ride, however, the huaan experiment la such a far-spread and often such
an Indispensable natter that one night speak of a conventional law,
which generally and tacitly is accepted and acknowledged by the whole
world. The defense of tone of the defendants has demonstrated to the
Tribunal in its document books the ooinion of the whole world on this
conventional law, in the nest varying degrees, fron the absolute harmless
to the absolute deadly experinent, an: has certainly therewith conoiled
valuable material which is suitable for fcrnlng the beeis for a codifi¬
cation of this nedical conventional law and to show safe future roads
for the developoent of Justice in this .*nere. lacking a written law,
the physician ond research nan even today can only recognise the conven¬
tionally legal concept as a rule for his conduct as ororesoed in inter¬
national aedical literature. Experiments on which, tlno and tine again,
reoorts were made in this international literature without noetlng any
opposition do not constitute a criae In tho nodical conception. Proa
nowhere i plaintiff arose from the side of the responsible nrofesoional
organisation or fron that of the adnInistrotion of Justice to accuse tho
experiments described In the lltoraturo as being cr In Inal. On the con¬
trary, tho authors of those repor.e tegardlng their human exoorlaents
gained gonoral recognition and face; they were awarded highest honors;
they gained historical importance. Ami in soite of all this, is what
they reported on supposed to have be.n c crime? KoJ In view of tho
coaplote lack of written legal norms, the uhysician who generally knows
only little about the law has to rely o-, and r^fer to, tho ednissibility
of what generally is recognised ca admissible ell over the world.

The defense Is convince- that the Tribunal, when referring to the
decision of this oroblem without being uraJudicial, will first gain the
understanding fron the large number and multiplicity of experiments per¬
formed all over the world on healthy and sick oersons, on crisonero and
free pecmle, on criminals end on the ooor, even on children end mentally


11167


Court I

17 Jul 47-A_2l-5-I3(-Leonard (Lea)

ill persona, how the medical profession la lt« interactional totality
answers the question for the admissibility of human experiments not only
theoretically but also by practical examples.

It is psychologically understandable that German research ner. today
will have nothing to do, If aosslble, with human experlnenta and try to
get away from them, or that they would like to describe then os inadmis¬
sible even if before 1923 they perhaps were of the opposite opinion.
However, experiments nerforaed 1906-1912 by a highly respected American
in Asia for the fight against the plague, which made hin famous all
over the world, cannot and ought not to be labeled as criminal because
a 3lore is supposed to have nerforaed the same experiments during the
Hitler period (in fact, however, were not performed at all), and oxoorl-
aento for which, before 1933, a foreign research worker, the Englishman
Ross, wns awarded the Hobel prise for his malaria experiments, do not
deserve to be condemned only because a German physician performed similar
experiment*! during the Hitler regime. One should not cay thrt eroori-
oents, because of different diseases or different drugs from thoso
referred to lr. this trial, because of this difference had nothing to do
with the counts of the indictment of the present trial, end that there¬
fore they are of no importance or evidence. In tho foreground thoro
stands tho basic question for the conditions under which such experinonts
are permissible; whether thoy refer to plague or typhus, to tuberculoolo
or Jaundice is e secondrry aucstlon which concerns more the medical
expert than tho Jurist.

Decisive for this trial is the muestlon: Did the conditions under
which experiments were oerfomed by the defendants find their interna¬
tional recognition even for such experiments which were nerformed by
foroign research workers with the aoprovel of all civilized humanity?

If one vents to arrive at a Just and satisfactory decision, one
must disregard the feet thet here German research workers are accused.

On the contrary, or.e has to strive toward obtaining an international

besls to represent the oresent international opinion on human experiments

11168


Jourt I

17 Jul 47-1-21-6-iat-Leonerd (Lao)


ecd which for decodes, if not for centuries, will fora the base for
the nereissibility of


17 Jaly-A»eB-2S-l-i £al07 (Int. Lea)
O', art I


hirson cnpcrincnte. Vc, as Jurists, can '-nly reader a service to tho
dcvolotoont r .f nodical science and therewith to hucanity if wo endeavor
S'- establish a d' ubtlossly clear view '.f Vday’s international opinion
on hunnn experiments, if these exporiaonts were performed by Gomans or
by foreigners.

*hor. reading this international literature, however, there cannot ho
any doubt that tho volunteering of tho experirontal subjects worronts
in ever;- ccso tho legality of hunan oxpcriccr.to, and that, thoreforc,
she r.oro sentimental attitude of our research workors was right, whon
bocimso of their knowledge of international litornturo they r.ado tho
question of tho logality of hunan oxporlncnta dopend in tho first
place or. tho Yolur.tnrinosa of the oxnorLtoctal subjects.

2) As far as ono can see, the international nodical litornturo up
t- da to owhcrc roprcoontod tho opinion that tho consent of a prisoner
wan ineffective bee-use for reason of hie irpriconaont, ho had no froo
will. On tho c- -.trarys In nany caeoe It hae taken an important otep
forward, and h-.s frequently, with'-ut .mooting any opposition, rop'rtod on
oxperi ’.nts perforrod or. prisoners, T-C CO"SZ!T OF fHCC: 'rfAS KM RS

OAFJZ: AS ZSGZL'~:a 1. Kany experirontn which partly woro ronorted horo
in the verbal pr* coduro, partly doocribcd by tho d'cunor.t subnlttod by
the Uefonso, do-'-nstrato clearly that 'bvi'-usly ovoryvhorc tho opinion
prevailod thr.t regarding prisoners, in particular such who woro
JEWED IS DZAIK, IH3 CCTSST 0? IrZ FRISC^E VAS FJPLACT ?T
KSKISSIOF 0? 1HZ AV~CB:T12S 10 PSIIFOH: KPOP.r.CT HUi'AK SXIZP.r.S-'TST
and even such ox/er iron Sc which woro very danger-us and with which f'trv-
litics occurred in a rorc or less largo ntnbor; because also tho
published reports talk about the nurbor of deaths in the described ox—
perir.onte, -nrtly slightly car.ouflagcd but to a large extent publicly,
with'ut tho research worker or tho reader realising thr.t I'uSICKO'JS A.C2103S
were being reported, because otherwise tho roection would ka^c bee- a
C'Tplctoly different one.


11170


17 JP-22-2-4;-loy (Inti Lcr.)

Court I


3) "he question teepee jar-.levari? acute if these exporinonts were
carried o U * in a SOCHI T1RIAS SCACS or during a Xs-tcl war. It is not
the p» i-t in this connection whether a dictatorial rc 5 i.n 0 is dcsirablo
'■r ah-aid be rejected, noithcr whether a war ne such appears to be cri-
ainal (for cccarplo bocauso it will be judged as an aggressive v.-r later
nr.); tho attitude that under such exceptional conditiar.o, as thoy aro
the case in a dictatorship nr total war, oven lifo-endansoring experiments
nn honor. beings nay perhaps bo noro Justified than under noir.al or.dl-
tiono is obviously based ns the thought that tho strto gnvernod by
dictatorship nay «x.d will nok for groator sacrifices, also from criminals
ospoclally during total war.

As a natter of fact tha thought appo'-rs t>. have necurrod tn nany a
dofondmt during this trial; If during n total war tho state asks
ovorybndy t- ho r.ndy at any ti-o to serve at tho fr-nt, and if during
tho aortal war every worn and every child at hono is exposed dally
and ever;- iv ur t* .:ortnl dangor, many a citizen would think it ur.an-
tiofnet'-ry If especially a crininal, wfco is burdened with heavy guilt
or nay even have committed a crino pur.iohnblo with death, ronnino
free of r .11 dmger, in other w rds ~uld be in n better pooltl'n then
tho upri£,ht citizen.

It n-po.-rc .-.ow that nan;/ an experimental subject who was used at that
tir.o for experiments was of tho erco opinion, bocr.uso tho witneno K-rl
Volff ctr.t.d r.:i oath that the rrls'noro with whon ho ap'-ko in Dachau
said, that “they v-uld c-ntributo voluntarily to Go irony's war offort
and show n aifr of their pctual good voll". (sco d-cunor.t boo* Ruff,
document IV. 21 , page 65). "he sn~o ideas were also str.tcd by various
defendants durlr^ their interrogation.

4) Che attitude t-vard this problea is extraordinarily difficult, ns
exceptional clrcm::stances h~ve V be c^ msidcrod which were never th' ught
Of oarliori for oxenplc, with the question which positions have to be
taken in tho fraaowrk of this -roblcn, particularly by F01ITICA1


11171


17 July-A-JB-23~3-JCrlny (Int. Lea)

Court I

pris- ners, «r with the iiffoTQr.ee, whether a death sentence has been
passed by on Ordinary Court or by a political Spec!-1 Court, has
erriicr cjnoror.tly a* t c'acorr.cd itself with the nodical—lcgal litera¬
ture for the authorization of huuac exp cri-. cuts.

With retard V tho case Ruff, these difficult questions seed porhaps not
be examined cry further, because it has been established without dr.ubt
D s wps stated fror a different side that Huff was convinced that tho
experimental persons had volur.tcorod and could bo emvincod according tr.
the posit*'r. of the case.

5) Ir. this connection oao has ropootodly asked, whethor Ruff hpd
eonvincod hincclf in Dachau, whether tho oxperlaontrl porsons usod
thoro woro actually condensed fR052SSIC:*AL CRIMINALS, whothcr ho had
oxaal.-cd the PSLSCCUL records of thcco pris-ncro for this pur.-ooo,
further vhothor ho had cado auro if tho special privileges pronlood to
tho prisosors (ns f' r oxa-plo thoir annosty) wore ’Cturlly given to
then later on otc. H* wovor duch exaggerated doaands could not be
nado of tho attitude of professional duty of that tio to Dr. Ruff
if or.c dnoo r.'t went t' bo unfair to hin. Dr. Ruff had never boon in
n co-cor.tr ti-n carp otborvico; his nlyrt singlo visit on th-t day in
Karefa 19 < 2 , whoa ho was in charge of tho high altitude crporlnonto,
was tho only Of.ntact which ho had in all his lifo with the concentration
ca po; the qviot and rooorvod scior.tist had cover hoard anything in .lie
institute about tho crualtios as they took place in the concentration
cr~.ps* nr.:* as we lo-rnod af thcr in this court r«'3. Thoreforo tho

thought never occurred V- hin that ho wao docoivod in Dachau; ns a natter

•

of fact he never d«ubtcd that the things he vna VId by the c'-~pctont
authorities were the absolute truth and therefore thcro woe no c«-.ucc
for hit to chock what he hd hoard as V- its accuracy. And them ono
ought n' t tf> disregard tho poeiti'Vt of Dr. Ruff in Ills only visit V- tho
Dachau c-ncontrati* a eiep in March 1942. Ho had V bo glad that he
was allowed inside the cp-p an a civilian; inside tho carp ho was not


1-172


17 vU^-A-v?-Sa-4-i'.eloy (int. Lee)

C-art I

allnvod t’ ~'vc one stop of the prescribed way, the guard who ncc'o-
pflaied lit sev t' it that Huff did not 30c any core than he was supposed
tr be shown, ?nd that ho C'uld newr opork a v-rd with anybody in the
can? except with the few experimental subjects. It would bo strange
vorc r.r.o V believe that It. Huff could at that tiro actually could
have fished v havo a look into the parsonal files 'f the prisonoro or to
ascertain hinoolf about the pardon which was supposed t'- bo givon later
on. The conduct of the pris*>nors thccselvcs and the discussions ho Imd
with thee were actually such that any suspicion in tho direction indicated
could and actually did not occur to Ur. Huff.

Therefore ir. the ease of 2r. Huff 0-0 baa to r once bo r that oxporlaonts
on TOLUmms aro generally permissible and that the voluntariness is
aloo proeont and has t*> hare in rind if a FHIST.Hl nubcite to tho
o.vpcrijiont. This is obviously also tho interpretation of tho verdict
of tho A.ioricru Military Tribunal II against ?lold Karohal MILCH of
16 April 1047* I.'ILCE know fr- the very beginning that experiments
woro enrriod out on prisoners In rachau; In opito of that tho Tribunal
acquitted hlo on that count. This w-uld not havo boon posoiblo If
tho Tribunal had dcnlod or. principlo tho idoa of n prisoner volunteering;
bccauoo ir. that case Kilch would have had to be scntoncod already
bocauso ho allowed oxycrlncnts to bo carried out on pris-nors, but
bosidos that ir. the verdict against J ilcto of 16 April 1947 it makes
ra difference whether a prisoner who allows hicself to be used ao nr.
ojrnori ent -1 subject Is a political prisoner or n criminal prio-nor or
whether tho sontcaco on tho pris-nor woo passed by an Ordinary Court
or a political Special Court. It v—uld be incomprehensible now if tho
Tribunal woro V take a difforont nttitudo V« these questions in tho
esse of 3r. Huff, than Tribunal >*o. 2 took in the caco of I'11 eh.


’-1173


1? July johan-(Ida)

ooiar i

Your Honors, In chapter four of ay written plea, I
have on pages 28 to 4b proven thr.t the high altitude exper¬
iments of Huff and Romberg in Dachau at that time were
absolutely necessary for Soraany at war. further that those
experiments were not xtended on principle beyond the
solution or the problems which were presented and considered
necessary.

I have further proven that Ruff after the completion
of his own experiments, after he received notice of Rascher'a
exp-rioents, went away froa Dachau to Herllr. immediately
afterwards in order to bring bach the chamber.

finally, that the experiments were prepared sciontif-
lcally well and were conducted correctly.

In the last chapter of ay written plea on pages 48 to
o2, I have stated that the experiments of Ruff and Romberg
were absolutely not dangerous to life, that they were carried
out without any Incidents, that in those experiment* of Ruff
and lomberg there were no pains and damage to hoalth to
the experimental aubjocta and that none had any fo .rs.

-U 1 of those statements I cannot develop In detail
oecause of the length of time involved, but I assume that
the defense counsel for the other defendants -ill continue
tc discuss this matter v hdn tneir tjrn C0nvi8>

On page 62 of my written plea. I then come to the
fo 1 lowing conclusions:

Dr. HuFF only dm -hit ni6 superiors ordered Slm t0 a „_ „
tho.o thus have railed nay they bJ taken Co account.

Dfl. .VJFT had no doubts concerning the orders or his
superiors for his assignment van urgently neoeesltatei In
the Interest of hla country, engaged in the most dim cult
' ,ar ■ ^ ° r 1 :a ««<»; If Dr. 3UFF at the time had read

lil-Ii


17 July 47-«-23-2H'oehan~ (Lea)
COURT I


the entire International literature about cddlcal experiments
on hum in beings be would have been able to learn that
experiments much more exerting and much more dangerous than
those with which he w*a familiar, which he knew and planned,
wore being conducted .11 over, and also with priso era, and
pern-pa are still beln- conducted vithout the com etent
authorities or medical societies declaring them ur. JOrmlaalblo
and intervening against thorn.

In long years, Dr. HUrY has provon to be a particularly
conscientious and conslder-ito research man who devoted hlo
entire past aotivlty primarily to save endangered human lives.
Neither oan he be blamed for having collaborated for a short
time with Dr. R.%3CHJH. Ho (H.i3CHlR) has been assigned to him
as associate by hla highest sup rlors; he had to roly upon
that; if thoy ordered hla to work togoth>r -' 1 th a man who,
on, turned out to be a criminal, no liability can be
charged to Dr. RUFF. Vhen Dr. HUFF saw through this colleague,
forced upon him, ana realized hla crlcin .1 activities, he
immediately out off all relations to him on his own Initiative
avoided any furtner collaboration with him and thus probably

prevented much toward further disaster..-

four Honors, when at the end of th trial I consider
Dr. Huff in this way In all those long and hard months when
I came to Know hla, my distinct Impression Is th-t this kind
scientist with his high type of knowledge and hla man- years
of experience In this special field, that this honest man
VhlCh Vu havj oeooBW acquainted with during those months bnd
m whoa -e can find no fault, this unselfish an I responsible
research r. wive-only thought of his vert and thought o: others
vh;.- were In the most danger of their lives, ma-’e It his task
-o save lives, -nia man does not b.lcng In prison, he should


11175


17 July 47-rf-oS-2'-^-Uoohan-aoa)

«XUA? 2

rather continue his research work in thj Interests of all
people and for tho salvation of threatened human lives. I
confess quite fr'inkly, Your Honors, to have the do-pest lm-
pressions th.;t I tone witn me from this trial and among those
isipre8sion8 la that Dr. Ruff at th- end of his mientlflc
assignment of Dr. Ivy, this <*merlcan sclontlst and researcher
when he asxcd him to continue certain experiments In tho
states rnd to undertake some research In their common special
field and to clarify a certain problem, a problem vhioh hao
ae lto one purpose to save threatened human lives. Dr. Huff
has not forgotten hla task In 11 fo and has a ocnsequonce
has remaned faithful to his ork. He does not think of
liberty and n future for himself, but merely of hl3 groat
interest In aviators, whom he lov..s to help no matter what
nationality. You, ao Judges, have the opportunity to let'-Dr.
Ruff oontlnue hla Job. Fleldnarahnl 'Allch was acquitted ae
f .r ao the Daohau altitude teeta are concerned, i.odloal
Inspector Dr, Hlpjfcd was not Indicted at all. Under theso
circumstances. Justice demands that Dr. Ruff be acquitted.

TdZ - J RJJ3IDiLST: Ihe .'noun-tl will no - - be In recess for
a few moments and when wo reconvene will hear arguments on
behalf of the defendant Romberg.

(a recess was to^en.)


11176


17 Jo! 47-A-24-i-ESk-Cook (Satz)


THE KASSEAL: Persons In the courtroom vill please find their seats.

The Tribunal is again in session.

THE FEESIDEST: Ve vill bear from counsel for the defendant Koaberg.

ZB* 7G3KBB: Mr. President, members of the Tribunal:

Vhen the prosecution desands, in the Penan transcript -cage 64
(English 12), that the Court give its verdict in the none of humanity,
it thereby desands a verdict In the name of the community of the
vorld, of a pipe dreas rather than an idea even close to realization.

Vhen the prosecution, cn page 67 of the German transcript (English
14), considers the coeoletion of this trial as necessary for all people,
this trial should, in their opinion, contribute to the obligation of
the peoples of the world to recognize the standards used at this trial,
an obligation, that is, which has so far not been recognized generally
as legally binding and does not even actually exist.

The prosecution is of the opinion that the true purpose of thio
trial goes beyond the aero exacting of vengeance on the few. It also
holds my client, the defendant Dr. F.oaberg, responsible for murders,
tortures, and other atrocities which he is said to have committed under
the guise of aedical science.

If this trial it to derive the punishcent of doctors froa tho
acral concepts of the civilized world, it must definitely be stated
that norrl valueo themselves never constitute a basis for demanding
punishcent. Max Scheler, in his works "Formalism in Ethics" and "Tho
Ethics of Material Values", has convincingly proven the correctness of
this opinion.

Natural law does not even demand the punishment of a oorson who
cokes no uto of his natural right to resist lows which violate the
moral vduas of Justice, loyalty, reliability, and others.

The punishment of such action is merely o measure of expediency,
for otherwise the principle "mile poena sine lege" would logically bo
incompatible with natural low itself. This principle demands that the
legislator not create a new law and thus make retroactively punishable


11177


Court I

17 *'ul 47-A-24-2-ZEX-C OCk (Xatz)


as Imrcra! actios which, at too tire of the action, violates no legal
standards. Let re in this connection quote a word of the vise Xoenigs-
berger philosopher Xant: "Sothlng but good vill is conceivable in this
world, or even outside of it, vhich can be considered good vithout an/
reservation. Good vill is not only what it effects or achieves. It is
not its usefulness in achieving soee predetermined ourpose, but it is tho
willingness vhich is good in itself.”

The prosecution charges Hcnberg with violation, froe 1939 to 1945,
of the Control Council Lav So. 10, which was not promulgated until 20
Deceabor 1945. The Control Council Law Ho. 10 lists criainal acts
against International law, detoraines the responsibility of single
individuals, and establishes the coapetence of this military tribunal.

She question whether the Tribunal is competent as an American
military tribunal to pass Judgment on offenses committed before the
occupation of Gerrnxor shall not be considered ldlo. The fact is that the
Tribunal has constituted itself and rust make a decision in accordance
with Ordinance So. 7, Control Council Law So. 10, the London Agreoaont
of 8 August 1945, and the Lxecutlvo Order of the President of the Unitod
States through which the judges were appointed. Ve must, however,
sharply distinguish the procedural auestlon and tho Question on which
arterial criainal low is to be applied in arriving at a decision. Tho
oroclacation of Ordinance So. 7 shows la itself that even American oro-
codure is not considered aoolicable vithout a legislative act of the
occupying power.

ify written plea or closing brief, which I have submitted and which
can be rend here only in parts and in its bcsic arguments beepuse of
lack of tire, is then followed by a short discussion of Control Council
Low So. 10, and especially an answer to the chrrgo of conspiracy. In
this connection I refer to the argument presented by the defense in tho
plenary soesion of Kilitary Tribunals I, II, III, IV, and V on 9 July
1947.

Also in view of the fact that a decision of this Tribunal hao been


1117C


Court I

17 Jol 47-A-24-3-*HX-Cook (Eats)


read«rod oa 14 July 1947, I do aot have to deal with this any further.

la additioa, I have considered the preparation, execution, and
result of the ?.uff- 2 csberg eroerinents, to vhich I want to refer here.
But I would also like to nake a brief steteceat about the oosition of
the prosecution exoort Professor Ivy in regard to slow-sinking excari-
asats.

The cuestion new nriaes whether the danger of the olow-sinking
exocriner.ts eachasiied by Professor Ivy really was so great that these
slow-sinking exoerinents, in view of the evident unreliability of the
calculations and aninal exoerinents, ore to be considered nedicnlly not
responsible. Where does Professor Ivy see the soecial danger in these
slow-sinking experinents? Professor Ivy considers it possible that in
these experinents anoxia lasting for clnost ter. ninutes could cause
daaego to the brain cells. He also considers It ooseible that the
danage to the brain cells caused tr- tho slow-sinking exoerinents were
not detected because no intelligence tests were given in which a
doerease in the learning capacity could have been notod (d age 9145 of
the Goman, pegs 9036 of the nngllsh, and pegoo 9166-9187 of tho
Oeraan, prge 906C of the English ninutes).

Tho following Questions are to be clarified in rogard to this
testloony;

1. Is there any danago to brain cells vhon anoxia lasts lc 60
than ton ninutes?

2. When such danage appears under longer anoxia, is it then
localised in the cortex cerebri?

3. When the dosage is not localised in the cortex cerebri, but
in other pexts of the brain, how does such dosage nanifeet itself
and by what nethods can it be detected?

4. Is It possible to conduct an exazination of the learning
capacity by an intelligence test?

and

5. H:w great is the degree of probability for such an injury?


11179


Court I

17 Jul 47-A-24—4-EHX-Cook (la-*)

It It so greet at to define the execution of sicilar experiaents ae
being irresponsible?

These questions were answered by Professor Ivy ee follows:

To Qiestion So. 1: Professor Ivy answered the Question as to
whether he knew a case of deaonstreble brain injury incurred through
temporary anoxia, "So- (page 9308 of the Geraan and 9201 of the English
transcript), and then he continues on page 9309 of the Oemrn and 9201
of the English transcript: "Two factors have to be taken into considera¬
tion here: 7irst the degree of anoxia and then the tine. These two
factors oust be taken into consideration, and ns you say in your own
report you were dealing with tho extre e Units that, in your opinion,
were still on the harmless side of the danger line."

To Qiestion So. 2: Dr. Ivy, when asked whore, after long lasting
anoxia, tho brain injuries occurred, affirned that in cost of the cases
such lnjurloe appeared in the .lain ganglia and esooclnlly in the aroa of
tho corpus striatum, that is. not in tho pericranium (page 9309 of tho
Goman ar.d 9202 of the English transcript).

To Question So. 3: Dr. Ivy answers and nfflrns tho corresponding
question t! t injuries of this kind generally are connected with dis¬
turbances known as parkinsonlnnisn. Disturbances of this kind nay also
appear later, after 5-10 days, and then even lend to death. In any
event, however, these disturbances cannot be ascertained through intel¬
ligence teste (page 9310 of the German, page 9202 of the English record).

To t^ieetion So. 4: With regard to this point Dr. Ivy stated that
he had knowledge of papers on the registration of injuries of brain
cells through nnoxie by way of testing the learning capacity in oninal
experiments (page 9X7 of the German, pege 9200 of the English record).
According to the statements of Professor Ivy no experiences in connec¬
tion with the reduction of the learning capacity of human beings, nor
the registrrtion by means of intelligence tests, are available.

To Question So. 5: To Judge Sabring'e Question (page 9217 of the
German, page 9111 of the English transciipt), "Is in tho Euff-Sonberg


11130


Court I

17 Jul 47-A-24—5-S3<—Cook (Zatr)


r«oort mention cede of experiments of which It can be said with absolute
certainty that they resulted in ddeths, pernenent injury, or great
paina for the experimental subjects?* the expert Professor Ivy answered,
■Ho, tut you will recall that I said that there was a possibility that
the learning capacity of the experimental subject night suffer fron
the long anoxia of the brain. However, that was not the purpose of the
Suff-Rcr.berg-Eascher experiments.■

To the President's question, "Hr. Ivy, is it or is it not your
opinion that the experiment of a slow descent from an altitude of 47,fOO
feet, as executed by the defendants Buff and Romberg,^, would probably
ceuso injuries for the expericental subjects?" Professor Ivy gave tho
following answer: "I said already that possibly the learning cnoncity
ni^t suffer froo it, but there is no reason to assume that injuries
car. be caused." (Page 9437 of the German ar.d page 9325 of the English
transcript)

This Is such a low degree of improbability, also confirmed by
this severe expert of the prosecution, that no ropronch can be r.ndo to
n scientist if he conducts such experlnents, esoeclally whon the exoori-
nentnl subjects wero wnrned with regard to the possible risk connected
with tho oxperlrunt.

The discussion of the final reports on the Ruff-Ronberg-Raschor
experiments, Docunont Ho. 402, Exhibit 66, Document Book II of the
prosecution, end the questions whether the Ruff-Rombcrg experiments
were painful or dangerous for tho lives of the experimental subjocto
cannot be dealt with in detail now. In this connection I want to
refer to ay written closing brief.


11101


17 July-i-BZ-2>U(Jross (In*.. Katz)
Co-art Bo. 1


Vlth regard to the question of roluntrx7 p^Jtlciprtlon of the ex—
perinentel subject* in the Buff-Bomber?; experiments, I refer to the
•r'-.e brief end to the speech of ny colleague Dr. Scutor.

I o on with the questio. whether criminals can be used ce
voluntary subjects. The voluntariness of core entr-.t ion ennp innntcs
wra denied by General Teylor who pointed out the terriblo living
conditions in the concentration c»mps. In this connection I want to
point out th/1 in 19U2 the German people end with then Dr. H orb erg.;
did not yot know enything rbout the terrors in the copcontration
cprps, which leter becrco known to the public. Furthermore the
terrible conditions r.s they prevailed-Inter, especially towards tho
end of the wrr were only developing in 1942. The experimental sub¬
jects usol ip. the SuffoBoabcrg ixperincuts were firthor German
criminals (this point wes shown). In other words, theso exporlnental
subjects were not prisoners in the sonso of the nr.zl rogino, but
persons who in rny government would have boor, detained in prioons.

The foot, thet profossionrl cricinrls rnd crinlnnls wore trrnsferred
to concentretion ersps is Juot tho point thr.t rendors tho ovidenco

%

so difficult. I went to onphasizo or.ee do re thrt tho fact that tho
experimental subjects of the Buff-Bonberg ex-perinonto were criminal
prisoners, who in rny event would hero boon Incarcerated nnd were
no victims of the nrtionnl sod-list rogir.e aust bo trhen into
consideration.

Besides the fact that tho living conditions in n concentration canp
lr. 19U 2 car. r.ot bo compared with those prevailing towards the end
of the w t and -s they arc known to everybody today, the hardships
resulting from these conditions or fror any other conditions eight
be an argonent for the voluntariness pm well as against it.

If the witness Eielscher was clso sperhing of the voluntariness
under duress rnd oeid thr.t the concentra.tion camp innatea seized
every ojrortunity eagerly in order to improve their conditions and
if he described this attitude as an objective compulsion, this


•mft?


17 v’ily-A-22t-25-2-Gro«8 (Int. Zetx)
Court ?c. 1


expression define* noro properly ike Concept of the philosophical
free.don of choice that practically never exists In real life. Sven
the expert of the Prosecution . Prof. Leibbrcnd In his partial attitude
upheld this point and declared that prisoners could not be considered
as voluntcors.

There Is no doubt that this point of view Is obviously wrong, which
Is proved by tho fact that prisoners are considered to bo In a position
to sake coonltaents that are legally binding. I do not know of «ny
case, in which the legal science friled to recopjilte such p. connltncnt,
because the prisoner In view of his arrest vr.t under dureos and there¬
fore was not freo to nnke n decision.

It Is un to tho state to declare the voluntariness of a prisoner who
volunteers for rn exocrloent -s sufficient, if tho st-.te intends to
use prisoners and criminals for experluents. Tho physician ha* nothing
to do with this question. It is beyond his sphere of lnflucnco. Ho
only knows that ths rulings recognlxo that kind of soluntnrlnoso nnd
give hi: tho cuthorlz-tlon to use these persons as experiment'd subjocto,
Tho physician has the right to bo of tho opinion that tho sontoncod
crlnlnal hes tha absolute freedom of choice botwoen both possibilities,
either to sorve his sentence or to volunteer for an expert:'.ont. The
prisoner has the sreo freodoa of decision ns tho patient, who con
chose between a dangerous operation, sickness and death. This Is
particularly tho case. If we are concerned with a first experir.ont
on r completely new technique of operation. Hover vrs such a decision
considered as sing under duress or norally objectionable. The
physician is used to this free decision In a situation dotemined by
fate. ?ro his point of view it nrkes no difference whether he gives
a choice to a person who has fallen 111 by an accident or by predispo¬
sition or to the person who has become a criminal by r.ccidont or by
predisposition. Tor n doctor and r scientist voluntariness nust be
sufficient. The supreme principle in this field could be for tho


scientist! a.-, experiment Is unobjectionable, if the experimental siib-

11103


17 jAl7-^-52>25->-GroB6 (I a t. Ectr)
Court “o. 1


‘ects giro* fcls consent, provided th-t the doctor, when conducting the
oxpcriner.t trices nil the neCeseery precautions.

The problem Is nrde sore difficult by the feet that no legislation
r boat exoerlnents on hunen beings exists nnd still, cxperlr.ontr.tion
vith hunra beings is nn Indispensable prerequisite for the further
developeent of cedlclne, which will be treated In the chapter on tho
necessity of 2:c>nricent*>ilOR on Eunrn 3c lags. Everywhere lr. thio field,
certain rules have t-ken ehr.pe which Cf-n be considered ns the lrv of
corxoa usage end which rre quite generrlly end through silent
r.cksowledgeaent accepted nnd rocognited In the entire world.

In the course of these proceedings, valuable oaterinl has boon
collectod by the defense which der-onstmtos the lr.w of coar.on uoago
In ersos freo the absolutely harmless to tho fatal experlccnt. Vlth-
out r. doubt, this evidence would be sultr.ble to codification of
r.edlcnl law of eorron usrgc In regard to experlaentstion with hunon
boinge end to direct legal dcvelopscnt In this regard Into safe channels.
Ve do not want to eximlno hero whether thle would bo poeslblo within
the frar.ework of m international body such ns tho Red Crose. Porhnps,
ir. this way, r. problcc of the future could bo eolvod, r. problcr. whoso
irsonsity nnd tragic nnturo Is clenrly seen In the question put to onch
ono of the dofondrnts by the expert of the prosecution, Prof. Dr,
Alexander*

■Do you think it permissible to kill 5 people, if, by so doing, you
era save the lives of 5,000 people?"

I refer to Dr. Scuter*s stptcnents rnd wish to skip the next 2 pogeo
of the excerpts. And I continue on page 10.

Tor the supplying of prisoners r s eroerlneatrl subjects, without
doub t the state has to assuae the responsibility. As far as this natter
is concerned the oath of Eippocrrtes c-r. certainly not be applied to
the physician. There were states which r.t lonet r.t tines did not
prohibit abortion. In plaost nil countries tho interruption of *r<_


11131*


17 Ar-3£-?5-’-t-Gro«* (1st. Zvtt)

Court Fo. 1


pre^imcles is permitted if the herlth of the mother is ?.t stake,
ra .-xcention vhieh Eipoocrrtes did not know. The physician*s duty
to nrescrve secrecy, one of the cost nohle fundamental principlee
of the rodle»l profession, cast he broken by the state if a public
Interest dflnrads it, e.g., in the fight against contpgcous
diseases, in the system of public insurance, or in the discovery
rad solution of r crine .

Here belong also the obligation on the part of the person carry¬
ing social security to undergo ra operation, tho sterilisation laws,
and seny others. Apparently the legislator feels no quoins in ouch
cases, because bis lavs bring the doctor into conflict.

Jot the doctor war sust be the greatest nrdness of nil, Vhile ho
le fighting with oil nenns of his art to envo the life of a sick
person, the lives of thousnnds in the flowor of herlth nro destroy¬
ed or forever injurod. So far r.s he is eblo, a doctor most patch
up again those who are injured, not so that thoy era now livo in
peaco, but so that they cm return to the front. The doctor doeo
this, though it rust run counter to the very nooning of his profooslon
Ec grains the necessity, because the Stato has ordered hin. I r r'.
bring this forth to show that the State, fron various points of
view, influences cedical ethics. It is evident, that, if the
State orders the doctor to do eonethlng that is contrrry to his
ethics, tho State nust undertake the responsibility for this. If
therefore, the State r.rJces experimental eubjects available for

medical experiments, it bears the responsibility for this fact,

\

which, however, does not relieve the doctor fron the duty of
carrying out the experiments to the best of his nodical ability
md with tho groatest of c«re.

Only to this extent is the scientist personally responsible.

There'fdllowsnow proofs that the experimental subjects uaod in the
Shiff-Sccberg. .experiments were exclusively Sermon criminals.

Tow I should like to turn to the question whether the *Buff-

111C5


17 July-^-S-25-5-GroM (1st. Zctz)
Court 7o. 1


Ho-berg experlnents Is rcsSue fron nigh altitudes were ncceesery.

It would appear necessary briefly to scrutinise the problem of
bunas eruerlscnts ns such.

The dsvelojeent of aedlcnl science would have been inconceivable
is the history of nraJcind without the nodical experinents. If one
reflects thrt our entire nedlcel knowledge rad practice represents
the sun tot -1 of the experiences that have been colto cted by natural
scientists, healers, and doctors in tho course of nlllenia In an
unbroken scries of hunnn experlnents, free the nost h-mloss to the
alnost certainly fatal, only then can one calculate the great lnpli-
catlons of the problen that confronts this high Tribunal, p~rtio-
ularly as rogrrds tho effects of its Jud^ient on tho futuro.

Tho highly developed and difficult technique of nodorn operations
hr.s boon acquired by the enperic nothod, the husrn oxporinmt. Tho
sar.e is true of our knowledge of tho Deans of conbattlng tho great
afflictions of cankind or our knowledge of tho nnlinua doooo of a
nodicino that is also r» poison. Hunrn experiments wero ns nocosonry
for tho totting of the recedlos proridod ty the chcclcrl industry,
such cs snlVarsan nnd penicillcn, ns they wore for tho testing ctf
nodorn physical nethods, shortwave, x-rry, nnd rr.diua therapy,

Ko on6 is able even to approxlnnto tho nunber of hunrn experiments
or the nuaber of sacrifices thnt pr.vod tho way for nodical science
to its present pre-enir.enco. The great afflictions, formerly the
scourgo of htcrnlty, which annihilated wholo populations, h-vo been
conquered: the black derth, the plague, leprosyx havo been all but
oxter ina.tod. Other great diseases still take their nureroua victins.
The Btru-.<lc against cancer, tuberculosis, aaicrin, and nany other
diseases is still going on.

In this struggle the nethod of human expericentetion for which
deductive thinking provides no sufficiently secure bnsis, has in nodorn
tires cone even sore proninently to the foro. And indeed, there is no
other way. *ni=rl experlnents;lcalcul'tions, deductions by analogy


1I1£6


i' ’sl7->-3&-25-&-GroM (Ir.t. Xr.tr)
Cora-c 7o. 1


cca only help sad auppleceat. I he cfrudel expert nent must be conduct¬
ed on ncnl ?he eupheniaD -therapy" cm aot cor.cer .1 the fnet. that
theee ere in reality experinenta. Vitneaaoa like Profeasor Leibbrnnd
•k-Dly ignored theac obvioua freta. If every doctor fcnd adhered ao
• triotly to dognr, to the ontfa of Hippocmtea, r. Profeaaor Leibbrnnd
naserta he hr a, thee redicel acience would atlll bo in ita Stone Age.

* doctor who atubbomly aalntnlna thla point of view and repudintca
on ethlcrl gromda nay experinent on hucm boinga doea not thus oolve
thia probloc; he el-ply puta it on another cw'a ahouldera. Such n
doctor ia a aort of conacientioua objector ia r.edicir.o, who doea n.
little to >olvc the problen of hucm exporicentntlon na the conaclei>-
tioua objector doea to bnnieh war froc t he world. Othera, rgain,
hare ourely peraonrl notivea. They do not fool thoaeelvoa to bo
robuat eroudj, or for other reraona wiah to have nothing to do with
such experinenta - a clever rnd convenient vr>y out, which, howevor,
doea not do Juatice to the acientiat'a obligation to tho coacon venl.

Fortunately for nnnkind, however, thore have been doctoro , t nil
" ro ° vho lxPV# B#eQ n °t only their duty toward tho individual but
nlao their duty toward huccnity. Have all phy.lci-na who have carried
out auch experinenta violrtcd the oath of Elp->ocratoe? A re nil tho
great


11137


17 Jolr-i-JF-2S-l—Leonard (1st* Eats)
Court I


end frs^.us scientists — Fastour, -hrlich* 2eod, 3rrsEi, Strong, Celncttc
— criminals; arc thoy at least d' etore who havo viointod the Cath of
Hlppr-cratos, this O-.th that the prosecution ha* placed in the foreground
as the sor&l lav guiding this proceedings and that public opinion has con¬
sistently usod f'r the rv-ral dofanation of all the dofesdar.ts horo?

It rcralnod for Frofoas'r Ivy, tho proeecuti'n , o star witness,
shortly before tho conclusion of this trial, in evaluating hunnn ox-
perironts throughout the world and in according recognition to thoir
othical v.-luo to testify horo on tho stand that, to bo euro, tho Oath
of Eip.v.crntos had its validity, but vr.c t'* be appliod in its r.axrowost
nooning only t- the doctor at tho sick bod. I'oroovcr, "oil, in his
Vok on nodical ethics that Profoesor Loibbrar.d s'* 'fton quo tod, writes
tho siuo thing.

Since it is r.ot posoiblo to collect all tho nococcrry data in ox~
periao-.tc =t the aid: bed, in tho coureo of history doctors hovo corrlod
out oxporL.'ontc in which tho pathological addition to bo invootigrtod
ir ortiflciall 7 lnduccd| in part, t'* r.ocortair. tho dogroo of contagious¬
ness durieg quarontir.c; in port, V invostlgrto tho p.-t olngicrl condit¬
ions ir. quest'-. without the intorforonco of incidontnl oyr.ptons; in port,
V* toot the dcvolc.jr.cn t and prophylactic offccto of v-ccinos; and,
finally, also in ordor to investigate pathological conditions in nan
th»t under nomrl circunstancos should not nppcr>r or cannot bo Inves¬
tigated; red horo bolor.g, for oxarplc, tho statoo of hungor and thirot,
the st-te of boing very cold, tho offccto of groat rltitudos or groat
velocities, particularly the effects of acceleration and decoloration,
and -.an;’ 'thcr dbnnrral conditions that arc brought about ly changes
in the real conditions of lifo.

Such or; or inerts wore, in pert, carriod out '-a pationts who,
without thoir hr.-.wlodgo or on tho assurance that p. sow nethod of tho-
rapy was being appliod, wore infected with additional disonsco, or on
vhns sev therapeutic cethods were tested. Those suffering froa cancer


mso


1 ? Julr ^L - J EH36.3. gqioard (Int. Zr.tr)

Court I

h«ro been particularly burdened with this, as car. ho seen ft*np the
history f craccr research. Ir. addition, there were end ere Actors
wh'- did n' t turn tn the aide hod fnr their exporinonts, hut who carried
net thoir cr-criaonts on volunteer prisnrora, soldiers, end freo civilinno,
whr. wore told wfcr.t w-e at issuo and who then either, for reward or
tdc»lisa, node thoaaelvoa avail chi e for experl-'.oats* Such a do o tor wea
not V.and hy tho Oath of Hippocrates, which proscribes for the patient ,
the vie tin, prison nil nocere* ho was doing his duty pj doctor and
scientist, who is ant fighting the hr.ttlo cg-inst dosonso in tho indi¬
vidual pr.ticnt, hut is called upon and obliged to take up tho hnttlo
against disor.so p.s ouch, and thus is oorv.ng hur.fCity rs a wholo.

It cranot he dioputod that those oxporir.onto c-.uccd sacrifices,
sacrifices of ponplo who gave thoir Itrco for tho peace and wolfnro of
huernity, sr-.crlficos th-t were or.durod in ardor v mtko tho "thousand
natural shades that flesh io heir tn", re Harlot puts it, r.oro tolorablo.

I helioro thrt I rr not excoodlng tho linit which is at stnko horo

•

if I r.oh tho questions Voro not all tho real or ootoneihlo ndvnnooo of
nnnkind, of which our ago lo tn proud, hnught at tho oxponso of r. vast
nur.hor nf sacrifices? I drew your attontinn V tho history nf tho groat
dlocnverlcs, nf coafaring rod flying; I draw your attontinn further to
tho nccn.-rplisfaecnts nf tcchniquos, the i-vention nf tho nutnrnhllo and
HnilroaA ere.struetiro, nining, oloctricity, etc. Too history of each
such dove lop oat 1 s a Hot nf victiro, and evorynno knnvs that.

S n nuch of tho necessity nf hurnn cxpcrircntc per sc, which -uot ho
hanicrily reengrised, a development ic not tn he bmkon nff suddenly,
nr the cotbods nf r.ndorr scionco arc sv-t ouddonly to chrogo fron the
srnmd up.

“bother certain mice arc tn he nhsorvod in tho cxocutiro nf huran
onperi cats, end if sn which rulos, will he discussed lator. At this
pniat I ca interested in tho f under, on t -1 assort inn thrt oxpcrL*'onto on
huaan boings r.ust ho permitted bo cruse the ctrugglo against burro nr.turo


111C9


Court I


(1st. Zp.tz)


forces us to adopt this attitudei If* in the future, all experimentation
on ht ii cr . boings is prohibited, not the doctor, r.o* nodical sthics,
but only humanity would have to suffer,

Military tribunal II in its Jud^ent of 16 April 1947 'gpinct Zrh?-rd
Milch tP.r-Sc tho sane attitude by finding the Defendant Milch not guilty
on this count of his indictnont, although Milch knew that oxporluonts
on barm a boings, tho sacc experiments with which ny cllont ie chareod,
were carried out for the Luftwaffe, Of courso, not every oxporir.ont
on a human being is necessary. But tho quostl'-n of whothor such an
experiment is necessary can be answered only in the individual ease.

In the following, then, tho necessity of oxporirortn for *roccuo
fror high altitude^is proved In dotal 1 * X refor to the writtor. ploa
or closing brief which I h*<vc handed in. In omcluoi n I should liko
to c-y tho f* llowing or this chaptor:

According to tho evidence presented, tho result must bo otatod
to bo thr.t the Ifechau experiments of Dr. Ruff and Dr. Ronborg wero nb-
oolutely necessary oxpcricor.tc,

-ho necessity of the Ruff/Re-berg expo r In or. to was not doniod by
tho Prosecution oxport Prof, ivy, who nd-'ittod that tho oano or sinilpr
cxjorincr.to wore and »ro boing carried o U t In tho An or i cm air foroo,

Tho latter fnot can bo soen trtn tho fact that tho Eofondant Dr,

Ruff, until his arrost, workod for tho Anoriem air force on the sroo
questions on which ho had worked for tho D7L. It also results fror. tho
fret thr.t almost all loading Gor~ar. --viation nodiclno oxporte aro at
present v.rking in tho USA, with the exception of Dre, luff, Ror.bcrg rod
3ocker—Preys eng, who aro under indict:o:it hero, Si-.co tho l*SA is at
the present tiro not at war, and sir.co it cmv»t be assumed that that
country is arming itself for another war, we must assume th»t tho nococsi-
ty of such c-?crinontE is n^t a tcr-.p'rrry or.o, but is absolute* that is,
applied t' the Luff/Rnoberg experiments, that tho cxccuti- n of the ex¬
periments for * rescue fr'-r high altitudes 0 was not or. ly necessary boenuso


31190


1? Juiy-ir<B-23-i-Lenr.ard (Xr.t. Katz)

Court I

ni the fact that Gorcnny was at war, but the solution of this pmblca
w» ontreno importance f~r tho further developror.t of aviation in
gcr.oral*

Pr'f. It;/, pr- p^uadod throo general principles for oxporlnontntion
on hur.ar beings. These principles, as ho testifies on tho following
pago, ho submitted, as a representative of tho dologatcs*co-nit too of
the Auorican ."oiical Association to this cn.-vittoo ir. Docenbor 1546,
vhorctrvn tho conn it too vk the following stand'in this cattor: I qiw.toj
*Bic cofinittoo finds that tho experiments which rro doocribod in
Dr. Iv/% report correspond to tho pri-.ciplos of nodical othlcs of tho
American Nodical Association. Thoso principles consist of throo funda¬
mental dar.-ndsl

1) There ust bo voluntary consent of tho experimental subjocto on whan
tho cxporlncnte are to be carriod nut.

2) The degree of dnngor inhoront in oach experiment nust first bo oo-
trblishod b~ cnir.nl cxporinoataticn.

3) The ar rimoat nust be carriod out undor racoonsibla nodical supor*-
vision la an orderly nanacr.

I should like to state that, aftor a study of tho nbovo evidonoo
and from. a knowledge of nodical litorr.turo, it is obvious that oxpori-
noats have boca carried out which do not conform to thoso principles.

3ut even la applying thoso rulos, which woro propounded in 1946,
it is cor tain th-t tho Euff-Ro-berg experiments, as doscribed nbovo, nro
quite within the frsncv'.rfc of these throo rulos and h-vc in no wry
violated rcdic -1 othics.

^'aelusins l- the clo-ng brief tho Rrschcr ax-orir.onto arc dio-
cucsc^, which have beer, contrasted to the Ruff/3orbcrg exporinents. It
hrs boon prpvod that Hnaborg did not take ray active prxt in thoso
oxporinoatc and that he personally onpocod tho “aschcr experiments.

-ot only is it cncplotcly out of tho question that Romberg took
ary retire part in the Rrschcr experiments, but ir. this ease he e-mot


11191


1 ? JuIy-AJP^Woftiiard (Int. Eats)

G-urt I

even bo charged vith an oaissi'u. Dvory onission aust bo breed on aa
•expected a=ti'=“. "hie expected action rust also, however, bo a *no-
ccis'r;* action*. Ivor 7 n^ccss^ry action is, of course, simultaneously
er. expected action, but not every expcctod Retire is sinult«*ncously n
accessory r.Cti'n.

7 .ic punishability *,f an oarisslon depends or. tv- prerequisites
whether it is to be punished depends »c a duty to trite action and on
whether it can be proved that this action would have r.vortcd the forbiddon
conaoquoaco* The duty to trkc action era nriao fro- a legal naxlnj
in particular, it nuct bo r. legal duty to avert a consequence, tho provod
pnrposo of which it is to Justify criminal liability for tho consequence,
On tho other hand, a nshs coral duty does not Justify ray crlcimtl lia¬
bility.

duty to net could further arise as tho result of tho assunption
of a special duty, perhaps the assteption of duties on tho basic of a
l.gnl transaction or a contract. This possibility too is quite out
of the quest *- lr. this easo, red the Prosecution hr.-. never rdvnncod any
facts which ight ad-.it of such an necunption.

a further b-ois for n duty to net would be nosolbla perhaps fr»c tho
law of Can-'n ueago in tho sense of a duty breed on previous action, but
in the present erne there is no question of this. 2 oaV.org, ns hne boon
shown, did -t -rtiCipstc in the Hrschor experiments either in the
beginning or in their furthor course. 2 ?or did ho hrtvo any right to dio-
"osc the chrober. Bor did ho have an;.* right of supervision of duty
of supervision 'ver the chncbor. His assignment read t" carry out "ex¬
periments for rescue fr-r. hifh altitudes*, which he did. Bor c«uld tho
Dofondrflt “.off bo considered obligated fron this point of v.cv, since tho
chmbor did not.belong »' tho D7L bat V tho Tcdicnl Inspectorate of
the Luftwaffe. Dr. Huff rad Dr. Ho-.berg did not belong to thp Luftwaffe,
however, but Stnbcarrt lr. Haachcr did. Thus, if oithor of the threo had
h?d any rig! a r.f supervision ovor the chanbor, then it was only Stnbsrxzt


11192


17 Jul7-'W?-23-6-LcnE«rd <Iat « *■)
Court I


2 r. Snachcr, never the civilians Dr. Huff and Dr. iceberg.

Ihc second c'nditior. f' r the criuln&lity of an offense of onission
le tkr.t it err. he pr«vod tha.t the action dcc-ndod would have ova rtod
the forbidden consequence. Tho Prosecution has not brought this proof.


cither.

It cuot, rather, he assurod that according to the situation prevailing
a*, the tifio, any attempt by Rorberg to uso force would have ondod with
his death end thus tho forbidden o-oecquonco would not hovo bocn nvortod.

But in both respocts, Vth in view of a duty to net as well no
whether it car. bo provod th-t this action would have r.vortod tho forbiddon
consequence, tho essential prerequisite is tho possibility of under¬
taking tho nocoosory .iction and tho possibility of having sono offoct
or. the undcsircd consequence. Tor ospocially horo tho principlo rust
prorrilt "ultra rnsfo ncr.n bl'igatur." Vhoro there is no possibility
of overling tho ccnscquonco, thoro can be no trlk of crininnl lir.blllty
for the consequence. Thoroforo, conviction for nn offonso of onisoion
dcnnnds thr.t tho Jud-;o bo convincod that thoro was a possibility of
acting.

Put thin conviction car. novor bo nttalnod aftor tho prosontation of
ovldonee. It has boon established that a spontaneous action of Ronborg'o
would have .icmt only an attack nr. Dr. Raschor. That is cor to in abnvo
<■11 because Sac oho- obviously lgr.orod Ronborg'a warning.;, boc-uso ho
obviously did not want to corforr with Ror.borg in this point.


11193


Court I

1? Jul 47-A-27-l-2K-Malcy (rats)


I wish to state once again that in view of the over-all situation it
vne not possible for Roaborg to eave the experimental subject and thus
prevent the awful results. Eoeberg was a civilian, unamed, end vao in
the concentration camp as a non-eeeber of the SS. Raseher was an
officer in the Luftvaffe and an SS nan. He carried a gun and claimed
to be Justified in his actions on Himmler's orders. I beg to aelc Your
Honors hcv Rccberg could, at that nocent, have saved the life of the
experimental subject.

Military Tribunal XI, in its Judgment of the Milch case, has
recognised the principle of 'ultra posse neee obllgatur" by saying that
legally a nan cannot bo expected to act like a hero. Had P.oaberg at
that nooent assaulted Dr. Haschdr, he would not have boon a hero but a
lunatic. If you cannot expect a nan to bo a horo, surely you nwst^ot
expect his to do something out of desperation. Thors cannot be any
doubt that Rooberg, had he survived the assault, would not havo loft
the concentration caap again. This nay bo seen froa Paschor's whole
attitude os well as froa his personal relations to Kiooler, of whoso
staff he was a aeaber. As proved earlier, Roaborg did act, and that to
a considerable degree. He did not coroly save tho life of ono or
three lnaates but that of orobably a largo nunbor when he removed tho
low pressure chasber froe the Dachau cnap and kept it away froa there.

I would like to know vfcothor those who now cost tho first stone at

f •

Rooberg would hove acted eoually courageously and sensibly nt the tine
ac Rooberg has been oroved to have done.

He has worked on tho oroblea of rescue from high altitudes in a
continuous series of exoeriaents on hieself in the low pressure and
freezing chambers, and given his contributions to the further progress
and security of aviation in a number of scientific publications and in
unpublished reports on his research work. Els scientific achlevnents
and his personal work were recognized through his appointment as head
of the department for high eltitude research in the Institute (page
20 of original) fer eviction medicine of the DVL, he being the youngest


1119k


Court I

17 Jul 4'7-A-27_2-ia<-Kaicy (Katz)

a=ong the roughly 40 heads of institutes and departments of the DYL,
which employed about 2000 German people.

Dr. Huff, formerly the chief of cy client, speaks about the
personal and scientific Dualities of cy clients, and I draw attention
here to pages 6655/66 of the Goman and pages 6560/61 of the English
record, as well as to page 6721 of the Gernen and page 6627 of the
English record.

Scsborg was and is not a climber or an ambitious -an. During the
war hd did not ~ork for his graduation or aim at publishing ao much as
possible. He regarded It at his duty, his experiments and research work
which served as the security of air crews. That ho did not snare his
ova person becomes clear not only froa the affidavits auteltted to ne,
but is also emphasized b- all affidavits submitted on behalf of Dr.

Huff where in some cases he Is Ccntloned by nano end in some others
Included as a natter of course among the assistants and their contribu¬
tions.

Romberg's cooperation becomes particularly clear fron the affidavit
given by Dr. Toss, also froa the affidavit by Engineer Heinz Looser.

I should also like to have reference in this connection to the affidavit
by Dr. Otto Geuor; In praising Romberg's attitude Dr. Gauer soys:

"At a date later than the Dachau oxperlaants mentioned by the
Indictment, experiments were carried out in the laboratories of Duff,
Romberg, and Gross which were made in order to clarify the Important
cueetlon of the combined effect of cold aal lack of oxygen. In those
experiments the expericentel subjects were subjected to the lack of
oxygen at an altitude of twelve kilometers only after having been oxoosod
until an hour before to a temperature of sinus 45 degrees C scantily
droasei. Here the severe cold pain and shivering set in and the experi¬
mental subject was unable to sit and to write."

Gauer adds:

"Since Huff had connections in Dachau through the altitude experi¬
ments, it would have been easy for him to obtain concentration camp


111 #


Court I

17 Jui 47-A-27-c_ZEX-#eehan (Zats)


*. --f '.-.n for oheee particularly dangerous and ext rerely pair-'dl oxreri-


ments.*

The Baza rust be true for Dr. Romberg. He avon was recueatad by
Hi:clor personally to carry cut the cold experiments with Rascfcer.
Romberg 1 s refusal to do this, but rather to carry out these ■cartieulnrly
dangerous* and "extremely painful* exoerlnents - as relpted by Gauer -
as experiments on himself, this must be considered a ner oroof of the
high ethical concept of his profession vfclch was Romberg's.

furthermore, Rcaberg offered himself as on experimental subject
not only In the framework of his own field of activities but naturally
in all other experiments of the DLV.

Thus, It Is not without the elaient of the tragic that it should bo
Romberg,whoso only air it had been throughout all his research work to
save human lives by responsible, even often dangerous enoloyner-t of his
ovr. person, that he now should be charged here "to have participated
in the National Socialist systou of extermination, motivated by an evil
spirit under the guise of science*.

The affidavits submitted by no cortr.inly demonstrate uneaulvocilly
that National Socialism was not the notlvrtlng factor for tho actions
of Romberg. In all, his severe criticism and rejection of tho system
at tho time is emphasised. The fact that one affidavit was furnished
by a Jewish family, who were friends of Romberg and his family during


tho wnr, characterises his point of view porhaps most clearly.

Ivon tho prosecution witness Wolfgang Luts expresses himself in
the sane sonse os to the political attitude of Br. Bonberg. By Itself
there would not exist any necessity to discuss so much ths political
cssitlot of my client if not the tfcol* trial due to the wording of the
Indictment and by the publicity in radio end press had been tied up so
heavily with politics.

It Is absolutely obvious that the experiments carried out by
Romberg In no way were the result of a National Socialist point of view.
What drove him to undertake all his other work and those experiments


11196


Court I

17 Jul 4?-J^27-4-Sy.-Keehan (iatt)


vb 5, besides his chossn tuk of airplane research, the urge to do hla
duty In a grave var and to help the copulation of Gernnay In lt6
defense against a harsh aerial var. It is true that this is perhaps
a political aotive, too, tut not a Hational Socialist aotive for that
reason and not one which deserves such public defamation.

aosterg was given a chance to prove hiatelf personally and in
regard to hi character, a chance vhich is granted to almost everyone
during one's lifetiao, when an unfortunate fate brought hln in contact,
for the purpose of working, with a nan of Batcher's tyob for the first
tine. At the beginning of the experiaents Boaberg had to consider
Baecher as an Innocent physician and officer of the Luftwaffe bocauoe
he (Raschor) vat introduced to hla (Rceberg) by nany older and more
experienced sen than he. Already soon thereafter, Booberg changed his
opinion of Batcher and already In 1943 ho described hla to Profostor
Werner Snotho nc a bad ran and a onthological liar. Thst is Docuaent 6
in the Docuaent Book Boaberg.

I believe that In the course of these orocoedlngs It hos boon
orovod that Boaberg did not fall in this test, one of the noot severo
evor facod by a husan being.

Hcaberg is a auiet nan and a reserved one, oorhaps oonevhat too
cuch. so; loci and boisterous talk does not agree with hia, ond thuo ho
did at the tiae, without sany words, what he considered his duty and
what was right.

As soon as he realized that Bascher, on Binder's orders, vac
doing things ho could not agree to, he discontinued cooperation with
hia and never re-assuaed It.

In Dachau, entirely on his own, supported only by his chief, Dr.
Buff, to whoa he vaa tied closely in cosradely collaboration, and
covered free a far distance by Eippke, Boaberg succeeded with the skill
of a diplooar, not only to disassociate hisself froa F-escher - that
night have been relatively easy by protending illness.

rut he did not stop there. He wont on and got the low oressure


11197


C • -

17 Jul 47-A-2^-5-iS'-Me ahac (Hat*)


chaaber out of Bachau against the expressed vill of Eascher end
Himmler. By doing so, he not only prevented further experiments hut he
also, by stopping the series of experiments, saved for science the nost
important results of the experiaento and thus gave r.easing to the esoloy-
sent of the subjects and hinself. Eor there can be no deubt that if ho
had only stepped out Eascher would have continued bis exoeric^ntation in
grand style and for a long tine, and on the other hand had had no useful
reoort on "Rescue froa High Altitu es".

An soon as the necessary cocolotion of the reeoarch rooort vas oer-
foraed, Eoaborg refused further collaboration with Eascher and above all
he cleverly avoided the participation in the cold experiments ordered by
Hiaaler.

By doing so, he faced dangers which today are about to be forgotton

*

and which people froa aore happy landa can hardly imagine. The foraer
Field Marshal Milch *es eccuitted under the chnrgo concerning the alti¬
tude experiaents. Generalnrit Hippko was not evon indicted. Should
Roaberg, last link in the chain, be sentenced for the ais-doeds of
Eascher?

Justice demands the acquittal of Roaberg.

TEL PHESI3BT: The Tribunal vill now bo in recoss until 9:30
o'clock toaorrow aorning.

THZ MAESEAL: The Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30 o'clock
toaorrow aorning.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 0930 hours, 18 July 1947.)


111 ?-


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 11
Target 3

Voluae 30

July 18-Aug. 20. 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. v* KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 30


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


18 July-20 August 1947 pp. 11199-11538


18 July 47-K-PK-l-l-Mcchan (Int: Klldeshelaer)
Court. 1.


Official Transcript of the American
Military Tribunal ir. the antter of the
United States cf «nerica against Karl
Brandt, ot al, defendants, slttln at
Nurnberf, Germany on 16 July 1947, 0930
Justice Beals presiding.

®E MARSHALL: Persons in the court rooa will plcr.so
find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judgos of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 la now in boss ion. God oavc the
United St-'tjo of rtarlco and this honorable Tribunal. There
will be order in tho oourt.

THE PRES I CENT: Mr. Marshal, will you ascort in if the
defendants are all present in court.

THE M*RSH«L: May it ploaoo your Honor, dl defendants
are present in the court.

THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary-Gone ra.l will no to for
tho record the presence of nil tno defendants In court.

Tho Tribunal will now hear froa counsel for tnc
dofondant Woltz.


DR. 5EIGRREID WILLS: (Counsol for tno dofondant


Dr. August Woltz): Mr. President, Your Honors, ay
wi’ltten expose rj the oase a nlnst rt u ust Voltz -.fill
asouac a chan cd fora by aDproprlatc cuts, without, I
hopo, bec' In unconnected. My alri is to present to tho


Tribunal those parts of $y spooch which, nccordln to ny


Undcr3tandin , see^ to b*, the most important and I v/lsh to
do bo without haste nor hurry.

I wnnt^oTSSbiavo to read ny statements without hurry
to tho aYT~''£KVhl11or. text I shall Keep and unc as

aycflo«yjjient:\y •mettA'ld-u'' Until today I have not received

jrosecution nna I should like to scy
it at a Later sta^.o.


tic cloSin brief c

here I shall r^ly


1 of ay document:


12229


le July -J7-K-PJU1-2 -Moehaji (Int. Elldosfaoiaer)
Court 1.


Tap handling of the Vcltz case ,n the pert of the
-'rosccutor.

It le part of the peculiarities of this tried. - un¬
equalled lr. kind and scopo by rny other In le.^cl history -
that the uoens of attack and defense anl thoroby the possi¬
bility of fInline Justice are distributed unequally. This
does net lnply p reproach a ainst the court or the prosecution.
Tills 16 the result of the preccodlr. historical dovclopnont.
After the collnp30 of tho Ooraon front the official Gornan
archives wore placed In safety by the armed power for tho
purpose of prosecution. Tho comprehensive documentary
ar.terlnl with which, almost exclusively, this trial is

conducted, fell thus to the prosecution.

•

Tho inequality butween prosecution and defense
result In. therefrom was obvious to everyone who was able
to follow tho course of the trials. It b^oomo r.poaront
particularly In the defense of tho defendant Professor
tfELTZ, wher. It was noooasnry to establish definite Oates,
c'j.Vversatl ns and actions, which happendd about 5-6 yor.rs
r. o and of the subsequent laportanco of which the partici¬
pants wore n-t aware at that timo.

I, as defense counsel of Professor VELTZ wa.s thcroforo
not In tho position to present to the prosecutor not over,
a single document b_lon. in. t< tho property of the defendant
- on the contrary I wa.s forced tijo contribute to tho invalid¬
ation of the lncrInin" tin.~ factors by tnkln recourse to
tho documents of the prosecutor hlnself nd by affidavits
collected vith rcat effort.

Not only was It Impossible for ne to search In tho
archives fer exonomtln, material. It was just as in osslble
:o produce exoner' tlr .5 documents the existence of which was
well-known to ne. I lve the following examples:


11200


IS July 47—K^M-l-3-Koehon dnt. Hildeshoincr)
Court 1.


Tfco letter of 8ZMKL31 of 24 July 1941, aor. tier, cd In
do cun on t Ko. 263, exhibit No. 47, page 59 of the Gorrnan
end pn. e 56 of the English docucont book.

Tfco letter of the sane of autumn 1941, which RaSCKER,

In the hurl eh discussion, presented to WELTZ, RUFF end
B0M3ERG.

For the first mentioned lot or It is probc.blo, for
the sec-nd one certain that It contains a remark of KIMhLZR
conoornln th^ voluntariness of the experimental aibjects,
which would have boon cost valuable.

«8 la known the whclc private correspondence of
RASCKER woo also confiscated. The prosecutor would
cort^lnl.” have submitted documents fron this correspondence,
If It hr.d contained lncriclnatln .arterial. In view of
the dooldodly bad relations between RASCKER and 'JELTZ,
which was the natural cor.doqucnco of iUSCHER's removal
fr.c the Institute, It Is difficult to Imagine that this
correspondence should not oontaln numerous dooUDonts
exonoratin for WELTZ, However, it was not possible for
co to got access to this material for the trial.

I r.x mk mg those introductory remarks before passing
on to the defense because I au convinced that the court
on duly wel^hlrv_. the matter will ornslior accordingly
the pros and con3 of this unequ-l dlstr;butlon of
strength.

Woltz has beer, char cd with faking part In tho
altitude and coolln : , experiments. In cy docwccnt, I deal
with the mate of the lo.'ol rl hts and I coao to conditions
and to doubt about tho Control Council Law. It is
sufficient to point out that a direct responsibility of
the sin lo defendant is not hero concerned. This Is on
pa,e 3.

11201


13 July 47-K_?X-l~4-Mcehan (Ir.t. Hlido she iaer)
Court 1.


I also will do without discussing tho term *Criacs
n 'inat Humanity" and without detailed enquiries into the
legal oh racter of the high altitude exporinents Ruff-
Voltz, which beyond doubt was permissible and unobjectionable,
Just as Rnschcr's experiacr.t on his wn person was criminal.
This oxcludoo nnaitlve participation of Waltz from the
o.r.r os of tho lndlctaont, so that there renalns nothin:;
but the charge of abottlng. This is a torn which I chose
ay self for oortrln vague toras of tho Control Council Law.

This r-thcr swooping steteaent leads no to Hunbcr V
of ny Trial 3rlof which deals with tho first development
of tSio rol donship between Woltz end Rnschor in order to
prove that it was not Woltz himself who approached this
favorite of Binder's. Here also; I can bo rather short
boon so it la beyond doubt that it was not Woltz who
dollvoroi the looturo on the apes -nd that ho was not the
nan of the confidential conversation to whom Raschor raado
tho proposal to exrorlaont on professional criminals*

liunbor VI, equally, this is the conversation in tho
Preying Palace, is no lor. or a decisive subject. I think)

It n-eds nd more proof tiuit Woltz was not a man of Rascher'o
character, and was not in fever of criminal exporlnents and
Just this fact was to bo proved by Chw conversation with
Hippie o.

I shall cone to further explanations whicn are of
1 ::r rtent ewractor froa pn ec in ay document book, which
c'oni with tho relationship of Weltz and Raschcr. Tills
.'.escri.es the personal relationship, the rolntic ,:3. ip which
tho prosecution do~l -with, the relr.tl ns between Raochcr
and Seitz.

r.:e re-oc - for R-schcr's ns : lynaerro to 'vclta 's -..~ flce
?.r seller's independent exocrlacnts were net "batted ;• Holtz,..


11202


IS July 47-H-P3U1-&-Mechos (Int. Hlldoaholsor)
Court 1.


I first want to point out that s'oltz did not personally
order Raschor's asslgnncnt to hie institute. This was
proved by the affidavits of "ondt end Xottenhoff. Woltz
had no in*, rest whatsoever, neither in Raschor's person
nor In his experiment6. For this I shall jive tho following
roa.sons:

The subjects suggested by Raschcr for tho exporiaents
were refused by Woltz. The subject "Slow nscont to high
altitudes" first suggested by Rnschor had boon dealt with
6 clnctifically by Woltz already at an earlier period. He
then had disooverei in r.nlarl cxporloents tho so-called
"adaptation effect". Therefore further oxporiuonta woro
not of pnrtloulnr lap-tt- .co in view of the p&nso of tho
vr-.r at that tine and the developed technique of the fighter
pianos. That was tho reason, why Woltz objected to thio
suggestion.

3ut ho c.lso objected to Raschor's second suggestion
of conducting freezing experiments. Prof. Waits certainly
was the first who recognized tho cold problcn with regard
to the Luftwaffe. However, he objected to human cxporlnont s
about tho c .ld probloa in this case. Ho did not oonsldor
thc.a as bein important, being in r position of jotting
tlx. necessary result through an Irani oxeorlaents.

as he did not know Rascher personally, ho had no
reason to call hlu to his institute.

Therefore the nssuaptlon ttet Waltz hlnself had ordered
Raschor's assi nst-nt to .is institute cannot be substantiated.
To tads extent therefore one cannot spook of nls abotcing
Rr.schcr,

Tho fact, how Waltz treated R-scher and his out .cations
still .eore contradicts tho nssuaitlon tint ho wanted to push
forward Hitler's proto, e. The facts prove the contrary.


11203


18 July 47-M-PK-Lfc6»Mcohan (Int. Hildcshclacr)
Court 1.


Hero I oa referr ing to an incident th?.t happened later.
However in consideration of the connection with tho
abetting proxies, I first wont to donl with Rr.scix;r*6
rcrov-1 f ron Welti* institute.

Beoauso of Welti* refusal of Raschor*s suggestions
for experiments, Hnschor had nothing to do in his institute.
Ho therefore continued with his former activity in Schon c au,
uhoro he had boon stationed before. Slnco ho was seen in
IJunlch, without rcportln to Welti, Prof. Welti ordered hla
to report twice weekly at his institute, he further cate-
:ovlcnlly donnndcd that Hnschor reported hln on the
situation at Dachau. It la known, how Hnochcr resisted
to this ordor. When reporting for the third end last tlno
lr. Welti* institute, Raschor showod Welti tho Hinnlcr
tolcgrna ordering socrooy even towards Welti. Tills was
sufficient for Welti to apply for his innsUnto dismissal.

How C“.n the rrosocutlon in view of thlo situation oponk
if tffclti abettin, Raschor and his intentions? Vhc.t
advanta .0 would it have been for Welti? At that tlmo
he was one of the best reputed X-ray specialists, vrhoso
cucocsoes were merely "nd solely duo to his personal achieve¬
ments. Why should he lr. contradiction to his hnvo had
the chr motor Intention to ankc any profit from the
scientific results of ono of his asslstents, who had
but little experience? Frau Ninl Rcschcr hewevor, in
Dec. Ho. 233 end No. 264 of tho Rolchflfuchrun t .-S3 tried
to misrepresent the facts this way, and the prosecution
obviously accepted hor statements. The incorrectness of
tills is devious.

Then I ccmi to para.mph 8 of ay ploa, Luti as r
prosecution witness I shall nut deal with here now. lutz

11201 ;


16 July 47-K-?it-U7-}fcehart (Int. Klldoshelmer)

Court 1.

wgb a prosecution Wltnoaa.or importance.

Ho. 9 of *y document, I wsuld llfco to substitute for
the following explanations, thich I have already submitted
to thJ translators.

Cons' !crln the cvldonco whldh clarified tho facts
I ac content with stating the following facts In ay spcoch
about tiio orl-In and the a rcccnnt In Adlorhof:

1 . Welts* meeting In «dlershof was neither plnnnod nor
proparod.

2 . The cxporlmontal series was not criminal.

3. Before the bo^lnnln^ of his first collaboration Dr.
Rasohor*s person nv^ no cause for suspicion, neither
personally nor froa tho mcdiorl~cthlcal point of view.

4. The experiments wore approv-d by the highest authority
of tho Luftwaffe. Hip.-ko had ^lvon hlo caress oonsont.

Therefore, tho conversation La Adlorshof Is n serious
a_:rconent between two physicians of the Luftwaffe about
scientific collaboration. Tho .^lst tons that tho two
institutes wore to bo rognrdod as sponsors. Ruff wr.s to
bo represented by Romberg who, as far as he was concerned,
was to have tho Immediate direction In Dachau. Slroc ho
was a collaborator of Ion otandln; one could give hid
this t"8h with a ;ood conscience.

I r.ow come to Pare reph X:

PcnaL-Juriiiclal conclusions from tho adlorshof
r rococn t. Cons id or In • this n.reencnt from the point of
criminal responsibility of Its participants, wo arrive
at tiio following result: Professor Veits and Dr. Ruff
r.vc the originators of this agreomant. Thoy were the
first to draft It and tu agree on It by mutually talking
and thinkln. It over. Then they called In those persons
who wore mainly to be entrusted with the carrying out of tho

112C5


18 J uiy 47-K-PK-l&K echon (Int. Hlldesholmer)

Court 1.

experiments and with those, vis. Romberg end Raschcr, ttoy
discussed the details and checked over them, ftion they
Infer aid the persons In authorlt; in Munich and Dachau,
which was Bohnitsler on! Plorkowskl, about the details of the
experiments and made sure that the experiments could bo
oor.duotod under the agreed conditions. This was all the
more to bo expected since Plorkowskl had received the clear
order of Himmler to obey these conditions, through Schnltzlor.

Therefore no reason con bo found anywhere to assuno
that the two of then had Intended to oonduct Impermissible
criminal experiments. This was already set forth before*

Just as little It oould be their lntaitlons to let Romberg
and Rancher make lnporai3oibl v or criminal experiments.

For this reason they familiarized Raschor during the Munich
conference with the pro ram of the cxporlmonts.

Equally we have to deny the quostlon whothor or not
Vfoltz can bo hold responsible for the criminal experiments
conducted by Raachcr outsldo the experimental prograo
■Height B on tlo own initiative or by ordor of Hlunlor.

Of tho facte stated In «* tide II, Humber 2, of Control
Council Law Ho. 10 only the following can be applied: c)
took a conscntln part therein), d) (connectwd with plans or
enter arises Involving Its commission). Only Intentional,
but not no. 11 ,ent activities are mentioned here; tills bccomos
clear from he whole exceptional position which the Control
Councel Law occupies In tho le al life of the occupied
territory. The latter fact excludes any other forms of
participation, cither of -orern of foreign Criminal law, me
“ specialist, a criminal responsibility of Vcltz and Ruff
is out of the question, because their participation and tiwrl
suggestions extended only to the permissible experiments rr.d
not to the experiments outside tho series.


11206


13 July 47— k-PM-1—9—Meehan (loti Hlldeah^ inor)
Court 1.


^xxrt from that the Prosecution seens to raise the
question whether or not Ruff or Wcltz could possibly
prevent Rascher^ experiaents fron Icing carried out at
all, olthcr before or after they started. Of which
possibilities the Prosecution thinks is not stated clearly.

nature of the quostlns, towever, and occasional
marginal remarks in their at-tenont give us a hint. Quito
obviously the Prosecution thinks of an offence by Ofcu.il salon,
counted by the onnlsslon of possible defensive acts.

As ro.-\aru8 Professor Wcltz only the following quostdons
oar. be dir cussed In this connection:

1. How could Professor Wcltz have prevented the getting
under way of ttoso criminal experiments of Dr. Rasohor'o?

Tho Prosecution seocs to think of theposslblllty of pro-
vontln thca In sono fora.

2. What could Professor Wcltz have done after the beginning;
of tho experiaents In order to prevent their further
sproadln J?

In this latter respect, I any aako the remark that
an Intervention a nln3t the continuation and tho spread¬
ing of tha experiaents on the pr.rt of Professor Wcltz
was outside the reach of possibility, .alono because ho
had no knowlei e of tho bc. lnnin and the oonduct of the
experiments, presucably not, bec.aueo Raschor had loft his
com. .and.

Tho . allowing paragraph Is devoted to throw light on
the question; her.. I an going to tell that Prof. Woltz did
everything possible to obtain 6onc knowledge of the experiments
without, however, to succeed and took in some knowledge)
about the experimental subjects without succeeding.

Wcltz fl,-rhts for th_ no rvlsl'.n of Rasch^r's

cxeerlnsnts .


11207


16 July -l-V-H-PK-i-l 0-Mo chan -Int. Hildoshelnor)

Court 1.

It 1g Point 11. Tho Prosecution dll not nako it clear how
W oltz could hr.vo prevented Rascher's own cxperlnonts. 9ut
from various remarks we can conclude again end again that
tho Prosecution always starts from tho idea which wo have
today of Rnschor, Hicclcr and the concentration c«nps. In
contrast to this, the defense oust point out that this
knowledge was lack in at that tlno. Waltz didn't have it, Just
as little as tho great sajorlty of the Cotrurne did not hnvo
it. 3y virtue of which reasons atould Welts have presumed
that Rase!: r would turn n criminal at some lator da to?

\rncn the preliminary discussions about tho Ruff-Ronberg
c^xJi*inonta wore still on, Reactor had not coanittcd a
crino at all, as far as we knew. Also, no other ocrcono -
had conducted any crlnlnnl oxporlnonts in Dachau beforo
tint tlco. For obvious reasons Welts rogardod the closo
relations to tho Reich Fuchror SS, of which Rnschor
boasted, as oxr. orated pranks cf an nnbltlous assistant.

Vcltz could in no way expect or forcseo that Hlaclor would
lvo the ordor to Rnschor to start a series of criminal
cxeorinonts of his own. Welts only know that exporiraonto
wore to jv. can*led out in Dachau along tho lines of tho
unobjectionable «ulcrshof pro._rnEG. These were to tako
place under the direction of Ruff and Roeberg. 3oth v.*cro
froa tho scientific point of view oolnont experts, and froa
the point of view of character they h~d the best reputation.
How, under those circumstances, could Welts have had an
lnklin that Rascher would secretly cnbark on ” see nd,
criminal series of .xporlconts?


11203


18 Jul-JM©-3-l-Gross (Int» Hildeshclser)

Court No. I.

Since no oeriod of tine w-s set for the beginning of the experi¬
ments, Welts did not »t first notice th»t F-scber wws not in Munich. *s
soon -s Veits learned, however, th-t Rascher hod been seen in Munich, he
c-lied his In twice - week to report. Richer elinin-tod Welts by
presenting t 6 telegr's fro- Himler. This wps p corplotc surprise to
Welts, since Rescher h=d earlier forced hlnself upon hin -nd leid gro»t
v«lue on his collaboration. Is Is known, Ttelts laaedi »tcly drew the of-
fici-1 conclusions from this sltu-ticn, he h«d Fischer's -ssignoent to
his Institute ended -nd sent « report ^bout this to the *fedic-l Inspect¬
or^. This action ws in every respect correct -nd expedient. This
cre-ted cle-r conditions. P-echer w»s then '•g-’ln under »lr G-»u Medical
Doo^rtsont VII, which thus h-d the supervisory duty. If tod-y, with
knowledge of the further developments, ono ex-nines Welts's notion, one
c-n find no better w-y. Even he Prosecution w-o not »blc to tell Welts
of » better w-y which he could h*ve taken.

XII

When w-s Procter's nssignoent to Prof. Welts ended?

R-scher doubtloss left tho lnstltuto »t the beginning of V-rch
19li2, be for: the beginning of the experiments proper. The Prosecution
hs »ttonotod, relying on Poc. NO 261 and NO 1359, to sot the tlnu ho
loft -t the beginning of ”»jr 19b2 or even l»tcr, In order thus to -scribe
to Welts the responsibility for Rase her'a own experlnonts.

To th-»t I cn -nswir the following:

The following considerations show th*t F-scher's -ssign-nent to
the Welts Institute onded »t the beginning of V»rch 10h2:

1. The experiments in D*ch-u were suspended froa *bout 22 Feb-
ru’iy till 10 k'-rch 191*2 In order to exclude Welts. This can be scon
from Pocunent N00263, !‘rs. Bln' P-scher's letter, -nd from Puff's and
Jbaberg's testirwny. Tt Is just *bout out of the question thnt the ex¬
periments wer* -g-in resumed before R-scher -nd Schnitsler were cert-in
th-t they h»d elL-dn-ted Welts' Influence.

2. Hi-rcler's telegr-r. which R-scher showed to 'felts is obviously


11209


18 Jul-3-HP-3-2-Grcss (Inti 'Sildesheiner)

Court No. I.

the -nswer to Schnitller's question In document NO-263. Fascher h-d
"Iso shown this telegr-r to R-rberp -t n earlier st-ge in the exDeri-
-ents -nd it is h»rdly conceivable th-t for two whole months P»scher
=~ie no use of this telegr»n. However, the telegr-n led inrocdi-tcly,
'fter H-scher h-d submitted It to Kelts, to the conclusion of Poacher's
-ssignment "t the Institute for Avirtion Medicine.

3. It c-n be seen for certain from Document NO-318 th-t on
16 N-rch 191x2 P.-scher w-s no longer at Welts' Institute. From 16 M-rch
until 16 April 19L2 he h-d been tr-nsferred directly to D-ch»u from the
Luftg-u. The orob’tive v-loe of this document is not violated by the .
f-'ct th-t P-sch»r c-lled his office in D-ch-u by -n incorrect titlo.
From the offici.-l military point of view P-sohor, *t -ny r-te, belonged
«fUr 16 M-rch 10fx2 no longer to Volts' I n stituU* but to the Luftg-u
Vfcdic-'l Doo-rtnent VII. For practical purposes it w-s of no consequence
for the Luftg-u lfcdlc-1 Den-rtnent wh-t n-mo R*schor g-vo to his office
whon he w-s ~esigned to h-ch-u.

li. From rv^cusent NO-296 it c-n be soon th-t Hipokr h-d told
the Luftg-u to extend F--sc»v*r's -ssignmr-nt «t D»ch«u by one month. The
f-ct th-t Hlnoke g-ve these instructions to th^ Luftg-u «nd not to
Veits himself -Iso shows unnist-k-bly th-t -t th-t time, on 27 'oril
19h2, thore w-s no longer -ny officl-1 connection betwoen Volts -nd
Raschcr, This letter *t the srre time also refutes the Prosecution's
-ssurotlon th-t Veits h-d boc i. -ssigned for the freezing experiments in
D-ch-u bee-use he w-s still R-ocher's superior. Hippke's lettor provos
the contr-ry. He oust h-ve known th-t P-scher w-s no longer with Volts.

?. Th-t F-scher's assignment to Dechira was - different assign-
rent fror his *osign=ent to Veits' Institute c-n further be seen from
the f-ct th • Rrscher's -ssignrents to Dachau were always limited to
one month where-s the original assignment to Welts' Institute was un¬
limited.

There is, therefore, conolote documentary proof th-t Fischer,
rt le-st -ftcr 16 V-rch 191x2, no longer belonged to Welts* Institute.
Only two file notes st-nd in ooposition to this proof; n-melv, Document


11210


15 Jal- u -VG-3-3-Gross (Int. Hildesheiaer)

Court So. I.

X0-2fli -r.d HC-1359. Both file notes originate fwa the P-scher couple
md were set down simultaneously -t two different places. r ile notes
-s such do not possess the probative v-lue of the above-mentioned of-
fici-*l cosrunlc-tiocs; -nd one must be- re-lly distrustful if such notes
originate fres the fescher couple. Aoong the nus^reun lottos tba
P'-schcr couple which the Prosecution h-s put in evidence, there is
hardly one which does net contain gross lies 'nd,distortions of the
truth. In his numerous letters, reoorts -c.d notes, R-scher was always
pursuing soecific ends, 'nd w-s willing to use -ny Mans. Ho w-s partic-
ularly successful in c-=oufl-ciug his re -1 offici-1 connections, in
order to t>l»y one office vinst another. I n-y slrply mention hero
his negoti-tions with 3r-wltt 'nd Qobh-rdt. One c-n therefore in this
C'SO -Iso rowdily «sauao th-t P-schor w-s attempting to h.-vc hia D-chsu
assignment extended by asserting that rfeltz w-s still tlying to olindn-
-to his from Dachau or to h-3>or hia in his work.

I, therefore, s-int-in th-t tho two file notes wore intention¬
ally untrue assertions by the Rase her couolo, which wore nado for -
voiy specific purpose. R-scher f-lsified tho d-to of events which h«d
in reality t-kon placo two ronths ortviously.

During the cross ox-ain-tion the Prosecution -Iso confronted
ffoUs with - few -llcged statements by - ccrt-in !1ss Prick. Th6sc
statenents were alleged to prove th-t in ipril R-schor w-s still at
Foltz’ Institute. Howev-r, sire* 1 the Prosecution produced no proof of
this, we need not go into the matter -ny further. 'Iss r rick w-s em¬
ployed -t the r 0 itz Institute before 15 ‘oril lojj? -r.d the date of 15
-pril 19li2 which the Prosecution h-s stressed w-s only the d-to when
she was fin-lly put on the payroll.

L'nder these circumstances I need point out only briefly what
leg -1 fora these natters would t-ke if one assumed th-t the file notes
w. re true. In this c-se -Iso the f-ct would be th-t Welts w-s not in¬
ferred of the P-ch-u experirtnts, although he repeatedly begged for re¬
ports. Under no circurat-r.ces would Wcl is hevo known th-t R-scher, in

addition to the Ruff-Fboberg experiments, w-s carrying on .-n independent

11P11


15 Jul-l*-y3-3-k-Gross (int. Hildesheirer)

Coart No. I.


exoerirectal series of his own on Higgler's orders. Therefor , if one.
were to -S3c=e hypothetically ("lthough the contrary hs been proved)
th-t Rase her still belonged to Kelt*' Institute until the beginning of
K»y VHi2, TTelts would still be?r no resoonsibility for teacher's crim¬
inal experiments since he knew nothing about then and also could not
"S3use that aside fro- the Puff-fcabc rg program still another progr-a
w-s being carried out on Hitler's orders. These hypothetical reflec¬
tions desonstr-te th-t the »ctu»l tine whon Fischer separated from
a'eltr' Institute is not of such pr-ctic-1 lcoort-ncc as the Prosecution
asserts.

From this it c»n be seen that Weltz, who tried in v«in to check
on the experiments, be-rs no responsibility for tocher's entire further
experimental activities. One C'n only understand the situation and tto
p»rt th-t R-scher pl-yed if ono considers R-schor's double position os
- doctor. This la No. 13.


XIII

n oublc position of P.ascher s ■■ do c tor -nd nn SS-bo-dcr .

The fact th-t the Dreh-u exoorinents took quite » different turn
than Kelts h-d ol-nned and expected h»d its reason in R-achor's double
oosition. Within the Luftw.affp, p-acher w-s Holtz' subordinate. But
it w^ in no way obvious for Kelts wh-t were the rel-tionahics between
R-scher and Hirrlor. Prof. Kelts did not at nil expect Himmler to
change his attitude a r .d exclude hin froa the exoerirents, after heving
allowed them. Tfeltz w.-s of course not in - position to exorcise my
influence upon Himmler's decisions.

This relationship is »poroxirately characterized in the Judgment
of Military Tribunal No. II in the case -gainst the fbrmer secretary of
the state MH£K. In this case the resoonsibility of the Luftwaffe for
the high altitude -nd freezing experiments exendned from the legal st-nd-
point. The Judgrent concludes after c-reful examination of the evidence
with the statement th-t Vilch w*s not in a position to prevent Pascher’s
ar.d the S c experiments, over, if he had known anything of then. I quote


11212


19 Jol-BMB-^^Oroes (Int. Hlldesheirer)

Court So. I.

the decisive sentences fron o^e 6 because of their lnport-r.ee for the
use of Woltz: I quote: "Did the defend-nt h«ve ‘.he twrer or the
possibility to prevent or to stop the experiments ? It c«nnot b; deniod
th-’t he h-d the power to either orevtnt or stop t:«n >s f-r ->s they
were carried out under the sponsorship of the Luf ;wof:>. it seeas to
be very probable however, they they would h»ve be in continued -g'inst
his will by Hisnler *nd the SS." That's the end jf uy quotation.

This ceroeptien results froa - correct unions tiding of Hitler's
position »t that time. The secretory of st^U Vilch v-s r.ot in a position
to defond his point -gainst Hiralcr's will.


U213


18 Jul-W-MMi-l-jeon*rd (Int. HUdesbeioer)
Court If-. T.


If this is true, according to the conviction of -n •reric-n
Tribun'1, cm for Mich, it is even are the c--se for the Luftwaffe
doctors we 're concerned with in this trial. With these findings one
«-f the acst irrxrt-r.t prerequisites is cleared up in the c-sc- of Kelts,
vrelts would hrvt never been in r p-sition to exercise -ny influence
iron the exoerlrer.te ordered by Hirr-ler, even if he h-d known of then,
"owevrr, he did not oven know th-t such experiments were beinr: carried

out -t " 11 .

Hcw-ver. Poacher's oosUion rust not be nisundvrstood in that
sense th-t Welts, within the coccctency of the luftw-ffe, would have
-llowed P.mscher to vlol-te the discipline -nd would have yielded to
Hl-rler'o influsnee. This is clo-rly shown by the one-rgy with which
he removed P-scher from his institute, regardless, whether he had to
do with one of Hlnrlcr's friends. Th-nks to his energy -nd his cour¬
age, R-acher *>s prevented from conducting unnecessary experiments
botween M-y loll end Fcbnnry 19L2, although ho insisted upon carrying
then «ut. It !: quite obvious, however, th-t Kelts was not in n
position t« inrluJncc the closo rel-tion-h.'.p botwoon R-schcr »nd Hlml»«r.
They keot their sutt-1 correspondence outjido thr official ch-ar.el jo
th-t welt* w’s completely tsninfor-ed in thu rrjvect.

T ho only wns th-t Wolt* could d*.-orc of wit.-.ir. his cnwicconcy
-g-inst P-scher w-s to n-ke reports to the M-oic-l Insne ‘or- o. Ho used
it -fter P-schir’s dismissal hy to - -1. . * d ■ - dev ailed
rvoort to Snthony, the deputy of the absent nodic -1 inspector.

I com to Ch-pt« r Xr.'. I sh-11 emit this now. The ch-rgo
-g-inst Welts in this respect cannot be eair.t-ined.


For the sure re-son I sh-11 now omit th* o-r-rr-oh Consplr-cy.
The -ttitude to this point h-s be*.n -Iso ch-ngcd.

I cor^ n~n to ?-r"vr-ph XVI, Conclusion, Sucr-ry of th- Ibsults,
nrlic-tion fer ^cqultt- 1 , -ni this is the 1 -st p-r-er'oh whVch I w*nt
to ro-d.

Khen -t the nd of the r-r the ccncer.tr-tion c-vi-os »eie opened,
the public leirmed for the first tin? of their terror/-nd the cri-tfs


112 Hi


19 Jal-i*-V?-k-2-Iecn ' rd (Lit. Hildesheiner)
"aurt K«. T.


which h«d been committed there. The general request for •> wiy sevt re
cunishsent of these crines, in order to prevent then fron being rope-ted
the future, w'S mre th~n justified. This is obviously the re-son,
why General Taylor, in his opening speech, claired th"t this trial
served -s ~n example, in order to tho German people underst-nd,
why it w»s necess-iy to destroy cities like Nuernberg.

In answer to this, I w*nt to point out the following: The prin¬
cipals guilty with reg-rd to this special field that is being discussed
here, »re dead. P-»schor, Ding-Schuler, Gr/ywitu, lulling, Conti escaped
the justice of this world. Also Holrloohner -*nd Finke ore de«d. One
would rendor n poor s- rvico to the concept of justico, when sentencing
persons, who hnppcnod to be in touch with the periphery of those events,
bee •’use of crimes con-.itted by those who ore do-d, without examining
thoir guilt quite independently of then.

With this I do not turn, Tour Honors, *g-inst tho infliction of
sovore punishrents, but against tho ret hod •'sked for by tho Prosecution,
rno.ly to n*ke responsible those, who *re still “live, for those who
^re dead.

A grave- reororeh was n-*do ag-inst the Justice of the Third
Ffeich, by saying th't it lacked every consideration for tho right of the
Individual "nd sacrificed these in-lienable rights to a nisinterpreted
interest of the state. ">>pos*id to this, tho democratic principles dc-
c^nd «n impartial cx-min-tion of the guilt of each individual, not in¬
fluenced by t»x politic-1 situation or the need of political propaganda.

Such -n icpsrtial Judmnent is also necessary in consideration of
the unique importance giv<-n to the outcome of this trial by tho world.
The outcome of thi3 tri'1 will be decisive for the character of medic*
research for the next decades. But, since the medical research in its
final a in does not concern the doctors but the sick, the importance of
the Judgment for the entire civilisation carx.ot be evaluated highly
enough. The legal limits of redicel research with regard to human ex¬
periments will in future h«vo to be conform with the principles set down
by the expected Judgment. If these Units are too restricted, it will


11215


18 ful-Jt-Jfi-ii-3-Leon^rd (Int. Hildesheiner)

Court No. I.

not be the doctors. In the last analysis, who will be prejudiced, but
the sick for whose benefit science is oeent to serve.

I now su= up the result of ry examination as follows:

1) It has been established that Welts did not participate in
*ny criminal high-altitude experiments or further any such experiments
in »ny fora whatever.

2) He did not omit doing anything which could h*vo prevented
or stopped ny criminal experiments of Pscher's.

3) He did not p»rtlcio"te, either directly or indirectly, in
Rascher's cold experiments.

U) Ho did not participate in any conspiracy.

The conviction which I express with this statement is the result
of sovcral years of work, which began with the first day of Prof. Welti's
arrost In June. I personally, after having known Kcltz for m»ny years,
was convinced from the beginning that he could not have coraitted any
inhumane acts. I thorofor© expected after beginning tills trial to en¬
counter cloar and indubitable proofs. The contrary proved to bo true.
Today, after almost eight months of Investigations, the participation
of Wolts in medical experiments of a criminal nature has been clearly
refuted «nd the charge of furthering them shrunken to an unfounded as¬
sumption. *nd this is the result of a trie! in which tho Prosecution
were in possession of all the evidence.

But the Prosecutor -Iso n-de tho dofor.se of Prof. Welts more dif¬
ficult by his special treatment of the c-so. Not only by -n inconolote
and one-sided presentation of docusents, whereby exonerating documents
were not brought out, but also in the rest of the m-nner of presenting
the case. This could give the Tribunal - conpletely false picture of
conditions In Gernaay and of the world of ideas of the defendant Welts
and thus of his true plans *r.d intentions. Thus - to give examples - the
picture of Rase her w-s painted during the trial by the Prosecutor in such
• w'-y ^ if, from the beginning, those ’round hie had been able to realise
that he w-s the crl-dn-l th-t he has proved to be today, after years of
ir.vestig ation.


11216


19 Jul-Vt-V3-Jj-&-Leon®rd (Int. Hildcsheioer)

Court No. I.

It Is stellar »ith knowledge about conditions in the concent¬
ration crrpa. Only after the collapse did conditions there cone to
light, -rd -t the s woe tine, the terror systea of concealment w»s re¬
vealed. The Prosecution, hoover, assures thet it was generally known
?t the tine.

To this chapter of unscientific treatment belong st'torents of
the Prosecutor's sich *3 this: th»t Prof. Welts was responsible for
Puff's »nd fcabenj's being in the dock. As if the Prosecutor did not
know very well that these two aviation medicine experts had enough
knowledge of the subjeot and enough coswn sense to fora their own
Judgment on their decisions. Ifcreover, they had no intentions of doing
anything illegal, wry more than Wolt* did.

I h-ve CBch-slsod the inequalities in the procedural possibil¬
ities also, however, in order to »«k the Tribunal to compensate for the
sovorc disadvantages of the defendant in obtaining evidence by corres¬
ponding Judicial Judgment. In 'll ponal procedures In tho world, no
doubt, the prosecutor hae to bring evidence ag'inst tho dofendar.t, who
is prosur»d innocent - has to show the court that the defendant deviated
from tho p-ths of lawfulness, 'nd has to bring this proof -U the more
clearly, the less grounds for suspicion the defond-nt has givon in his
previous life. In doubtful c-ses, when tho Prosecution case does not
clarify the state of affairs sufficiently, the previous irreproochnble
conduct of the defendant, his previous wry of life must bo the decisive
factor.

I have already stated by w.-y of surcary that the Prosecution
case against Welts has f'lled. Nor was even the slightest proof
brought th't Welt* gave ->ny aid to Fascher’s exoorirents. But where
there could be doubts about Weltr's inner attitude, perhaps -a to whit
Intentions underlay-his actions here «nd there, his previous conduct,
his wh"le attitude toward the medical profession, toward humanity,
should be decisive.

For this re-sor. I h-v*- taken the liberty of submitting to the
High Trib'x-.al cpinions »nd Judgncr.ts free various circles, from the


11217


18 Jul-M-S£-4:-5-Le?n»rd (Int. Hildesheirer)

Court Ho. I.


scdic*1 profession, which warded his Its honors, from his Msociatcs,
who attested his nobility of character, hum-*n kindness, end humanity,

-nd from his employees, on whose behalf he Mw.-ya took action with the
whole force of his personality at decisive points In their lives. No¬
where dees this description indicate characteristics toward which the
Prosecutor directed the only accusation which he seers to maintain,
which is unbridled scientific "cbition, favoritism, and -bove all lack
of resDect for hur.’n feeling and the ide* of humanity.

Ever/ healthy feeling revolts -gainst the Disposition that it
could have been -n end in itself for Prof. Kelts to conwit crimes, tor¬
ture hue>n boings, -nd kill by sadistic excesses. Ml this fits so
poorly Into the picture of the s-n and champion of the progress of
nodical science, the pioture of n person who never c*r«d f° r egotism
end material interests, but only for tho promotion of the wholo.

In a complete distortion of this picture, tho Corn-., press, mis¬
using official material, nodo the assertion that Prof. Kelts h*d, to¬
gether with Pnschcr, killod numerous pooolo in Dachau by cold experiments.
That such « statement destroys the honor of a Gcrm-n reso.arch scientist
in the very field in which he had succeeded in saving thousands of lives
by his scientific discoveries, is not only unjust, but it is tragic.

This treatment of a n -n who h»s served medic-1 progress so well demands
Just coBuonaation. To award this is in tho h-nds of Vilit»ry Trlbund
I, which is c-lied upon to decldo. To this Tribunal, I address the plea
to restore, by a verdict of acquittal, the livelihood which was destroyed
by Prof. Kelts by the charges of tho Prosecution. I *lk th-t Military
Tribunal I pass Judr^ent to the effect that Prof. Kelts be acquitted of
the charges against hie, in whatever fore they may h-ve been made.


11218


13 July h7-X-*i C-5-l-foona rd (Hildcsheiaor)
Court I


THE HESIDEKT: Is *y of tbo-Gexrar. counsel advised 's to tha
whoroabouts of Dr. Hoffmann, Counsel for defendant Pokomy? T.o Till
bo prepared to hoar froa hia after hooring froc counsel for defendant
-rack.

IE. FISJgHG: Tour Honor, the dofonso counsol Hoffnann is in the
?ohl Trial this coming. *s far as ho was inforaod, tha translation
ma not concluded yet, and he counts on being tha last this afternoon,
ir. fact, ho is, of course, willing to plead this afternoon, but thoro
are a nunbor of other gontlonon hero whoso translations aro finishod
and who could coco first. It was assessed that counsel far tho dofondant
Pokomy would pload this afternoon.

TKS PH£5IXE!T: The interpreters have advised no that threo trans-
la tions aro available this roaming: *.Tiliia, whoa wo have hoard;
Froosohnann for Brack, whoa wo shall hear next; and Hoffmann, as coun¬
sol for defendant Pokomy. interpreters have informed aa that tho
translations for tha dofondant Hoven and Bockor-Froysong aro not yet
ready.

Dr. Hoffmann will be callod upon after counsel for dofondant
Brack has isado his argunant.

Frior to calling on counsel for defendant Brack tho Tribunal will
be in rocoss for a fow ninutes.


(A rocoss was taken)


11219


,


13 July i.7-k-?jC-l-6 4-7-Cook-(Ld3)

Court I

TEE MARSHAL: Parsons in the court roor. -rill be so'ted.

Tho Tribune 1 is egai n in session.

THE iHSS2ZENT: The Tribunal Kill no* hoar tho argument on behelf
of tho defendant 3reck by his counsol.

DR. F?.C£SCH1AKN: For tho defendant Brack, Hr. President, your
Honors:

Tho Prosecution has charged Victor 3r*.ck before tho Military
Tribunal for participation in criaea listed under articlo II of con¬
trol council law Mo. 10 as a aajor war original of tho European axis
perrors in the s:nsc of tho London agreorsont of 8 August 19U$ according
to the Moscow declaration of 30 October 19i*5.

Tho defendants of this trial, as far as they rroro doctors, wore
aocusod in General Taylor's opening spooch of having coraaittod atro¬
cities under th« guisu of nodical scionco. Tho defendant Brack does
not belong to theso doctors. Brack would probably not even havo appoarod
bjforo you banch as wrr criminal, had his superior Bouhlor boon still
alive. Br-cfc worked as an export in the Fuohror Chancollory and in
his field af icric had nothing to do ri th nodical problems. Also Brack
is not aocusod by tho Prosdcution of having participated in nodical
oxporinonts.

However, Brack is accusod of pa*tlcipation in tho gonocido policy
of tho Third Raich, in so far a3 ho participated in the outhanasla
program and the storiliaation oxporiaents was conscious of thoir
do3tructivo p ur poses.

I.

In tha Judgment of tho Uff the word "euthanasia" or "cuthanosia program"
is not usod at all. It only mentions aoasuros that woro taken for tho
purpose of killing all tho old, mentally ill, and all thoso, t&o had
incure bio diseases, in special institutions, which includ.d Gc man
nationals and foreign workers rho wore unable to work. Also in tho
separate judgment against the defendant Frick only these aoasuros arc
montionod.


11220


13 July Ii7-H-FjC-tf-6 5c -?-Cook (Lea)
Court I


«ny connection, or avon tfca possibility of such a connection
between those measures ard persecution of the Jews, doalt with in
a separate chapter, in particular with the plans drawn up in the
sunnor of 19U. for a "final solution" of the Jowish question in
Europe was never established by the H!7 nor avon hintad at.

!• *ord "outhanasia" was until 1939 unknown to Brack as woll as
to lerge circlos of tho German population. That this word originally
aaant the "art" of dying, or to newt doath with serer.o calm, had remained
tho secret of those scientists, who roro interested in the Groek lon-
guago.

During tho course of tho centuries the moaning of this word
changed. It first booaj&o tho expression for tho ondoavour of tho
physician - originating in huaaxvo- cocpassion, developed by tha no¬
dical art - to a Ho via to tho .nd of .a dying poraon by soothing his
pains. But than tho moaning of tho word and with it the concopt of
outhanasia was expanded, and towards tho ond of tho 19th contury it
aoant tho assistance in dying through an abbreviation of lifo, if tho

lifo of the sufforing person had lost its raluo in vi_w of an iaaodlnto

•

and painful doath or as a rosult of an incurable disoaso.

It is a fact that this kind of outhan-sia has boon applied in
tho whole world since tine and can be tracod b'ck to tho Twolvc Tables
of tho ancient Roca *nd to the epoch of stato socialists of tho anti¬
quity.

The assertion of tho Prosecution that outhanasia was the product
of national socialise and its racial thuorios c-nbc indisputably
refutod through history.

-von if th- Prosecution is of r different opinion, tho Tribunal cannot
O'/erlook the fact th~t -ccarding th- testimony of Karl Brandt, Brack,
Pfarnnuoller, Eodorich, Schultzo, Orubo, Gertrud KalL-wyor and unitor
Eugor. Schaddt, -11 independently stated that the measures started
according to Hitler's 111 in tho autumn of 1939, only applied to in¬
curably mentally ill -.nd ware suspended in l?Ul. For those aoasuros
• 11221

 . _ -_J


13 July !i7Hf-?jC-3-6 *-7-Cook (Loo)

Court I

the participants used tho word and the concept of "euthanasia" in tha
nooning of the final nedic-i assistance, whether justly or injustly
will ha discussed later.

2. It is not uninteresting to note that the word "euthanasia program"
appears for tho first tine in tho Brack affidavit (!» U2 6 Exhibit 160),
which has he on drawn up by the prosecution after several interrogations.
Brack at that time was in a stoto of physical and psychic exhaustion,
and thoroforo nop in a position to roali 2 o cloarly what ho said.

The dofonsa in agreement with tho prosecution refrained frou
presenting a nodic*l expert opinion, but did not, as tho prosecution
now asserts, refuse to present it.

I rogrot very dooply that the prosocution, when using the word
"outhrnasla program" coir.od by than, ch“ractorizos without sufficiont
proof the outhanasia appliod in 1939/19U1 for tha incurably sick as
the oonadont and doliborato procusor of tho difforent actions of
annihilation which nark tho rdlo stones of tho psychic and moral r'llns
loft to tho Gorr.an paoplc b; non who had bccorao crazy.

3. If tho prosocution had been sura of thoir as sun tion, they wouldn't
have had to subait those extremely doubtful documents with which they
triud to provo in cross ox'sdn-tion that tho defendant Brack partici¬
pated in planning th- nass axtermination of tho Jaws.

I continue on page 10 of =y plan as follows i


Ho;.- in the f*ce of such an insufficient ovidenco which noroovor is
opposed whan n corpus cases of int^rvontion for Juws in that period
of tine — I only recall the cases 7/arburg “rri Goorgii - and in tha
faco of Brack's sworn statements “bout his attitude towards Jcrwry, the
prosecution can assort that, 3rack had p-rticipated in planning tho
axto mi notion of tho Jews arxi with that dosed tho circle, which they
drew round the outhanasia of incurable mental patients, the Action
Hi F 13 and the final erasures to exterminate tho Jews.

U. Again I wish to stress that everything that happened after the


11222


13 July !;7-K-3jC-&-6 £= 7-CooSc (Lea)

Court I

stop is August 19U1 ur.der -isuse of the institutions of euthanasia,
had nothing to do with the euthanasia of the incurably insane which
was supported by 3rack. An opposing view would only be suitable
to sake an historical record which is not supported by the weight of
the judgment of the International Military Tribunal, but merely cor¬
responds to a view which just in the decisive points is void of every
substantiated basts.

II

On the sane line of collaboration in the expemination of the Jews
lies the assertion of the Prosecution that 3rack had sterilisation
experiments carried out which brought death or permanent ham to
numerous helpless wiotiaa.

The Defendant 3rack does not dony that he submitted suggestions to
Himmler which dealt with the mass sterilisation of Jews. The Prooo-
cution considers the suggestions as seriously meant. I agree with
the Defendant Brack, when he admits in his diroct examination that it
is possible for a reader without detailed knowledge of the circumstances
of tto origin and the intentions to get such ar. impression. The ques¬
tion now arises:

How should a nan who never was himself an opponent of the Jtma suddenly
make suggestions implying toward the Jews?

1 . In this connection I nay be permitted to devote a few words to tho
personality of the defendant Br%ck, since only rith full understanding
of his inner thoughts can his actions ir. connection with the charges
made against him, of sterilisation experiments and collaboration in
euthanasia, bo given duo consideration.

Russia's most profound poet of tho 19th century, Dostoevsky, in his
novel "The Idiot" puts in the rxmth of Frince Myshkin as proclaims r of
his faith ir. the unending power of the human sopl, which overcomes all
evil and darkness of life, tho words:

B ?ity is the most important and perhaps the only law of existence


11223


18 July L7-i-?3C-5-6 & 7-Cook (Lea)

Court I

Although he did not know it, this quotation became for the Defendant
7iktor Brack the yardstick of morality in his acts in life. Kot only
when kncrledge of the intentions of Hi Malar 1 a entoura ge showed hia tho
terrible auspices which threatened the Jews fro- the year l?liO on.

.lot at'the tine whan Hitler's'decree of the s’cner of 193? brought him
in contact with the problem which had moved the heroes of antiquity.

So, in the youthful heart of the defendant and into a aatTe age the
pillar of his character - almost a passion - had always been "to want
to help in all things which brought the misery and the suffering of
his fellow nen to his attention, and a corresponding absolute readiness
to help which put hia will into action. Thus "sympathy" - literally
"suffering with" his follwr non • became for Viktor Brack the spiritual
motor force of his acts.

Sympathy with the poorest creatures of humanity induced Brack to co¬
operate in the execution of the idea of euthanasia. Sympathy with the
concentration oasp inmates, who hod been robbed of their froodon for
years, accaaloned Brack to suggost soveral "amnesties", through which
tens of thousands of concentration camp inmates wore grantod tho good
fortune of returning to a life of freedom.

Sympathy with the prisoners, torturtod to tho point of spiritual
collapse moved Brock, in the early sumer of l?Ul, to poos on Bouhlor's
order for medical examination of the rental wrecks in tho concentration
camps.

2. Another outstanding characteristic appears to us in the picture of
the personality of the Defendant Brack:

His sense of Justice led hie in hundreds of cases to intervene for
the Just interests of Jews and part-Jews when they confidently car,*
to hin in their distress. I need only mention the cases of Warburg,
Ollendorff, and Georgii. His feeling of justice, paired with strong
personal sympathy, led him in dealing with all sort3 of ratters in the
of the Fuehrer, especially in the qi estion of the releaso of concen¬
tration camp inmates, to adopt the so-called "weak line".


11221 :


IS July L7-i:- T jC-6-c 1 ic-Cook (Lea)
Court I


I-ras^ did this itbout consideration of the fact that such a policy
of tolerance would necessarily dr a-..- dorr, upon him o If the antagonism
of 3or=anr. and Heydrier. or the displeasure of Ki-nler and might expose
him to tha dagger of being sent to a concentration camp himself.

These statements are not based on vain arroganco of the defendant or
an attempt to surround the defense of Brack with the sloriola of a
person ostensibly motivated by humane foolings. From mraorous affi¬
davits and testimony of witnesses those o.ualitios of Brack*s shino
crystal-cloar.

But it would air.imizo the significance of the so observations if I did
not also sketch the shadows -.ihich fall on these bright colors in the
picture of Brock's personality.

Sympathy 's doubtless ono of tho feelings which solzo the coro of a
human being's personality. To reject sumpathy as in 1neonsidorabio
sentiment of tho heart as stoic virtuo donands, would conflict with
natural feelings, deny tho prldo of nodarn-man, humanity, in Whoso
name tho victorious powers bar collol tho defendants to jud^nont; for
sympathy reans, as the Dofondant Brack so well said, participation of
tho heart in the sufferings of othors.

3. But, 33 huaanly good as sympathy is, as a moral commandmont it is
only relative. 3ofore sympathy con exert its influence on tho -.dll,
it needs to bo examinod fo. -ho purity of its composition, or in other
words, it neods purification and discipline by reason.

In this respect wo soe a weakness in 3rack»s character insofar as, for
lack of restriction to a concrete field of trork, ho repoatodly failed
to show tha r.»cissary sensible consideration. He gave tray to inpul-
sirnoss i;. things, the import of which it ras outside his capacity to
judge.


1122 ?


13 July i*7-E-FjC-7-6 £ 7-Cook (Lea)

Court X

Thus, in his character, reason was rwre or less overshadowed by tho
urging* oi his exaggerated altruisa. let ra reaind you of the tostl-
ZOT S' of the witness Hederich, tho affidavit of Tuossling, that Brad:
ms not without Justification callod a "political Parsifal", or of his
own admission that out of stupidity he lot hiasolf be involved, in the
case of his storilization suggestions, in a thing which ho did not
understand.

Whether such conduct was from his childhood on a component part of his
psychic background, or whether it ms the offoct of his own distross,
which cane about as a result of the Vorsaille treaty, through tho loss
of his homo anl tho destruction of his plans for the future:

This involvement in constitutionally dotorr.L-.od thinking constitutes
in Brack's lifo tho fatoful trsgody which, in tho Judgment of all tho
tritr.osscs, allows a rv.nrho is halpful, docont, and aodost Ln his
thinking bj auspoctod of crims against hmanity.

ihus, his «rJo to robol against inhunano actions drovo him, who
»as entirely ur.concerr.od to sifcsit to Himlor in tho spring of l?in
usoloss sterilisation miggostions with the air: of preventing the dan-
iyr of general storillsation which ms threatening the Jews.

In tho course of his examination as a witness Brack doscribad his
relation to Hl-nlor from tho Tory beginning of his acquaintance, his
original impressions of boliof ir. tho personality of Himlor and his
huranity, tho orisLng of misgivings and doubts, their pacification,
and than t;u horrible disappointment until his inner broak ir. 19h2,
occasioned by Eisclor's anaounco-cnt of his sterilisation intentions
anc- still .-ore of his later extermination intentions toward tho Jews.
3 rsc.-: also -described in an extranoly realistic way tho reasons for his
last appeal to Himlor's instincts Ln Juno l?u2 (SO 205, bxh. 16}) and
reveoxed the attempt to exploit Kl z nl/r r's realistic thinking in regard
to the procurement of labor, which in his jpiritaal distress socr.od


11226


13 July ^7-t-?jC-3-6 & 7-Cook (Los)
Court I


to him tho last possibility for rescue orxi decided him to sand such
o letter to KiaOer.

5. Brack's attitude toward tho Jews has beon proved by nisiorous
affidavits.


11227


IB July-H-IL-8-l-Gross (IntiLea)
Court I


childhood on ho had various friendships and acquaintan¬
ces v.'ith Jews; he continued to six with Jews at a time when
personal dancers wore threatening him on account of the fact
he was a Party official, '.ahen he was active in the Fuehrer's
Chancellory h- intervened in numerous casos on behalf of the
int-r-ots of Jews and holf Jews. At the same time as he
wrote his first letter he energetically and successfully
intervened on behalf of Professor *ferburg and preserved him
and his institute for Humanity. Various Jewish circles
expressod their thanks and their gratitude to Brack on
acoount of his personal courage. After the intention of the
leading people to deport the Jews to Poland in a disgraceful
v'ay became knov/n for th- first time, Brach drafted plans for
the establishment of a Jewish State in iladagaskar.

ah these faots, whioh not even the Ftosecution can
deny, make it appear quite impossible that with his suggest¬
ions Brack had intended to participate in Himmler's destruc¬
tive intentions or wanted to support them, all these facto

• •

prov„ that in his urg- to help he wanted, from th-n cn, to
do nothing but looking aft^r the interests of the Jews.

•

Brack believed he had to serve them by showing them a certain,
though childish looking, method which for a layman like

Himmler didn't permit th^ discovery with certainty the

•

desired effeot with its many 'Ifs and Buts'. That way, in

the first place, Brack hoped to 1-ad Himmler astray from

• •

his sterilization plans. Should, however, Himmler regard

3 3

th- method as suitable for an experiment, then, Brack

hoo-d, the long period whioh was necessary for the prepa-

• m

ration of such experiments, could win such a lot of tira^
that the end of the war which he oxp-cted with certainty
would call a halt to all these plans.


11228


18 July-H-IL-8-2-Cros3 (int.Lea)
Court I


It is undisputable that the method suggested by Brack was

entirely unpractioablc, from the point of view of the x-ray

technician '■s well as from the point of view of the x-ray

specialist, as can be seen free 3raok Exhibits 48 and 49.

Thuse aoiontifioally reasoned expert testimonies of

• •

Professors Rump and Stunpf, who are recognized authorities,

together with the affidavit of the witness Grube iBrsck

Exhibit 27) permit to attach probability to Brack's further

statement ebout the changes made in expert opinion of an

x-ray expert which was given particularly for this purposo;

• •

therefore this statement of Brack's is, to say the least,
to be regarded as not refuted, ev„n if I did not suco-ed
in spite of the help given to mo by the Tribunal, to obtain
a confirmation of these facts by the expert himself from
the Russian 2»one.

■ihllc, in the first lett-r, a oertain plaoe in occupied

•

by the intention that the sterilization should be unnotioed,
this point of view could not only b, abandonn-d in the

0

3;cond lett-r, becauso in the meantime larger numbers of

•

p-ople 1-arned of the intention to exterminate the Jew3,
but it had even to be left out of the letter, to make
Hicml-r fall with greater Oertainty for the chance to use
the Jews for work. In June 1942 this was th- only way
to make Himmler give up his intention to exterminate the
Jews.

• •

If Himmler had accepted this proposal, then, of
• •

cours-, It would not only have saved the 2 to 3 Million,
of whom Brack wrote, but it v/ould have saved all the Jiws
from extermination; because it would run counter to all
reason to exterminate 6-7 millions of Jews from the v.ry
star V if perhaps many more than 2-3 millions of men and


11225


.ith


1 C Jaly-:-IL-S-3-Cro33 (Int. L_ a )

Court I

women fit for work could be found among their number,
that Brack thought ho had once again won the necessary tine,
until the fight -..-ith Russia, which he thought at that tide
still precised success would have b-cn brought to an end.

Think of these ideas of 3rack's whatever you like: Considering
his mentality and his sooewhat primitive reasoning his
statement appears at least as probable that he wanted to make
a last attempt, oven if it was not thought over up to its last
oonsequonocs, still to turn the fate of the Jews as a comple¬
tely disinterested person: th-reby Brook was always con¬
vinced of the ineffectiveness and harmlesness of his method.

•

To quote a Cr ;ok philosopher, 'nobody is able to fathom

the r round of the soul, and though yax travel every road,

so deep is the bottom.' Brack had no need to commit nn

intellectual theft in order to oopy Pokorny's motives.

3rack had told me his r-asens already at a time when he

couldn't -von 3?cak with Pokorny. Forces stronger than -v-ry

reason slumbered in his soul: To h<-lo and to help again,

even if hundreds of thousands should be subjected to nn

experiment which, in his opinion, was entirely innocent,

if only the many millions could be saved that way. The

last thought prompts the lawyer to enquire whether or not

in this ca3e there was a so-called emergency surpassing law,

•

in the sense of the so-called theory of weighing goods,
which placed Brack before the alternative of either viola¬
ting a high legally protected value or violating a low

•

legally protected value, and whether or not Braok was
th-refore entitled to violate th; less-r value, b-caus-
th-ro v;as no other way out to 3ave the higher valu~.

Therefore you will hav<- to decide the question wh^th-r or
not after th- weighing of th- two evils in Brack's activiti-s
the int-ntion to c ommi t e Crime against Humanity can b-


11230


13 17 -! -IL-6- 4-Cros 3 (Int*L-e)

'-our t I


r-co^niz-d nt all, if ha decided to sacrific- a legal right
of sa nll value belonging to an insignificant numb_r of
people before sacrificing the legal rights of high value be¬
longing to a great Gass of Gen. Now I turn to Euthanasia,
page 24:

1 .) The dreadful fata of the incurable insane, whose

tragic and somber suffirings have again and again

confronted hunnnity with insoluble problems, has

for a long time been of particular importance for

the ooncept and application of euthanasia.

The conocpt of treating insane persons n 3 sick

•

has beoexae accepted only slowly. To be sure, it can
already bo found in Plato's , 3upubllc‘' and in lat-r ages
also it nov.r entirely vanished. But egain and agnin the
concept was visiated by assertions that an insane person
was evil or was even possessed by the devile that

allegedly were f-rm-nting him. In the ago of the deplo-

• •

ruble witch trials this delusion reached terrible propor¬
tions. Thus, in the cultural history of nan the develop¬
ment of the care of the insane is one of the darkest
chapters.

It was only in the niddla of the eighteenth century

that cental disorders were recognized as disease and it

was 5-on that institutional care was expedient. Thu 3 , in

the course of time insane asylums onae into being in which

in addition to a large number of cures after longer or

shorter commitment in on asylum, hundreds of thousands of

*

spiritually dead persons were housed, often for many years
-and decad-s, coaoletely cut off from the outside world.

Professor Leifcr-and, Pfannnueller and 3rack have
described types of such spiritually dead. Their emotinal


11231


13 J uly-!:-IL-8-5-Cross (Int. L-a)
Co-art I


r-saon3-s do not -xtend past th * nost elementary ?rooess_3,

v-rgine on the animalic. Qit of all rapport with th-ir

environment and the human community, utterly incapable of

morel thinking, thay stand at on intellectual level that

animals often achieve. Dependent on outside help, even in

th - cost primitive everyday sitters, they are divorc-d from

th- human community by the nature and consequences of their
* 0

affliction, vith no prospects of inprovem-nt, to say nothing
of cure.

The ooncept of redeeming these empty human shells from
th-ir misery is not a modern one.

0

As wcrly as 1516 the English Lord Chanoellor, the
Renaissance philisopher, Thomas ^ro, inbuod with tho spirit
of Humanism, mnde in his book Utopia" proposals for

0

Christian reform of State and society which, although
limited by his age, were nevertheless meant very aurioulsy.
Amone th-m wer- also proposals for a gentle m-rcy death
v/hich thi church and State could grant the insane person
for human- reasons.

Philosophers, legal scholars, doctors, and theologians
have sinov. th:n concerned themselves with this problem which
is known today under the namo "outhenasia'. The have thrown
light on th- qu-stion of the justification in destroying
so-called 'life unworthy of being lived' from the nost
div-rse points of view, hav- affirmed that justification
and denied it.

•

Not cnly in G.rmnny but clso in Franc-, Norway,
J onmnrk, Switz-rland, England and An.rioa, liberal
socialists and fr-e masonry circl-s the concept has found
furth-r and further dissemination.

Long before the advent of Rational Socialism, German


11232


18 J uly-I-IL-8-6-Cross (Tnt.Len)
Court I


literature produced n number of books with a positive
orientation toward applying euthennsia to th- incurably
insane. L-t me draw your attention to th- writings on
monistic ethics in th. p-riod before the First ./orld *'ar
and to Exhibit 496, which the pros-cutio.a itself termed the'
standard v;orJc, the book of on- of the .tost renowned German
scholars on criminal law of the last century, Binding, and
of th- hiehly esteemed Professor of Psychiatry at Freiburg

0

u niv-rsity, Hoche: Th- titl- is "Th- Admissibility of
D-stroying Lif- Unworthy ob Being Lived.

2 ) F ra3 th-se few refer-nces it can be s-sn that the
question of euthanasia for the incurably insane has b-en
discussed and propagated for quite, awhile by men vhos-
human and lib-rnl attitude and whos. juridical and Christian
ori.ntation cannot in any way be doubt-d. It cannot be
wond-r.d at that th- Catholic Church has opposud euth-nasia.
It hold3 unsw-rvingly to th- prinoipla that th- Stut-
cannot permit itself such nr. action without offending the
pr-o-pts of religion. 3ut for it charaot-ristioally -nough
it is not the question of humanity but th . viewpoint of
th- sanctity of life that is decisive. It is a fact that
needs no aroof that th- church and th - State have frequently

0

com- Into conflict ov-r 3uch probl-ms and that th- church,

*

although still struggling against th - Laws of th - State,

has finally yield-d, and this not only in G.rnony.

The history of this problem ho.3 also sufficiently

prov.d that th- qu .stion of euthenasic has be-n’ nnssionat-ly

affirmed by it3 adherents for ethical reasons, and has b.en
* *

denied fanatically by its o?pon.nt3, likewise for -thical

reasons. Both, adherents and opponents, cito in th.ir

behalf the pr-cept3 of humanity.

11233


1C o'uly-!:-lL-8-?-3ros3 (let. Lea)

Court I

'1- cnti-thicnl reasons adduced by th~ two 3id_s '.rv-

fch> p^rf--ctly understandable consequence of th- various

• •

attitudes on the port of awn. States, and peoples to th~
question of Humanity as has b-^en denonstrat-d to us not only
in wartime, but equally, in th- post-war period.

'Humanity' does not arise in us as Heraclitus portraus
it in hi3 philosophy, fren the 'koi.nos kai theies log-s'
of -which -v-ryone has a part in his sould a priori, through
his contact with th». absolute world. -^vjn today th« concept
ha 3 not yet been cl-arly d-fin-d in positive lav; ns th~
final deposit of an absolute 1 -gnl id-a — this is parti¬
cularly truv> in international law— and such a d-finitlon
fould probably also be lacking in the future.

3 ) The proa-cution disouss..d most exhaustively all
the individual directives and measures within the framev.orl:
of .ht-nasia.

•

In the course of presentation of evidence — I ref..r
to the testimony of the witness Schmidt — it v/aa ^scer-
tnin-d that Brack had nothin? to do with the working of
the -t-ich Ccamitee for Children with Heredity and Consti¬
tutional Afflictions. I can therefore diso-n3- v;ith dis¬
cussing this point, th - nor- so since the sam- points of

• 9

vi-w -r- here valid, perhaps to an even greater -xtent,
as in th- question of euth-nania for the incurably inoano.

Pn page )0 I go on about this point.

As regards the latter, ^rack has not d-ni-d hi3
oarticipation.

4 ) The treatment of thi3 matter during the presenta¬
tion of evidence was only n-c-sanry in ord-r to r-futo the
prosecution’s charge that Brack was the leading nan in the

uthenasin program. The def-nsa has brought oroof to the

1123U


18 Jul7-!!-IL-8-8-Cross (nt« 13a)

Court X

contrary. Hcichsloitcr Bouhler, according to Hitler's decr-~
was responsible for carrying cut cuthonasia. There is
documentary proof of this responsibility in Karl-3randt-
^xhibit 4 a and 4 b. ^v-ryt{*ing that Brack did he did only
as Bouhlcr's deputy, whose orders he carried out.

His position in tho cuthcnasia program did not even
correspond to that of an assistant and was less important
than that of n general secretary who is the administrative
offioial in n government offioe. Brook's position was
altogether subordinate. Ho had no right to'anko any in-
dependent decisions. He was not tho liaison man for the
T 4, as the prosocutio.a claimed. Brack's position, which
was described by tho proscoution n3 so important, must
not bo orer-estiantod, oven though outsiders have some¬
times Judged it incorrectly; Rather it must bo pieced in
its proper proportion on tho basis of tho trua foots as
det-rmin-d during the presentation of evidence.

5) Xuthenasia, your Honor, is a quostion of consolenco.
official activity achieves its inner meaning only
through the philisophic idea that informs it. The
essential -thicel nttitudo of c person can only be recog¬
nized and adjudged on a metaphysical basis. Brack's
motives th~t induced him to participate in the euthanasia
program for th- incurably insane was deepest pity for
these most -wretched human creatures, whoso dolivory from
suffering is a desirable thing from a hunano point of
view, as the witness Loibrcnd could not deny.


11235


13 July- 3-0J-9-l-Gross-(Lca)-
Court 1

So, and only In this way, can and must Brack's activity in
cq thorns la and his acceptance of it to be evaluated. Ho did not
accept it ligbthusrtcdly but only after the most thorough study of
lit-rature on the question and after personally seeing mental
institutions and their unfortunate inmates.

Brack's actions were not determined by social theories or con¬
siderations of expediency such as wore ascribed to him with the
purely fictitious phrase about "doing away with useless eaters. He
was guided by purely ethical considerations which provided his con¬
science, after careful security, with objoctivoly valid norms. Brack
has stated thua comprehensively in his final rcaarks on the euthanasia
problem, and sutaitted his theories to the verdict of public opinion
in the film *1 accuse".

6 ) However many as th. grounds may bo dclege. ferenda for the
Justification of euthanasia for the incurably insane, reference to
such grounds would still, for lack of legal basis, bo of no importanco
dc lege late. Tru. preo.dit.ntcd and dolibaratc killing of a human
b.ing remains murder if it is done for ethical reasons.

Brack can therefore not b_ denied his general criminal responsi¬
bility for ills participation in euthanasia unless he has some grounds
which exonerate him.

In Justification of his acts Brack cited Hitler's declaration
of 1 September 1939, of the contents of which, as well as the oral
xplanations given at the time, Bouhlcr informed the defendant
‘rack when giving him the assignaent to participate in the preparatory
ensures for euthanasia for the incurably inean.. Brack did not make it
clear that he contrucd Hitler's declaration as a Fu.hror decree"

*Mch obligated nim to carry out Bouhl.r's assignment. Tho question
"ith which the- I.H.T. concerned its.If so deeply, regarding the
importance to be attached to this defense, can therefore be left out
z - consideration in this defense of Brack.


11236


16 July-~-lJ-9-2-Gros5-( Lea)-
Court 1.

But the defendant Brack did ciaias that ha, like associate and
'll other persons involved, rogcjdcd Hitler's assignaent as a cospletc-

1 7 valid legal basis for carrying cut euthanasia, and also considered
litlcr Justified in issuing such a decree with force of law.

7) Therefore Brack's defense culminates in the fundamental
question of Mother Hitler's declaration of intentions of 1 September
1939 can bo considered such a legally unobjoctable state act which

^ A. .

eliminated the injustice of killing a human being inherent dc lege lata
in euthanasia of the insane.

Th. treatment of the question in this re on encounters groat difficulties
insofar as thcro is not only considvratlo ir.gnorancc of certain pecu¬
liarities of the Oeman position in constitutional natters but abova
nil a groat difference bctwcon continental European and transatlantic
Jurists in constitutional and legal thinking. Law and norals have
for centuries bocn sharply differentiated on the European continent
in Juristic and above nil in legislative thinking, in contrast to tho
states across the ocean, This historical fact must be taken into
consideration, for only then can the realization be reached that in a
question of Oeraan consitutional law only that development can be
decisive which legal training Las had in Germany in deviations free
•he constitutional law of the '..'oiaar republic sinco the Enabling Act
of 2h .larch 1933 and tho Head cf tho i>tate law of 1 August 1939.

*ith these laws Hitler was given ill authority as head of tho state
:ad chief of the government, in full knowledge of the Fuehrer principle
*hich had been in operation for over a year, with approval by the
plebiscite of 19 August 193L.

•res this tine on Hitler incorporated the will of the people and tho
■ ‘ siting functions. had thus bcccoj tho Supreme Legislator of the


11237


IB July-::-GJ-9-3-^ross-(I^a)-
Court 1.

r *oich. A concluding resolution of the Reichstag was only the confiraa-
tion of his priauiy dclcaration of his will.


Ar.ong the. independent promulgations of laws, which were represented
zs direct emanations of his authority, tho declarations of Hitler's
will were at first called "decree” and later uniformly "Fuehrer decree"
assumed the most important role. In thus the distinction, still
customary undor tho tfclaar constitution, between lcgislctivo and exec¬
utive is overcoat, as Hitler proealiaed in his Reichstag speech
of 30 Janaury 1937 in thw words: ■ There is only one legislative power
and ono executive." Therefore the decrees united natcrial law with
organisational measures and administrative diroctives, especially
insofar as they Wire addressed only to a group of person gathered
togehtor in a curtain coenunity. Proclamation in thu Reich Law Gaaottc
(Rcichagcsctsblntt), countersigning by the coopotont departmental
ainstter of later tho ccepctent chancery chief no longer played a
decisive role in 1937. *he Fuehrer principle was already in full
operation at this time. It no longer tolerated the depcndcnco of tho
authority to pronulgate original Laws which was grantod to the Puohrer
by tho plebiscite of 193l» on the observance of formal regulations.

only decisive thing that remained was the fact of proclamation of
tho will of the Fuehrer, not its fore. Hitler's decree of 1 September
1939 addressed to Brandt and Souhl^r, was therefore in fora n lcgully
quite acceptable state act of th- head o f tho state.

-7 result in the examination of thu development in legal history of
th. Fuehrer principle in the Third Reich agrees with the testimony
of the witnesses Laascers, Lngert and Best. This tustinony is underlined
by thu standpoint of the Reich Minister of Justice Ou-rtner and
Schlcgdbcrger as representatives of supreme Reich authorities, as
transmitted to us by ^a=ers and Engert. Finally, it is affirmed by


11233


13 July-*-GJ-9-i:- J ross-(lca)-
Court 1.

University Professor Dr. Hermann Jahrreiss, who 2 few days ago dealt
with the questions arising in this connection in great detail and exh¬
austively in the Jurist's trial before Military Tribunal 111. I may
ask the high Tribunal in judging this legal question to consider
these statements.

8 ) Brack was con-zinced of the legality of this decree, on the basis
not only of juridical but also other affective indications of much
core significant independent steps taken by Hitler in domestic and
foreign policy.

Brack's conviction, that of a non-jurist, of tho legality of the
Fuehrer decree, based on Uu. explanations and information of his
Juristic associates and tho concurrent or at least now dissenting
statements of the highest representatives of the Hoich Justico
authorities at the mooting of Oonrral Public Prosocutors on 23 April
19lil (Brack Exh. 36) can therefore not be doubted.

Evon if you deny the logal validity to the Hitler Docrcc, though I
regard it as valid. Brack coordtted a legal error at least as far tho
particular legal position of Hitler within the State is concerned,
according to which Decree is toherwiso illegal activities arc to bo
-accused. This legal error is suitable to abolish his guilt or at
least the gr vc guilt of intention. According to u crman law valid at the
tiac of commission this question is to bo answered absolutely in the
affirmative. According to that, a so-called error outsido of criminal
law - which is indeed the error about tho legal validity of the Decree
of 1 September 1939 - excludes the unlawful character which is an
essential of tho term intention.

9) Of course, tho law giver set Units to the exorcise of the powers
of the Fuehrer. The limits were, where his acts were no longer in ac¬
cordance with general human feeling. Human feeling, however, docs not


1123 ?


IS July-k-GJ-9-5-Grcas-(Lca)-
Ccart 1*

root in logos, as sold of ore. l ts Units are found generally, and with¬
in the framework of Euthanasia in particular, not to be absolute,
but to usl a word of Hcrakloitcs, “pant's rhei", vague -after all
shat hes been mid during this trial about the history of Euthanasia
and the arguments of the religious, ethical and legal opinions.

The contents of the Decree didn't eoan anything basically new
and alien. A definitely limited nuaber of experts was in a coutious
way entrusted with the JudffKnt of that, which in the course of the
years has repeatedly been discussed and demanded by c cop-tent pooplc,
as doctors, lawyers and philanthropes.

The State as well as the Church have recognized exceptions to the
divine prohibition to kill for the cases of death sentences and
killings in battle. A genral decision on the problee of Euthanasia,
which never rested during th_ course of thousands of years, was evident¬
ly not the intention of the Docrco.

dori.cn/or he created only the personal mitigating circumstances
of tho not existing conscience of illegality, ns far as the ucn mention¬
ed therein, and the p-rsons, idiom thoy used for tho execution of their
order acted in conformity with the individual instructions of the decree,
ino decree therefore neither transgress against tho limits that univ¬
ersal coral law has set.

10) Brack according to his entire ethical attitude towards tho
problem of euthanasia was of the opinion that ho acted in accordance
with the laws of humaneness. He knew that tho concept of humaneness
can be cent rued variously from various points of view. He pointed out
during the presentation of his ovadenco that the Christian concept
cf humanity is different frea that of the modern champoin of the
euthanasia idea and that humanity is cited not only by thoologians

also by atheist ncsfc.rs of a ccc^assionatc humanity. Brack bclioved
ia good faith that in his acts he was not only carrying out a legal
d-cree of Hitler but was bvhaving in accordance with the- presepts of

112li0 .


18 Jaly-it-GJ-9-6-upess-(Ua)-
Ccurt 1.

humanity. *or the opponents of euthanasia tc grant this good faith
to the over ready and honest nan Brack dees not Dean that th_ opponent
Is r-linquishing his enm point of view, but is an expression of a cost
lofty sense of justice.

11) The duty to maintain sccurccy which 3rack and all the other
participants in the in the euthanasia Dcasures were under docs
nothing to change this. The prosecution's assunption that this
betrayed Hitler's iroe roost consciousness of the illegality of his
decree has not been ccnfirccd. Socret decrees were by no neons appearan¬
ces under Hitler's rule. *rcxa the very beginning on Brack rup-atedly
aade efforts with Bouhler to hav. the secrecy lifted because it was with¬
out purpose and lod bo difficulties. Shortly after the inception
of euthanasia the fact of it was known to Largo segments of the
population and had beccce an open secret in the fertile ground of which
rovsaors sprouted like weeds. Consequently even at the beginning of
19ii0 Brack emphatically demanded the issuing of a foranl Reich law,
on the grounds that euthanasia for the incurably insane was, in its
effects and extent, a natter concerning the nation end the public.

He personally worked on the draft of this law.

The rejocticn of the signing of a renal Reichstag law by Hitler
1 s perhaps the nest striking evidence that ground for secrecy assured
in the indieteent cannot be correct, tut that other reasons oust
have bcun the- activating factors. Whether these considerations of war
policy or other processes of thought were decisive for Hitler did
net cone tc Brack's knowledge. Hot tho least important reason for
Brack's creating tho file: "I accuse" was to induce Hitler to repeal
th, secrecy regulation. The legal crgua>nts which I could give at
much greater longht on the uestion of the Fuehrer ducroQ of 1 SspfcOD-
ber 1939 and Brack's criminal responsibility would overstep the tiau
. at ry disposal. I have consequently attached the legal opinion of


18 July-*-OJ-9-7-Grcss-(U=)-
Ccurt 1 .

University Professor Dr. Karl Engiseh of “cidelberg cnco norc to cy
written plea fer the inforaation of the A ribunal. This dccurxnt was
net adnitted in evidence as an exhibit for Brack during the
presentation of ay case. I expressly refer to this explanation
and ask that you sake it the subjects of your deliberations in
I arriving at your Judgnent.


1 1?}.?


is Jv' --'Jr-Th-lP— 1-v^cT.crd (In*. Lc?.)

Court So. I

In-hie opening speech Gcreral Taylor pointed out that the application
of euthanasia to nor.-G._ra?.ns would not have been permissible even if
there had boon a lea in force in Gsrasny.

The evidence proved that, according to the various state jents of
witrsis, Euthanasia was confirv.d to Gorsan aontal patients. Foreigner:?,
foreign nationals, as well as Jems, wore expressly excluded. It could
not be proved by the evidence that such persons weru subjected to Eu¬
thanasia before it was stopped in August 1941. Consequently, tho con¬
trary has to be regarded as proved. The d-creu and its execution, ttiere-
fore were otrictly confined to the Ho lt a inposed on Go many by th_ ge¬
nerally valid principles of the law of nations or by international ngroo-
aor.t.

Oeneral Taylor in his opening speech admitted the cnnctvxnt of le¬
gally valid principles about Euthanasia in countries outside of Gemery*
condition tltf.t would merely be the aai;itanar.ee of Certain safeguards.

Such safeguards a-N provided for sufficiently by the detailed filling
out of questlcTinaircs and by cxpjrtizing the questionnaires according to
radical points of view; issue of directives to the experts on tho basis
of expert-nodical consultations; appointment of experts and top oxocrts;
personal observation of tho insane in tho institutions and asylums liko
the Euthanasia institutions; consultation of tho Administrative health
agencioB of the Reich Ministry of the Interior; and by tho right of
appeal of overy physician participating in the procedure, right down to
the last Sut.masic doctor.

With thoso criteria of Suthnrn 3 io, close I 7 bound with tho critical
judgment of the individual case, all prerequisites seemed to bo given -
according to Brack's point of view, - to guarantee a safe and orderly
procedure of Euthanasia. 5rack was assidously anxious to make sur- they
«ero obeyed according to tbu Bouhlcr directive.

•

Brack felt it as deeply regrettable when, ir. spite of all that,
abuses bo coat apparent here and there. It was beyond his powers and ca-


11213


13 Juiy-lt-FL-i'J-2-Leor.ard (Int. I^a)

Court 1 . 0 . I

pacifcy to prevent thee.

Decisi v e lor hia was: tho thought, vora out of caapassion, to ro¬
lls'- tho poor creatures from their sufferings painlessly and unnoticed
by t..:-asolv-s, provided medical expertizing has er.du sure thr.t iio vns
incurable and therefore, though ha did, didn't lack not every ccr.so of
life, but hod lost every will to live because his mind and soul were
buried. To Brack it seemed to run counter the dignity of man to live a
life unworthy to live only for tho sake of the will to exist.

In ay Closing Brief I have assembled ell the argun-nts with regard
to the charge of SS n^mbershin, which ore appropriate to refute also thi3
point of the Indictment. I herewith refer to it.

I am at the ond of the critical evaluation of ay argument. The ease
of Brack is a very problematic case. Tho defense fully recognizes tho
woight and the inport-nee cf pro and contra. After a collaboration of se¬
veral sooths I was In a position to acquire a complete picture of Srack't
personality. I believe in his hunnnenoss and in his sincerity, and I
consider bin »:nablo to have ever pursuod destructive aims. It is tho
principle recognized in the American concopt of freedom that every per¬
son accused of a crime has to be considered innocent, until th. proof
of hia guilt !;* s been established through tlv. evidence that is beyond
wvury reasonable doubt. Taking everything into consideration, I can think
of no more appropriate words to define the considerations that should
fora the basis for the verdict in this case than thoa. uttered by Judge
P h il l i p s, when, at the conclusion he voiced his opinion in the verdict
against the defendant Errardt Ifilcft ir. tie proceedings before Military
Tribunal II, as follows: IT rihen a prec.uin.rt American jurist was applying
this God-givun principle of freedom ho spoke as follows: 'If after con¬
sidering aid Weighing the entire evidence you find that your thoughts
-ro confused, your convictions shaken as in a stern, and that your ju' -
Oent, Like the dove in the Flood, finds no resting place, then, t:;c law
states, you must acquit.' ".


1 C Julr-if-FI
Court So. I


LD->Luor_-rd (Ir.t. Lor.)


TH£ PK ^SK UJT; The Tribunal "ill not; hear Iron counsel for t'.cfz.i-


±r. t Pokorny.


Ifcy it please the Tribunal,

c kcv!.s ego the Defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny was an tho
witness stand lore end cede an explicit statement about his letter to
Klsaler in October IS41, document ho. JiO-035, exhibit No. 142. Tlie Kish
Tribunal could learn frea the state-.ents of the defondant Dr. Pokorny
that he states the true motive of his letter to lave been to provor.t
Hissnler frxi carrying out an intended crime on humanity, in putting him
or. a false trail and offering hia, in the plant CaIndium oeguinur*., a
drug for the purpose of storilization uhich neither suitable for sin¬
gle casos nr, r ior general use for sterilisation or castration.

During the Trial ar.d, particularly after the presentation of evidence
for the Defo. iant Dr. Adolf Pokorny, 1 have been repeatedly askod uliat
is ay attitude to the aotivo stated by Dr. Adolf Pokorny and what I
think about it.

I, as hi a do e nse counsol had to conridor that tr.e defendant Dr.

Adolf Pokorny* *roc the beginning, as tioll as during interrogations, ns
also during tho uholo time of this trial, has repeatedly emphasized tmt
the actual .lolivo of his letter wax contrary to the objective contents
of tr.o letter.

I had to consider that the defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny c/aractorized
tho witnoss T r u x the reason already in spring 1942 as the real lotivo
which he subcatted here to the High Tribunal. That was at a time when
no indictment trao in view for hia yet. Tr.o witnoss Trux stated this in
the course of tie presentation of evidence under oath to tho High Tri¬
bunal.

I had to consider that the defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny stated a num¬
ber of ^:dical reasons from which claims to have drawn tho conclusions
when writing hi3 latter that it war impossible to carry out a sterili¬
zation or a castration with Caladiun se- uinua. I have not had that much


1121:5


.


13 Jul 7 -H-rI^ 10 -ir-Lm>r^rd (inti Lea)
c5?t i

radical training that I coaid un<tersta:*j in detail in hew far those pure¬
ly aedicai reasons could actually convince the physician of the impossi¬
bility of tho use of Caladiua seguinun lor lisatio.l or castration.

But I !-avo understood that there '.-ere only two actual possibilities
for sterilization or castration in 19U/19A2, that tho surgical ono and
the one carried out by X-ray. All ra-thoda of sterilization or castration
by drugs, such as drugs, horaooes, lack of vitaain-S, etc., were only
theoretical 'oasibilitios which only could to obtained under big diffi¬
culties with a acaU laboratory aniaal and could not in any way be trans-
aitted to the luaan being.

I undorstar/ that the aost Impossible, tho *ost hope loss and the
least consolidate procedure was a sterilization or castration with tho
Plant Caiadiuc soguinua. I understand that in addition to that there wore
tho extra nodical reasons, such as tho difficulties of tho cultivation,
tho gaining of the plant extract, the establishing of hot houses ard
everything olrc. It is t.-oreforc not absurd to think that a doctor could
b-.Ueve that nothing could happen with Caln^iun.

I also urdor stand that tho defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny thought hi#
proposal ratiior safo froa a discovery, ovon though it was iopossiblo to
carry out , hocauao a doctor has a certain superiority to a laynar liko
’iinrlor and only radical neoplu and botanists could rccopiizo tho unsui¬
tability of Ids proposal froa tho cgiiming. Tho actual course of things
nao proved, as ch^.-n by docuaw-nt Pokorny Ho. 21, exhibit Ho. 21x that tho
r Professor Vbm •, to what t •• r of the defendant Dr.

Adolf Pokorny was eiven for his expert opinion, at onco pointed out the
impossibility to carry out this proposal. Only Hiaralcr, who apparently

* M attracted to anything radical which departed fron tho sound and nor-

*

-311 school oocifcino, thought it necessary to follow this project end
w-st tl_ra ‘ ith it. Tho Tact of this ratbod of thinking by Hianlnr was not
unhnjwr., or.d the defendant Dr. Pokorny states, and counted upon it,
thinking that the letter would have its off. ;t ano that, or. lie other


112L6


IB July-IS-Flr-10^ioanard (Int. Lea)
Court :;g. i


hand, his real .".ctivo could not have been so easily proved by the rulers
of that tiao.

I finally had to consider that tho defendant Dr. Pokoray was neither
a a.abvr -of the : SIAP, nor ooo of its organizations, and, bocauso of his
-ducatien, his social corrections cr.d his faaily tics, could not have
bu^r. a "yes—-'an™ of the Third Reich, but everything speaks for it that
Yn, who had neither relations nor or mizatory connections to tho rulers
of the Third Reich or their organizations, was an opponent, if not even
a political porswcutoe. Basvd upon those facts, nj.ich cannot be consi-
dored as subsequent constructions or excuses, the defendant Dr. Adolf Po-
korry stated his .motives to tho High Tribunal and he hopos that tho High
Tribunal will bcliove hie under these circumstances. It can bo held
against his that tils letter, which must have been writton for tho very
purpose for which it has obviously boon written, proves his real yonoral
nttltud. twards ifo and that everything else is nothing but an oxcuse.
But, so -icny things have happened botwoon Heaven and Earth wnich appear
unbeliovabl-, but are true nevertheless that it can be thought worth con¬
sidering by the objcctiv- cfcsorvor of this state of affairs whotner the
native stated in tho luttor is the correct one or whether tho motive stated
by the dufondant Dr. Pokorry night bo raaily the true one.

In this connection it must be oome in sind that the proceedings du¬
ring the trial brought out the fact that, what the defendant, Dr. Adolf
Pokorny, hoard, as lx soys, from a security service nan about a planned
cass extermination, was actually true, and that a plan was ready as osrly
as 28 March 19/. 1 daily to sterilize 3-1 thousand people with an X-ray
plant consisting of 20 machines, ns is shown in document HO-203, exhibit
No. 161.

Furthermore it is known to tho court that as uirly as 1911 tho ..iass
extermination of Jews was in full swing in Auschwitz and in other canns,

“nd that HLanlor's plan for rcss extermination thus w-s in full execution.
Free an objectivo point of view the evidence in this correction established

122Ji7


12 Julv-Jf-FIy-lO-6-Lconard (Ir.t. Loc)

* art .No. 1


thu fact that no experiments could have been undertaker, on human bcir.ca
with the dru, proposed by Dr. Adolf Pokorny, and that furthermore this
plant, cftladiux aeguinua is completely unfit to carry out sterilization
as well as castration in the real sens^ of these words. Vo a net further
r/Jt consider the hypothetic possibility that one- could kill the cc;.„ra-
tlve faculty of a human being by isjcns of a general poisonir.6 with cnln-
diua aeguinua, since this is possible, too, by starvation, or by using
caffeine, or oth-r drugs. Such means Were not specific sterilisations
like the onos planned by Kiamler who want.' to kill the generative fa¬
culty, but retain the ability to work; those i^ans would have boon iden¬
tical to cntoraii^.tion, ss it was carried cut auch acre easily and quick¬
ly in the gas chambers of Auschwitz, ifaidanuk and Luolin.

As for the detailed explanation of the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokorny
..bout his .actives, I should like to ask tho nigh Tribuinl to gather ti.c.u
frca his testimony and his affidavit, document Pokorny No. 29, exhibit
No. 29, and frao ny closing brief.


11213


18 July 47-K-PJt-lL-la-l—Meohcn (Int. Lea)
Court 1.


I do not want to quot _ the a In detail, tut rather
burn now to legal considerations ns They cone up in the
case of the defendant, Dr. «dolf Pokorny.

It is on established fact that the defendant. Dr.

Ldolf Pokorny, wrote the letter of October 1941 to Elmlor.
Control Council Law No. 10 is the legal basis for the legal
classification of this letter. This law contains legal
: batractions, as for oxazplc, the abstraction of murder,
of bcln a culprit, of aidln and abetting the culprit,
of planning, and so forth. Kow theso logal abstraction?,
however, a*e to be interpreted to suit the social case, raid,
above all what their definition 13, cannot bo drawn from
Control Council Law No. 10. Vo know from the definitions
of the German criminal law who lo considered to bo a
culprit, what is to be understood undor the torn attempt,
and 00 forth. However, it is not immediately sure, uhottor
or not those abstractions aro also applicable to Control
Council Law No. 10. Furthermore, nearly oyery oaso lo
different, and the question will have to be answered over
end over a -in, if this or th-t fact is to subsumed undor
the provision of the Control Council Lav.

It lo my opinion th-t for the terss "culprit" and
"attempt", usod in Control Council Law No. 10, th, defin¬
itions of German criminal laws should be applied.

Control council Law No. 10 was made in oo-opcration
by all four occupy In powers. It ropr-SCnts, thoroforo,
spiritually a uniform entity. Or. the other hand, the
Interpretation of the abov,. mentioned lc.;,nldetractions
is different in the criminal law systems ef each of the
occupying powers. Murder, being a culprit, aiding and
abetting the culprit, end planning, to mention these


112L9


13 July 47-fc-?M-ll-l3-3-Heeban (Ir.t. Lea)

Court 1.

cradles only, arc deflnded differently 1 r. An glo¬
wer lcar. criminal laws than in th2 Russian Or French
criminal law systems. If in each zone of occupation*
the interpretation were to take place in accordance with
the criminal law system of tte occupying power of that
zone, the result would be, that the very sane ease could
possibly rosutl in different punlslnont in the different
zones. This result would be unfair a:.d would also.bo con¬
tradictory to the uniform entity of Control Council L aw
lio. 10. It oust b„ rxntioned, moreover, that the Inter¬
na tional Military Tribunal pointed out repeatedly in its
verdict that the Haag Convention contains binding
regulations for the si natory powers who oust carr; then
out in the Occupation lavs. In r rtlclc *13 of the r.pporfilx
to tiw Haag Convention cf 8 October 1907 concerning tho
lavs and oustoas of land warfare we find that agreement
uc.o reached for sharing Occupation laws G lvln S consideration
to :ho laws of tho occupied country, insofar ns no oor.v-
pollln obst-clo prevails. Thl3 forces me to the conclusion
that r.ccordln to the Ho.a Convention in torpre tat lore must
take plr.co by use cf nntionnl laws, in our cose the Goman
criminal law, if tho Control Council Law requires an
interpretation in solvin a legal question, and if this
interpretation cannot be made on the basis of the Control
Council Law itself, because it represents Itself only as
a kind of le c al frame-work. (Rahmon csotz).

If we examine the letter of tho defendant. Dr. «dolf
Pokorny, from'the point of view of Cera-a criminal law we
car. discern two parts, vnen viewed objectively. The defendant,
Dr. Adolf Pokomy, decl- rc.s in ths first art of the lotto*
that “tho enemy must not only be defeated, but also
annihilated. * He points tj 3 million bois. ovists who arc


11250


13 July 47-K-PJt-ll-ia-S-Mochon (Ir.t. Lea)
Court 1.


prisoners of war. In th. second part of the letter he
occupies himself with the idea of under taking sterilization,
and he proposes to use the plant, calndiun seguinun, as
no an a to this effect.

The defendant, refers In this connection to the

•

articlo of the business fire of Medaus and Koch in the
periodical for experimental studios on animals -and to a pop¬
ular ecionco periodical "Die Umschau"; they mention that
the firn above carried out experiments on animals with the
plant, caladlun se.ulnum. Theso publications gavo inter¬
ests insights into the o xpevScats on animals carried
out with the plant, calodium sj. ulnun, but would not let
a physician conclude hat with this plant human beings
could r.lso actually be stcrlllzod; furthernore, the authors
cxprcorly dcclarod In their article that there was no
possibility of sterilizing human beings.

The letter of the defendant, Dr. «dolf Pokomy, did
not find In the person of his addro'-soo a man who hoard of
ouch thou hts of mss extermination for the first tlrao.

To the contrary, it arrived at a time when mao6 extermination
had already started; nt that ties the f lrn will have to
carry cut theso mass exterminations could no longer bo
chan cd. The letter of the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy,
could, therefore, from an objective point of view, at
most give Klmnler a hint as to what course ho could
eventually take to carry out his already existing plan
of extermination In an additional fora. On the basi3 of
the defendant, Dr. Adolf Pokorny's lettor Himmler ordered
the firm of Madaus and Koch to continue the oxporlnont’ on
animals with the a 1 -ant , cnlaf-ium so pul nun, and to report
as to whether or not there was a possibility of sterilizing
humor, bcin s with this Dlent.


11251


18 July "7-J4-PH-11— 12 —4—Mo chan (Int. Lor.)
Court 1.


Idcr.3 which were su est cd to Himmler, of carrying
out experiments with the plant, caladium segulnum, in
concentration camps as soon as possible, mil of starting the
building of hot-houses In which to cultivate this plant,
ronalnod In the sphere of vl6hful thlnkin„, and they never
_ot to the point of execution. Only the flrn of iiadaus and
Koch resumed Its animal experiments. These oxperlmonta on
animals, however,brou ht no C6ults and ended In 1944 with
a report which \c.a sutcltted to this High Court as docunont
No. 28, exhibit Mo. 29; this report gives clo-ir proof that
thoy dli not make any progress until the end of tho war,
but were still In the phase of fruitless experiments on
animals. In this connection wo might lcavo undocldo, whether
or not the aversion of tho responsible men of Madaus and Koch
to holplng Himmler was a factor In tho failure of the
.animal experiments. The witness, Dr. Koch, at any rato,
answered haro In tho wltnoss stand, - whon quoatlonod by
the prosecutor, If he had nr.de success of the animal
experiments wish tie plant, caladium aegulnum. Impossible,
only 'ouonuse of hlo aversion to co-o;x,rnte In Himmler's
plan - that ho nedo tho animal experiments reluctantly
and Inaccurately, since te did not like to work for Hlmmlor,
and that, furthermore, there Is no possibility nor way of
cekln 0 use of tho plant, calndlum 60 gulnum, for sterilization
or or.stration. *n Inaccurate or knowingly falso cxplditatlon
of the "nlmal eiporioents with caladium segulnum would,
theroforc, hr.v^ been only q very praiseworthy, bat In foot
unnecessary sabotage of Himmler's orders; It >ould not
alter the fact that the problem of using tte plant, caladium
segulnum, for sterilization or castration still remains
unsolved. Thir concurs with the unanimous opinion of all


11252


19 July 47-M—?K-11-12-5-Mcehcn (Ir.t. Lea)
Court 1.


nodical and pharmacological authorities, as can be found
ir. the documents Pokorny No. IS, 20, ana 30, exhibits No.

27, 28, and 30, and in tho document of the prosecution No-
5347, exhibit No. 546.

If we pssuic now, at first, that the defendant, Dr.

Adolf ?okorny, was convinced from the beginning that tho
plant, calndlum segulnum, was unfit for sterilization and
castration, and if wo assume that he wrote the lottor to
load Himmler astray and to prevent him from committing a
orlmo'on humanlty, then there was doubtloss no crlmo comm¬
itted according to German Criminal law, because the will
to see any objective characteristics of criminal acts
realized Is missing. He, who Instigates an attempt which
oannot succeed knowing that the experiment performed on
hla instigation Is not a principal and must therefore remain
exempt from punishment.

Shore Is only one reproach one could mrko In this
c. sc against the defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny. This roproach
could be thrt he, oven with the best intention, had mention¬
ed the Idea of n mass extermination, and that ho should
hav considered that this Idea would strike root In Klianiter's
mind, and that he (rokorny) would become the author of an
Idea end a pl-.nt which would be executed by Himmler, even
with quite different means and undor qulto different
circumstances. In this case ? sentence pursuant to
article II 2 d of Control Council Law No. 10 would be
possible, which states that a punishment ccy bo Imposed If
someone Is connected with the planning or the execution of
crimes against humanity, without any regard to the Intention
of the person concerned. The only r-quircsxint is that the
act was committed intentionally, and according to German
criminal law the "dolus evcntualis* would be sufficient In


11253


18 July 47—&-PK-11—12-6-Mochcn (I n t. Lea)

'ourt li

Cr - 8 “- However, It has been shown by the evidence in
-articular end by this trial In g.n.rol that the defendant
Dr. Adolf Pokorny ir.d net to discover the Idea, of a mass
extermination, but that this Idea existed r. long time
boforo he conceived It, and that Holer's plan born from
it was already executed to Its full extent slnco 1941. In
this respect I h?.ve already pointed out above the n^sa
extermination In tho gas ch-abera of ^uschvltz, Kaidanok
and Trobllnkc and h: ve referred to Document NO-204,

Exhibit No. 162 which shows th„ intended sterilization of
3 to 4 thousand persons per day. It was not tho defendant
Dr. fldolf Pokorny who conceived the ldoc of n mass exter¬
mination er who established a plan for It, but this ldoa
was already oxlstont, and tho plan, too, wr.s exletant
consisting In tte use of Cyclon 3, In tho surgical steril¬
ization and tho sterilization by X-rays, all of then means
which were sufficient to execute the Idea and the plan,
evon without tho author of tho letter, the defended: Dr.
Adolf Pokorny. The defendant Dr. ndolf Polorny thoreforo
can on'y hav* stown r means for the execution of an estab¬
lished plan, and according to his tfwn statement ho only
Intended to do that, because he has st-tod that he had
heard about 1:1s plan from an 3D man, even If only in a
vn&ua and rough outline. The defendant D r . «dolf Pokorny
Is therefore not a prlncl-xil because in the actual oxcoutlon
of tho extermination plan he has neither reallzod himsolf
a characteristic of thv actual fact by any action of hie
own, nor had hedntendod tho sencess of the action as an
action of his own.

--.coordIn.-: to Dorman criminal law he la also not on
instigator because the plan for committing the extermination
had been established long ago. It was Just this plan which

1125U


13 July 47_*_?y_ll—12-7- lfeehcn (Inti Lea)

Court 1.

hj hcd hoard about that inspired him for his action. Himmler
conceived the plan of extermination was already,
and without his (Pokorny's) assistance determined to
execute It. The Instigation, h-w ever, would presuppose
tnr.t tho will for the crlao Is stiaulr.ted In the instigated
person. This, however, wa.3 already abstractly impossible
in view of Himmler's determination to execute his plan of
extermination In any cas„, end rn Instigation to somothlng
which already Is existent In tho determination if the
principal lo in osslble.

There only remains that tho defendant Dr. Adolf
Pofcorny might have boon on abettor. Such nn abetment might
have consisted In the fact tint tho dofendant Dr. Adolf

SJ

Pokomy has pointed to the plant Caladium ecguinuia as an
offlclont drug for mass sterilization for the pui*poso of
extermination. Such a sterilization, however, has not been
porfortxd, neither in a single cr.oo nor In --.a so, and
therefore much the less has such an extermination plan
boon oxecutod because the plant Caladium aeguinum 1s
completely Inefficient a drug for sterilization or
castration purposes. Even if the defendant Dr. Adolf
Pokomy had b. lloved In the efficiency of the plant
Caladium sogulnum or if he had boliovod that in a noai*
future It could have b^on made use of, this might have
constituted at the b^st an abetment to rn experiment with
an Inadequate mans because, as we know today, tho ’la.nt
Caladium sogulnuo Is objectively inefficient In the actual
morning for sterilization and castration purposes. Such
an abetment to an experiment with cn In- dequate means would
to be sure, be punishablo according to German criminal law,
but it would Involve a do. bio mitigation of ounlahnent, l.c.
with regard to th, e xporlaent as well as with reg' rd to the

11255


18 July 47—34-PJt-lL-l2-g-Mechar. (Int. Lea)
Court 1.


abetment.

In tho present cose, however, the evidence hrs shown
thet thoro Is no question of an abetment ns tic plant
Calndluo aegulnum has not been tested or. any human being
but only on animals. Tho execution of the crlmo which
conoorna us in th: present case has therefore not been
started, much the L-ss the national oxtermljition of millions
of humans.

I have already explained above that th„ witness Dr.

K 0 ch stated that the reluctant -nd lnoxact oorfornvanco
of animal experiments no asserted by him could not alter
tie fact that - hem was no'chanco to perform r. sterilization
or a castration with the plant Calndium seguimm, end that
his explanations to this respeot ohould not bo interpreted
in such a way ns if without this hind of performance there
would have existed a chance to sterilize or to castrate
humans with C-Indium o eguinea. However, if contrary to
this result of the evldenco enc would become reconciled
to the idea that all the same this kind of performance by
tho responsible con of Koch rnd ri.adr.us would bo lr. any way
connected with the Impossibility of performing the steril¬
ization with the plant Cal"dlum scgulnuo, this toe would
not change the result, because a orp„trrtor, who is lucky
or.ough that sotxbody else gets him off his aim when firing
his pistol, is not a murderer anymore, since tho suocoas of
his deed has been prevented even though this might have
nap eonod against bis will -nd without his consent. However,
I present this idee exclusively as a hypothesis sinoe it
cannot b„ supported by the evidence; the plant calc alum
seguinuo in Itself proves the impossibility of aaintainlng
the idea of an ■accomplishment 0 .


11256


IS J uly 47-H-PK-ll—l2-^-“oahan (Inti Ler.)

Court i.

The result of the above arguments Is therefore that
Ir. this case everything should oc considered as preparatory
actions only, n preparatory ration# however, is not
punishable under German law. ait what th. defendant Pokorny
did Is therefore oven les6 punishable since he, from tho
legal point of view, rendered only assistance to such a
propara to ry action.

However, in order to take Into consideration dl actions
and ldons which could bo possibly considered I will approach
the quostlon whether or r.ot a psychological assistance
prevails, clnce ttw letter of the defendant Dr. Adolf
Pokorny In ono way or nnothcr resulted In, or could have
resulted In, favouring the ontlro plant of extermination,
c.bovo being considered ftG a cure recommendation of tho
modlum (drug) to be applied. Suoh an of feet could bo soon
In the fact that the approval of n plan might not lnclto
a porpotrator, dfccldod to commit the crlmo anyway# bit
aijit possibly encourage him In his doclslon. But hero,
too# can I only repeat what I havo stated nbotfo already,
nomoly tho fact, that It Is Impossible: to presume t 'nr. si
Klmnler noodod an oncouragcnont in hl6 decision by Clio
lettor of the defendant Dr. *dolf Pokorny, beoauso of ills
(Klculcr's) criminal cbclslvcnces to carry out tho extermination
whio was proven already by t:.e start of extermination of Jews
Ihc phrases which th_ defendant Dr. ^dolf Pokorny usos in
his lettor also wore not needed by Hlnnler as an oncourago-
mcr.t of his decision. They (»uld not influonoo him. Thoy
only caused r reaction that the writer of the lettor was a
asn who wanted to emphasize his devotion with all these
phrases, more could Himmler not see from It. That excludes,
however, a psychological assistance of the defendant Dr.

Addlf Pokorny and here, too, does ho remain free of 0 uilt.

11257


13 July 47L)U?!4-ll*i2-i4Mechan (Ant. Lea)

Court 1 .

So fir I hive irgued the Inter ore tat Ion cf "oorjnilttcd
crime", "Instigation", "complicity", "attempt" nn& "pre¬
paration" in accordance with Gorman lew ana have coac to
tho result that a punishable act of the defendant Dr.

.%dolf rokorny in the sonso of tho 7 cn. 1 l law doeG not exist;
now I would like to exialno tho qiostion whether, too Control
Council Law No. 10 , considering the facts of this oaso,
contains in Itself a directive to the effect that a
punishment of th- defendant D r . «dolf Fokorny is called
for, based upon tho fact that he had written a letter and
oailod it to Higgler, regardless of the interpretation of
"co-i-nltt«d crlao", "instigation", "complicity", "attofflpt'
and "preparation".

First of " 11 , th.rw is no doubt that aasc sterilisation
roprosont 3 a crlao against humanity, lr. spite of tho fact
that the ruler -t that tl=v, in this case Kim lor, approved
of such a crloi against humanity, ard hid the power to
>revent punishment of tho porpotrntor. That follows from
Artiolu HI c which expressly statos that the homo law
(Kolmatrooht) in a ease like that is irrelevant. Ihlo
jrovlslon, however, moans in ay opinion, only a roferonoo
back to general othicil standards which would consider tho
carrying out of such 1 plan criminal; those ethical
standards cannot be influenced by accidentally opposing
power conditions. This however, does not exclude, as I
tried to ;rovc so far, toe fact that all.genorcl conditions
of tho Gorman Penal Law, ns far as the Control Council Law
No. 10 di r not change them, must be considered Li the
evaluation of such e crime.

First of all article II lc ->rovida 6 that all crimes
hereby regulated have to be completed since article II lc
deals with inhumane acts, murders, rapes etc. which had been

m$Q


18 July 47-&-PJU1 Ll2-li?-eehan (Int* Lea)

Court 1.

actually coa-ittod. From that one any draw the conclusion
that a pure planning of such a crime against humanity Is
r.ot pun Is ha ole under article LL 1c IF the crime Itself was
not codieted.

nlso rrticlo II 2d of the Control Council Low No. 10
do qb not say anything different. If, following this
artlolo II 2d, the planning of a crime Is alrordy n
punishablo crime, tills doos not nxnn the exclusively
preparatory action, but the planning aeons hero an actual
participation In the crime and calls for n direct action
or.d actual beginning of activities. Would an act have boon
committed the participant would oven then be punishable if
ho would not have participated In the punishablo net
himself. In the case under consideration, howover, an
actual realization (of tto plan) did not trice placo,
because the plant Calr.dlua Sogulnum has boon tooted exclus¬
ively on animals but not on humanbelngo, and only tho
experiment with human beings would represent an actual
realization (of the plan). It appoars unnooossnry to mo
to repeat again In dot-ll what I have st-tod above, namoly
that the plan of extermination existed long before Pokorny's
time, that Hlr.olcr ws decided to carry out a nass exter¬
mination 1 any possible way, even by sterilization, and
that the defendant Or. Pokorny Only suggested a useless medium.
Nothing happened because of this useless medium and nothing
could ha.'pon; all that did happen, because of Iho suggestion
of the defendant Dr. «doif Pokorny* remained within tho
limits of preparatory actions to a crime against huncftlty.
Since, howover, such a preparatory action is not punishablo
under Control Council L~w No. 10, a participation In such
an action ca.nnot be punishable either.

I ha.vo already exom'-ied the fact as o huv much the

11259


19 July 47-K-PX-11-12-lfc-Jfeehan (Int. Lo~)
Court 1.


defendant Dr. ndolf Pokorny Influenced the entire plan of
zass extermination. It has now to be determined how far he
is possibly responsible under th. penal provisions of
Control Council Law No. 10. Under a-d article II 2 of
the Control Council Law fc>. 10 four ways of participating
In a crime r.ro listed, vfcioh can be applied to the case of
the defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny.

According to article II 2a a person can be punlshod
who has collaborated actively in committing a crime against
humc.nlty. The defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny cannot be consid¬
ered as having participated actively since ha has not com¬
mitted any act directed towards the execution of the crime
end since ho did rvut intend to oomai t the act as his own,
but only intended to give a hint to Himmler.

According to Paragraph II 2 b he who aide the per¬
petration of Buch a crime or has ordered or supported It
la liable to bo punished. Defendant Dr. Adolf Pokorny had no
"Uthority to give orders, neither could ho lend hla support
slnco conceivably this would only have been possible after the
dead had boon committed.

If in the following I now define my attitude rog'.rcilng
the word "Boiholfor" I am'ware that this word is derived from
the trc.nsl"tlon of the English -accessory". The Gorman
translation "Boiholfer" refers to a oortnln extent to the
institution of aid according to Gorm-n law, consequently,
ossentl lly It would comprise the Idea of th. accessory's
participation. English lav however makes no substantial
difference between abettor and alder. This Is also not
surprising, for the question of German aid has just shown
us tir.t th. instigation Includes such aid nnd on the other
h/>nd there Is always a weaker form of Instigation In
psychological rid. The gradual difference In the criminal


11260


13 Julv 47-M-PIUll-13-lfi-Mcchah (Int. Lea)

Court 1.

mind when abetting and when elding can be brought about
by punlshnont of the individual ease, but doee:not
necessitate that both conceptions nu6t bo separated.

Under the word “Bciholfer* the Instigation as well as
a psychological eld can therefore be subsumed. Now I
have already stated abevo that there is no question of
defendant Dr. *dolf Pokorny being rn abettor, nor could
he have given psychological aid. I have thereby pointed
out that Klmmlor in his plan of aass extermination did
not first need to be Instigated and also did not recoivc
any psyciiolcgloal assist noe, as the wording of the letter
from defendant Dr. «dolf Pokorny ehows. Insofar a partici¬
pation of defendant Dr. iidolf Pokorny, according to tho
coneoptions of the Instigation and tho psychologlaal aid
doco not oxlst, since there can be no thought of an
abetting in these aethods without the succdss not ooming
off. Himmler towover would have still continued his
plan of mass extorclnatlon without defendant Dr. rtdolf
thorny 1 !* letter and his letter has insofar no lnfluonoo
on the whole plan. Tho letter ocn aislly be omitted without
the situation being changed in tta least. Theroforo, tho
actual fora of -id Is ollmlnati-d slnco defendant Adolf
Pokorr.y only aided tho preparatory act. In thiB rogr.rd
too I br.vo already ^ode sufficient statonents above. I
have pointed out that beginning to carry out a criminal act
on humanity con only be seen in tho use of tho Cnladlum
soguinua plant on a human being and that the marc animal
experiments c^n bo regarded ns an net of carrying tiicu out.
According to Paragraph II 2 c, he who has participated by
consenting to a crlma on humanity is furthermore liable to
punishment. The English text says:

11261


“took a consenting


13 July 47-K_?M~ll-l3-l4-Moohen (Int. Lead-
vourt 1.


part therein". The Shgllsh wording 6howa that more than
ncro shouting or writing Is needed; therefore, in ay
opinion the acre consent is not sufficient, especially
-s otherwise "11 Jo relists would h?.ve been guilty of
« crime on humanity, tut rather Is It necessary that
by consenting sone condition has been la.ld down for tho

•

? success.

Kowovor, I h?.ve already stated above that It Is
truo that the vholo plan my have been Influenced by
dofondrnt Dr. «dolf Pokorny's letter, but as regards
this I have stated further that Dr. ndolf Pokorny's
position, having had no connections with authoritytlvc
acn cut', not having belonged to on organlration, was
much too subordinate and unloportnnt to enable him to
lnfluenoc or dlroot Klnalor in any way by hlo letter.
However, Dr. «dolf Pokorny's oonsent, as It Is objectiv¬
ely manifested In his letter, Is thoreby not casual for
c. crime committed on humanity and with that tho presumption
of the facts, os laid down In Paragraph II 2 o, Is not
fulfilled.

Finally, I still have to dial with the question of
applying Paragraph II 21, according to whlon he who has
boon associated with the planning or execution of a crime
against humanity Is liable to punlshaont. I have already
stated above, when do ling with the question n.e ®o whothcr
a. punlshaont according to P^rngr^ph II lc Is concerned, that
the definition of the Control Council Law No. 10, para ra.ph
II, 2 d, points out that since there it Is only a question
of acts committed, n acre preparatory act Is not sufficient.
In Itself It would be contradictory If the definition of
crimes on humanity would emanate from accomplished deeds,
but In the interpretation reference would be endo to


11262


18 July 47-K-PX-ll-lS-ia-Moehan (Int. Le-).

Court I,

prcpr.r-.tory '•.eta not actually committed crimes on humanity,
so that when Interpreting the lav a broader view on
penalty would b_ t ~kcm than the law itself demands.

Systems of criminal law, too, so far as I onn Ascertain
at times expressly contain n special indication where tho
legislator wishes to provide for punishnont of a preparatory
action, too. Tr.us a preparatory action in German ci’iainal
law, although it is otherwise not punishhble, is expressly
mado subject to puni3hront by the former regulations
rogardlng high treason. Exactly the same thing, however,
is tnxc in my Judgment of Control Counoll Law No. 10.

From the fact thn t punishability of a preparatory action
is not expressed, it follows conclusively that It Is
not intended to b v punlohtblo.

Buoh punishment, of course, oan only be Justified whon n
contain oausallty exists, which is manifested ty tho fact
that tho idea convoyed, tho plan, tho .•greoment, or tho
consent contributed to tto success of somo cause.

Anyono whoso plan or ldoc had no result, howover,
remains unpur.ishod 11 fce any Journ-llet or letter writer
who, on both sides of this war, may hav.. expressed ideas
about the trentmont of tho opponent, ideas which, looked
at objectively, in the./Svlres wore objeotionablo according
to othloal standards. To what extent beliefs nr., to be
punished hore is another question. In the case of Gorton
citizons they would have to be Judged accoi’dlng to tho
do-Nazificatlon 1-w. Control Council Law No. 10, however,
r.co nizos no crimes of b-llef, tut only orioos of action.

The motive of the deferdar.t. Dr. «dolf rokomy, hen, not
be considered here at all. It need only be considered that
the total plan for extermination was already will c»tablis.iod
in Himmler’s mind, w-s not influenced by the letter of tho
dofo«dcnt. Dr. ^dolf Pokorny;


13 J^ly-»-OJG-ll-12-la-4feehan (Lea)

Court 1

and hia suggestion which the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, gave Hinder
in his letter did not get beyond the stage of a preparatory action, *./hich
in lt3elf is not punishable, so that the aiding and abetting of this
preparatory action by the defendant, Dr. Adolf Pokomy, must remain un¬
punishable oven in accordance with the special factual provisions of
Control Council Lav No. 10.

If I take a position in regard to the question of the conspriacy,

I do so — in view of the statements of the counsel for the defense
uhcc I succeeded and the fact of the conclusion reached in Military
Tribunals 1, II, and III in regard to the question of the "conspiracy" —
coroly with a general reference to the fact that in the case of tho
defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, in ry opinion, there is no foundation for
implicating him in a conspiracy. The mere fact that in ny legal opinion
the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, has not aide himself culpable undor
Control Council Lav No. 10 excludes tho possibility tliat ho could have
token part In a conspiracy, as cInland here by the prosecution. Added
to that aro the general circuastancos, fron which it follows that the
dofonclant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, neither belonged to a Party organization
nor to a govomnont agency, but was an independent country medical
practitioner in Koootau at tho tine *.rhon ho .froto tho lotter. Tho fact,
too, that ho knew neither Hiaalor nor anyone else personally, and
especially none of the defendants here, aake3 it impossible for mo to
believe that ho was implicated In a conspiratory circle.

The defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, wrote his lot tor by himself. He
had a very definite goal in *iew and neftibere expressed the thought that
he 'dshed to be included, in any.my, through his lotter, in tho Himmler
circle.

Bub Hiaalor, on the other side, was much too all-povorful and much
too presumptuous to have toon tempted to draw such an insignificant nan
as the def dant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, -.fas in comparison to him, into his
circle and to lot him participate in anything. Himl er did not oven deem
tlie defendant, Dr. Adolf Pokomy, worthy of a reply.

1126b


U Ju2y-iWv’G-ll-12-2a-Mcehan (Lea)

Court No, 1

?ohI, in his letter to the deputy Gauleiter of Niederdonau,

Document No. 0i2, Exhibit No. 155, 'writes 10 months after the dato of
the letter of the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, that Hinaler had applied
ninself at his — Pchl's instigation — the problem of sterilization 'dth
tho plant, caladiun seguinun, aany months earlier. So unimportant was
the defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy, for Hiernl er in this connection that
Pohl over, designated himself as instigator of the idoa of sterilization
with the plant, cladiun seguinuc, although the defendant, Dr. Adolf
Pokomy, had written a letter about this subject; this lotter, however,
had apparently been forgotten long ago,

Since, on the ono hand, a decision on the question as to 'hat
cotivo lay behind tho lotter of the dofondant, Dr. Adolf Pokomy, can,
in case of doubt, be aado in favor of tho dofondant, Dr. Adolf Pokomy,
on tho basis of an ancient legal principle, and on the othor hand according
to ry logoi view-point no punishable fact exists at all within the
□caning of Control Council Law No. 10, 1 proposo the acquittal of tho
defendant. Dr. Adolf Pokomy.

THE PRESIDENT i When the Tribunal reconvenes wo -.rill hear from
counsel for tho defendant Hovon and counsel for tho defendant Bockor-
Froysong.

Tho Tribunal id 11 bo in rccoss until 1:30 o’clock.

(A recess was taken until 1330 hours).


11265


18 July 47 J_H5H.13-l-?oster (Slideshelter)

Court I


AF7S3SCOS S^SICS

(Tfce hearing recorrrened at 1330 hours, 18 July 1947.)

-SE "APSEAL: The Tribunal la again in bob* ion.

"Hi P5ISIISHT: The Tribunal will new hear froa counsel for
the defendant Horen. Counsel will hero one hour or until 20
slnutee to three o'clock.

IB. cm LU (Counsel for the Defendant Horen): Tour Sonora,

K r . President, jeatierenof the Tribunal*

*Quet hocinea c tot sentential" There are ae cany opinions as there
ae people. Especially now, at the conclusion of the evidence In the
proceedings against Dr. Horen. 0 ne realises that this phrane of
Cicero's is not generally applicable. Everyone who has experienced
the subalselon of erldence against Dr. Horen ehould soo clearly one
point: this nan le not what the prosecution has represented him ae »t
the beflnr.lng of tho trial In thle court rom.

This san Is not the typical ropresentatire of tho creep physicians
In tho concentration carps. This sen Is by no ocans thu typical
roprosontatlro of thoso accomplices who willingly supported
In carrying out his prorrn* on destruction In the concentration caapo.

Hot long ago, tho prose, tho couth piece of public opinion ,
proeented tho following question to tho public: Is I*, Boron guilty
at all? And if ono nay apeak of any guilt In this =an, has ho not
already boon punished through his suffering In the concentration
cssrp of Buchers*aid, when ho was lsprlsoned by tho Oestapo from Septem¬
ber 1943, end, finally through the father restriction of his pcrconal


liberty until Jhia day?


t <


that this question is bolng dlscusood at oil In


publlcand that Dr. Horen le not airply condeemed because he worked In


f < -f

concentration casp as a dee


deetor.


I« Dr, Horen guiltyi According to the lndlctscnt, whon answering


•his quc»ql-n, two things rust not be oslttid.

U>

l) Hcrel7 a question of lew sust be decided, *hcn naking this
decision, one should be guided howerer by any coral or ethical


11266


18 Jul7 47-i_MSILl3-2_Iostcr (Hlldeshcimer)
Court I


principles. This quest i'n tut rather be decided eoterly and with¬
out pessinn, Just as tho proceedings were cerrled on in tMs court
rocn, solely and only according to principle* cf law, tho principles
which Jurisprudence has developed during the course of coatrulos on the
tests of the law* of logic.

2) When answering this question, the yardstick of normal tines
and condition* su*t not he appllod. The extreordlnay conditions of
those times rather sort be considered instead, under which the dofondant
Dr. Hovon has acted.

Tho great Roman phllosphcr and poet, Lucrcclus, has already said
In his well known work about "Ths Baturo of Things" "During a high sea
and turbulent winds. It lo coofortablo to watch tho offort of others
from ashoro."

It Is of c?\srso, wory simple for scoeono who has not oxporloncod
what wont on Inside a concentration ciwp surrounded by olcctrlcally charged
wiros, to say: Tho life of ono r*»n, even that of a criminal lo ■ afire d,
Tho killing such a nerson therefore lo vTong undor all circumstances.

Thi. difficult problem can not bo solved with such philosophical
or religious doctrlnos which do not have even general validity.

Ho doclslon of law or of Juatico can be based on this,

I havo therefore endeavored to answer In my closing brief
tho chargos that wore brought against Ik. Hcvim only by taking into
account the general principles devolOpod In law and Jurlcprudonco.


11267


18 July 47-^-'<SB-l4-l-£ross (Slideshei=cr)
Court 1


Tfce indictment against Ur. Eoven can be summarized In the followir-f
three points.

1) Participation in a conspiracy

2) Comission of var crises and crises against humanity

3) Membership in an organization which has been declared criminal
by the International Military Tribunal, nanoly membership In the SS,
which was called orig ina l by the IMT.

Concernli^ Point II Dr. Hovcn is charred specifically with
a) collaboration in the typhus experiments in Buchenwald.
b. Participation in carrying out tho Euthanasia Program.

I wish to trc*t count $3 - Membership in the SS. In this connect¬
ion I rofer to pares 203 - 205 of th« closing brief. Thore I havo shown
in detail that Dr. Hovcn:

1) Loft the C-en* ral SS beforo 1st of Scptcnber 1939.

2) Did not Join tho W„ff 0 n SS voluntarily nftor tho first of Sept¬
ember 1939. Ho was drafter rathor, into tho Maffon SS by tho Stnto in
such a way that ho had no other choice.

Horc I want to treat in detail only count of indictment *2,
"Cosrioslon of war crises and crimes against humanity."

On p'cos 10 to 15 of my closing brief I hrvo, first of nil, explained
tho lofal problems. Considering prior studies of the scienco of
International Lav which preceded tbs drafting of Control Council L«# *10,
especially tho report of the Intor-AoCTion - Juridical Coscittco of
tho 30th of July 1945, I oust cose to the conclusion that war crimes,
within the seining of Control Council L«r *10, aro only those violations
of law and cone n uBf.es of war as wero perpetrated on member of tho
United Satlor.s.

The presecution has tried, in Its final pl«a ( to justify tho appli¬
cation of Central Councel Law ♦ 10 to punishable nctions committed
nfa.inst Germans by saying that Lav flO was not only a principle of
International Lar, but also simultaneously a b'ationnl Lav of C-ermany.

I wi s h to make the following reply to the prosecution:


11266


18 July 57-A_XSn_!4-2-Ccrs3 Elideshei=er)

Court I

Application of Law rlO as a national L eu of the country should
be a ratter reserved to the Ccrnan Court# only.

According to recognised rules of International Law B the judges of
an occupying power are only competent for crlslnal ecf# which threaten
public order and safety in the area adalniatered Jy the occupying power.
?hia can be ooen froa artlcio 43 of the Enguo Convention 1007. Moreover,
tho principle# of International Lew confirs coapetence of the occupyirg
powor for crlalnal act# which are coanittcd Airing the occupation, and
for the prosecution of crlooe, l.e. violation# of law# and uoago# of
vnr, perpotrated on coshers of United Hatlon#. International Jurispru¬
dence doe# not recognise the coepetence of court# of the occupying powor
to cxeeod these function#.

During t^occupation of Bolglua In 1914-18 tho Oeraan Boich
wa# rcproachod for having Instituted court# for the prooocution of thooc
crlaos, court* which did not ccct thoso prerequisites.

In this connection I refer to tho otatcaonts of tho woll known
ioorlcan teacher of International Law, Jason Milford Gnrnor and hi*
work: "International W ard Morld Order Voluao II pago 81 especially
on page 78 whoro Garner wrlto# oxprcssly that tho Jurisdiction of Tri¬
bunals of tho occupying power l# ro«trictcd to violations of a nllltnry
n-turo only.

The prosecution of individual# for crises against humanity lo
unknown in international Lew. This can be seen from the aforcoontloned
report of tho 30th of July 1945 which was closed, among other, by tho
vcll-kncvn Accrican teachers of law, Caspos, lonwick, Costa, Bobodo, and
^loto dol Hlo. TfclQ report expressly states that only tho aost serious
violations of the lav B of wnrfaro can bo considered as criacs against
h*aaanlty. This view coincides with the opinion of tho International
Military Tribunal which also did not consider crises egnlnst humanity
'■•o separate eriainal acts, but which expressly dcclnrod that a criao
Gainst humanity Is only thenffisslttcd if thle action simultaneously
involves a erlze against tho peace, thet is. If this constitutes prep-


11269


18 Jul7 47—A_H3H_14—3-Cross teildolhcimer)

Court I

aratlon for a war of Regression or « var crime.

I COV cone to the result set down on page 15 of ny closing brief.
Crises against humanity "re only punishable if they siauultnnooudly ful¬
fil the act of a war cinre, cr if they wire cos=itted in eonnoctl n
with, or In execution of, a war of regression, rnd tho most serious crimes
rro to be considered rs crimes *g»in«t husanity.

Since in this proceeding the charge of preparation or execution
of a war of aggression has not been made, a crime against humanity is
only given if the prerequisites of a war crlmo exist.

In part 3 of ay closing briof I have tbon evaluated tho rosulta
of the evidence.

If I have understood correctly, tho prosecution has explained in
its final plea that in this proceed^ not every piece of ovidonco
should bo considered by itself. This maxim is lncocprohonciblo to mo.

In a criminal proceeding tho probative valuo of iaoh picco of ovldenco
must* first of all, bo carefully im-citif atod and aftor ouch an lnvoo-
tigayion, the ovidoncc, in toto, can justify tho findirv of guilt.

I have confronted the chargo of oxecution of typhus experiments
with four dofonslvo neoortionst

a) The defendant I>r. Hovon did not act as the deputy of Dr. Ding-
-chuler constantly but formally represented him once only temporarily
in Blocl 44 and 49 without undertaking ary action. During tho time

of ectirv as deputy, nc typhus experiments were carried out.

The dofendant wee Dr. Ding-Schulcr's pornanont deputy only in
3lock #50 whero the vaccine for C-eraan *ehr-«cht troops was produced.

b) The defendant Dr. Seven did not participate in typhuc ex¬
periments in block 46.

c) Tho defendant Dr. Eoven, as far as wps possiblo for him, tried
to provent the execution of typhus experiments.

d) The defendant Dr. Seven did not select the experimental persons.
Sorely bccauso he could not prevent execution of these experiments ordered
ty Hinder end upon irrigation of the illegal camp leadership ho


11270


18 July 47-A_M3n_14-4-£ross (Elld08hci=er)

Court I

revised the selection of expcrinental persons, to prevent in thig w«7,

•he use of political prisoners and especially aon-Gernra prisoners for
these czpcricets. for particulars I refer to stetesents in ry closing
brief pages 16 to 69.

I draw the attention of the Tribunal especially to ay statoaentn
on pages 37 to 41 whore I answer the views of van Leeuwardon and Hans
Tondoling. There I have explained that the statoaonta of these two
persons have no probative valuo for the following for-jal and aatorial
reasons*

1) Both persons failed to sake thoir otatenents undor oath. In

a criainal proceeding, however, n porson can only bo riven aonotary fino
or sentenced to suffer forfeiture of liberty by reason of a sworn
deposition. This general procedural rulo of all civilised statos applies
also to Anericrn court procoduro. ^io logal coracnto about thio point
aro sot down on pa#o 26 of ry closing brief.

2) Both persons woro not subjected to cross oxaoinatlon
although I rppllcd for this expressly in tho session of tho 23rd
of June 1947, ro Is shown on pa go 10113 of tno Gcrnan transcript.

I h"ve ropcatod this application In writing on tho 26th of June

1947.

Although, tho prosecution holds tho opinion that I was granted
the rlrht of cross xa-.ination b<c»ueo thcoo two poreons *orc Interrogated
In Holland by a comisslonor appointed by tho court. The prosocutlon
hen here however overlooked the fact thpt according to American Ux* tho
prlviiorc of cross xa-’inptlon Is only then xtended If tho vitno6s
npponro personally in court and is ccnfrontod with the dcfondnnt. Theoo
legal principles h-vc been set down in dotall on page 39 of r-y ciooing
brief whore I quote decisions of Acorican courts of Justice.

3) The teetinonlcc of Hans Yondellng and of van Loou#ardon have
fcctn shaken by tfco stntcncnts of the witnesses Dorn, Picck nd Be Vltt
 set down In dotftll by =c on pares 39 to 41 of tho closing brlof

in fofcrcsce to decisions of ieerlcan courts of Justico,


11271


18 July 47 _jL_KSH_14-S-~tob« (Eildeflheimer)

Court I

It can therefore ho considered es proved that Dr« Ecver. did not
participate in a y --ay in the execution of typhus experiments in tho
Concentration C^np Buchenweld. T urtherrorc, tho evideneo has hown that
Dr. Hoven did everything in his pwver to prevent the execution of these
experiments which had been ordc-cd by Hircler. Ecven wes tho first and
only carp physician vho undertook to w'rk against the order of Himmler
insofar a* he prevented to have prisonors of tho Buchor.wald Concontra-
tion Cftrjp infected with typhus lice. Details r.»y ha found on pago
46 to SO of =y closing briof.

Dr. Hovon is furthor charge, in connection with tho typhus
experiments in Buehcrs'ald, with having solocted tho experimental per¬
sons. Tho cvldonce his sh-wn in thlw respect that Dr. Hovon did not
solcct any persons, hut that ho aoroovor, only temporarily upon
instigation of tho illegal camp leadership rcvlst-d tho selections of
doncstlc end forolgn political prisonors e so as to prevont in this way,
that tho political dopartr.cnt, l.e. tho C*estopo f used political and thus
non-Ccrnan prisoner* to carry out theso experiments. The rooults of
tho ©vidoncc to these points lo found on p-fos 50 - 62 of tho closlnc
brief.

In order to provo tho correctness of its assortion that Dr. Hovon
participated in tho typhus experiments in tho con'-ontration canp Buchorv-
wald, the prosocutlon referred specifically tottn affidavit which Dy,
Hovcn submitted on 24 October 1940.

This statement lacks all probative ’•aluo because the conditions
for oubnittlrg an affidavit which tho Tribunal Imposed in the oooslon
of 3 January 1947 were not fulfilled. My ntti*udo in regard to tho
-ffidavlt can be found in detail in pages 63 - 68 of tho closing
brief.

I would like to cnch&ftlze here only the following points of

view:

firing his examination on the witness "trad D r . H 0 von st"*cd in
dca.tll, in the afternoon session of 21 June 1941 and ir. the morning


11272


18 4”—A—MSi-14-6—^rcse (Elldesheiner)

Court I

session cf 23 Jure 1547. that hodld not kr yw a i^rse nurber of the Eng¬
lish words which the affidavit contains P words which Df, Hovcn did

not lotoir cm be found in the transcript of the oorning seooion of 23
Juno 1947. The ignorance of thea words shew 3 th^t tko defendant Ur.

Hovcn did not urdcrstPnd tho neaning of the affidavit aubnitted by
hi=. I a=, however, vo r y grateful to tho proaeuction for h-ving Q-t-
sitted the tranacripl of tho intorrogetion of I Sc. Horen-on-22 and
23 October 1®46, in the forn of Dccunent EC 4068 pnd 4069, shortly before
tho presentation of evidence w« g completed, Trey can bo found in
Document Book X.X p*go 1C6, 116 Erjllsh. I havo atated on pafo 64 and
68 of the closing brief the £•. Hovcn, during hio interrogations
on 22 pnd 23 October 1946, anid ac-othing ontlxdy different then what
ia contained in tho English affidavit of 4 Hovenbtr 1946 which vna node
out by the proaccution aa a roault of tfcis interrogation. Lack of
tl=o preventa =o fros going into thio ratter in detail at thia point.
Thorcfore, I sorely wiah to point out ono acrloua contradiction.

During hie interrogation on 22 October 194€ IV. Hovcn nado
tho followi- f atatesenta concerning tho aclcction of cxporiaontal
subjects!

"Ar In oclcctir.g prioonora in Buchorvald for tho oxporiscnitfl
which were carried out by Dr. Ding it vrs not officially nec-
eoorry that I =pkc such a ocloctlon or sign thcoo lioto. Dr.
Ding could hare eirrly riven tho order to roko tho nccoaoary
nuaber of prisoners avallcblo. But I did personally
concern.aysolf with tho selection, since I wpc psked by
the prisoners who did r.ot deaerve it vmld net bocosc
victlca: I tried tc pick only those people who wero known to
be crir-inala. After I had left 3uchcnwald, the sa=o
oyster: f selection waa nc longer retained and tho prisoners
were siuply -ado available to Dr. Ding by Schobor,"

Thus Dr. Hover: has 'inequivocally expressed tht ho concerned hiasclf
w ith the selection of cxp.rincntel subjects on’y to prevent in this way


11273


IP -*iriy 47-A_MSH.l4-7-r-rcss (Hildcshciscr)

C*-"t I

tho Uie of political prisoners, especially nor_Gcr-an prisoners,
especially non-Gorcan prisoners, for these experiments. Tho affidavit
cf 24 October 1946, however, contains the opposite. There it seye:
according to the demand I chose virions prisoners at randen fron the
list of r.ancs. That la end cf his quotation. This is cntirly difforont
froa what Dr. Hcven said during his interrogation of 22 October 1946.

Dr. Hover, rover seld that ho

1) selected prisoners according to dcaand -nd

2 ) he did not o*y that he selected prisoners at randoa and

3) ho did not testify that he selected prisoners according to tho list
of na B es.

Thus no word In the affidavit of 24 October 19i6 corresponds to
tho statements subaittod in the transcripts of 22 and 23 October 1946.
Thus tho following cr. n be aid ns a result of the evidoncol

1) Tho defondant Dr. Hovcn va« not tho rerannent deputy of Dr. Ding

in tho typhus oxporisent block 46 of th® concentration c*np Buchcwald.

2 ) Tho defondant Dr. Eovon did not participate in the typhus oxporinontc
in block 46.

3) The defendant Dr. Koven prevented the carrying out of typhus oxper-
loonti as far as It wa 0 possible for hla to do so.

4; The defendant Dr. Hovcn did not solcct tho experimental subjects
for the typhus cxpcrlecnts.

It is a source of special satisfaction for no that in this natter
I agree with 'he opinion ' / hich the prosecution alrc dy expressed beforo
Irirging charges a/a Inst Dr. Hovcn. During tho interrogation of
22 October 1946 which I havo repeatedly acntlocod, tho representative
of the procccuti:n said thefe 11 owing about Dr. Hovcn "You aro lucky
that you are not Involved in nediccl cxpcrincr.tr. Y c u participated
in sn uniaportant natter." This can bo seen fron the transcript of 22
Cctobcr 1946, Document SC 4C66, Dccunont Book XIX, page 32 C-oranB, page
54 Inrlish.

1 rcw 00 ~ c tG the ChPTfe brought ^reir.st Dr. Hovcn that he c*rtlc-


31271a


18 Joly 47-iJCSE_14_e-C-rc38 (Eildesheiscr)

C-tn-t -I


ipptec Is the euthanasia prc£r*=, -his is the second war crisc rnd criuc
paairst hxamnity with vhich the defendant Dr, Eoven i3 charged®


11275


13 Tily-A-II-15-1-Le onord (Int. Eiidesheim_r)
Court I


The srat-aents 01 * the prosecution concerning the count
o’ participation in the euthanasia program ar. not without
c art rad ic t i or. s.

Th_ pros.cution stated, in thw opening sp-uch. of
3;c-aber 1946, that Dr. Hovon had personally ordered 300 to
/,0C .Tewish prisoners to b- sent to 3-mburg.

0

In the course of the prc3-ntatien of ovi.'.e.ao-, the pro-

seoution claiced that the defendant Dr. Hov-n had participated

in measures ordered by the hiGh-stnuthrritl<-3 of the German

Aeich ‘n connection with th~ euthanasia program.

It follows frea the speech by the pros-cution itself

that the defendant Dr. Hovji could not "t all giv- the ordor

to 3-nd 3°0 to 400 Jews to 3:rnburg. Th_ pros-cution h~s
• •

st™tod, in groat detail, that n gr-nt nany ag^nci-s were
s >t up Tor that purpose, agreeing with these statements of
the pros :cutio.a, the prosecution Y/itnc3S Dr. lionr.vcks has
expressly said that he did not think it possible th"t Hovcn
gav- such an ord-r, because this transfer to th- euthanasia

4

institute was tnfc-n care of by 3-rlln. Confirming this, the
pros-cuUon witness loohmhlli said that the transport from
Huohenwold to Bernburg were ordered by higher authorities.

The result of the evidence on this count can be found in
detail on pages t 70 to 77 of ay closing bri-f.

3»at *^r. Hoven did not participate in thu carrying out
of th e euthanasia program, as I h ve shown in detail on

0

pag.s 78 to 79 of the closing bri~f. In this conn-ction,

I call the att-ntion of the court to the testimony of the

witness -h:. I^-nn-ckc. It was Dr. *<nnecke who s^l-ctjd thu

prisoners in the concentration camp Buchonwald, who were

transf:rr^d t. the euthanasia institute to be ga33od. ^r.

•

••■an c!: is th'e only witness who, because of his activities,
:<n-v. best whether *-r. rbven participated in tLo euthanasia


11276


!o J'il7-A-IL-15-2-Leonard llnt.iiacsheiacr)

:r.irt I

program. Dr. Monnecka, r. prosecution witruss, has expressly

•

.otifiad that Dr. Hover, in no way participated in hi3 work,
that is Konnecka's work, in Bucher.wold. Specifically, -h*.

Ho van did not fill out the questionnaires and did not make
up any lists for the apical commission. Nor did Dr. Hovon
select the prisoners for action 14fl3 as was customary in
some other concentration camps. Th„ tostiaony of Dr. Hennaoka
agrees with tho statements of the witnesses Dr. Horn and Dorn

0 0

.and Gottschalk, Dr. Hovon's secretary, who had baan °r.

Hoven's secretary for many years. The testimony of Dorn

scho^rs that only ono transport left BucJunwald for Bernburg,

and this was towards tho end of the year 1942. In thi3

natter D r . Monneck.. testified that he selected the prisoners

for this transport without tho collaboration of Dr. Hovon.

1 have continued to comment on tho testimony of Hoohmhild

0

•.'-.03 0 tentinony is partly contradictory to the evidence,

-rd I have presented the roascr.s, citing nroc-dural

prir.cipl-s developed in American law , why the testimony of

Rochmhild and Dr. K 0 gon cannot properly dispute the otate-

merfcs of the prosecution witness ->r. Uonnaoke ar.d the de-

fonsc witnesses Dr. Horn and Dorn. Roohmhill and Dr. Kogan

could not, on the basis of the positions they than held in

the concentration camp uuchenvmld, h-vo the necessary

knowledge as to how -ction I4fl3 was carried out. Beyond

that, the evidence has 3hown that Dr. Hovon nr evented

action 14fl3 in collaboration with th. illegal camp raanage-

nent of the concentration coap Buchcnwald by means of a

count:r- action which wa3 designated 13fl4.

It can be s .on from the latter of Dr. ‘^ennocka to his
• •

■•’•if.., submitted by tha prosecution, and from the testimony
of Dr. Konnocke, that 12^0 J.ws wore to bo sent to Bernburg


11277


IS July - A - XL- 15- 3 - loonard (Ir.t.Hildcsh-iaer)

Court I

In four transports to be gassed. But as th- pros .cution

itself has said, only or.- transport actually left. The

other transports were proventad free leaving by the defendant

Or. Hoven, a3 the prosecution witness Dr. &ogon has confirmed

in agreement with the prosecution witness Dr. Roehchild and

• •

th- defense wltnosses Picck, Gottschalk, and Dorn. In this
connection, I call the attention of the court to the testi¬
mony of Dr. K 0 gon which I have cited on page 102 of the
closing brief. Dr. Kogan testified, as follows: "I know

that, as far as I r orient er, four transports were to loa.vu

for Bernburg in 1942, and these involved chiefly Jews. I
believe that at least one transport left. The remaining
transports were prevented from leaving through the inter¬
vention of Dr. Hoven."

Dr. Kogon also described in what way Dr. Hovon prevented
the transports from being ale up. In this respect I rof„r
to ay stateaents on page lOi of the closing brief. These
statoaents were supplemented bv Dr. Hoven when he was on
the witness stand. This evidence al3o agrees completely
with what Dr. Hov^n already said in his Interrogation on
22 and 23 October 1946. Dr. Hoven stated already at that
time that he did not examine the Jews. Dr. Hovon definitely
said already th .n that h- never so.at any person to 3-rnburg.
7/hen the intjrrogator put it to him, he declared that
thsrG mu3t be evidence in existence to prove th~t he hid
700 J-ws who were to be sent to Bernburg. This I have
mentioned or. Page 109 of ay closing bri-f.

The result which therefore can be ascertained is,
that Dr. Hoven took no part in the action 14 ir 13 under
which code the Euthanasia programs was carried out in the
concentration camps. He rather prevented the execution of
the Duthanasi-a program, as far as it was in hi3 power , and

1127 B


IS ^uly-i-'-IL-15-i-Xconard (Int.Hiidoshoiia_r)

Court I

it is only duo to the so measures of Dr. Hovon which h. under-

todk unselfishly and by risking his lif_, that 300 to 900

Jews didn't aeet their death in Bornburg but survived their

ennp tino in Buchonwald. This has boon confirmed expressly

by tho witness Dr. Kogon. Dr. Xogo:i stated that it was due

to the steps which Dr. 116von undertook, together with the
illegal camp rumagonont, that a considerable number of J-v/3
was still loft in the concentration camp by the beginning of
1945.

In two further parts of my Closing brief I dealt with
the killings which Dr. Hovon either undertook hin3~lf or
which w-rc undertaken with his knowledge.

In part b), paga 112 to 117 of tho Closing Brief, I
stated that these killings hud no connection with the
euthanasia action 14 ? 13.

7urthor I stated, that it can bo roeardod as proved
that D r . Hovon killed only two prisoners himself and that
about 50 or 60 prisoners wore killod by order of the leader¬
ship of the -nd foreign political prisoners v/ith tho

knowledge of Dr. Hovon.

A legal evaluation of tho3c killings I have sot forth
in a further paragraph under cypher c on pages 118 to 1/.7
of tho Closing Brief.

Th- legal arguments as s:t forth in the Closing Brief
are taken from th. work of th. well known American crioino-
logi3t "Tharton, which is called Criminal Law. The first
part of this argument contains, under cypher c), the
following littoral quotation from this book:

According to Cocoon Law, tho killing of a non can be
either:
l) murder
l) arms laughter

11279


13 <!u 1 y-.':-lL-15* 5-Lo oh.ord tint. Hildoshoinor)
c ourt I


3) excusable homicide

4) justiflablo homicide

Zxousablc homicide and justifiable homicide arc not
punishable.

The present American law does not differentiate botwocn

Justifiable homicide and excusable hooicido. I refer to ny

Closing bri^f, particularly to the statements of Wharton

• • • 0

in his book 'Criminal Law", 12th edition, vol. I, 1932,
pages 826 to 879. According to Wharton excuse and justi¬
fication for a homicide are either:

1 ) repulsion of felonious assault,

2 ) prevention of felony.

• •

The right of self dofenso, i.e. repulsion of felonious
assault i3 restricted to a narrowly defined number of
persons.

On the other hand, everybody is entitled to prevent a
crime. I refer to the details contained in my legal argu-
cents, pages 119 to 122 of ny Closing Brief.

Killing a man to provont a felonious crime requires
the following conditions which aro set forth on page 122 of
ay Closing 3rief:

1) The perpetrator must have the bona fide belief that the
commission of a felonious crime is immediately impending.

It is not a condition that 3uch a crime would actually
havu beer coranittod. Rather the bona fide belief of tho
accused is quite sufficient. In this connection I refer
to tho legal arguments on page 121 of tho Closing Brief.

2) This belief of the accused must not bo negligently
adopted.

3 ) Th crG must not bo any other possibility of preventing

a crimo than the killing of a person. *n other words - tho
killing must be tho only neons available to prevent tho


11230


18 J uly-!!-IL-15-6- Leonard (Int» Hiidoshciner)
Court I


crime.

The r-osocution's assertion in its fin.nl pica, 'One must

not kill five to 3avo fivo hundred', therefore can not bG
considered generally valid either frern the point-of-view of
German or Anarican law.

On tho basis of the statements of tha prosecution, I
have not beGn able to sco cloarly whothor that sontcnco had
referonco only to tho Justification of experiments on human
beings or ol3o to tho killings which wore carried out by
Dr. Hovon or with his knowledge.

The Justification of thu killings is materially distin¬
guished from that of the experiments. Thoso spies, stool-
pigoons and traitors for whoso killings Dr. Hoven acooptod
responsibility when in tho witness stand, had plannod to

commit serious crimes on their follow-prisoners. Therefore,

• •

if the three pro-roquisito3 which I mentioned, aro givon, wo

are concerned with eases of Justifiable or excusable homicido.

On pp. 123-125 of my Closing Brief, I elaborately

explained that thoso oondition3 oxisted in tho case of all

the killings for which ^r. Hovon acooptod the responsibility.

The defendant Dr. Hovon had tho conviction and good

faith that tho spies and traitors who wore killed by him or

• *

with hi3 knowledge, wore about to commit serious crimes,
resulting in tho djath of numerous inmates of tho Buchcnwald
concentration camp, during his examination on tho witness
3tand, Dr. Hovon gave a thorough description of this.

Tho decision on thoso killings was not reached by
°v. Hoven


11231


13 Jul?v»-PS-lS-l--Eerrln (!nt. H'ldeikelrer)
Court To. 1


on hi» own. Dr. Eoven had no cruse for that. It wr>a not his life
thrt was endangered \r/ those spies or trrltors. It was rather the
con lttee of political domestic and forei^i prisoners, many of whom
ere tod'jr holding high office In their countries. Those oersonoll-
tles guarantecd-to Dr. Eoven thrt only such Individuals would ho
killed who already hrd been active and would continue to he active
rs spies and as trrltors. These statements ty Dr. Eoven were
prrtlculnrly confirmed \r/ n number of witnesses who were hoard on
this. Those observations cry be found In the affidavits I subcltted.
Above 11 It has been proven th-t only such poodle were donw away
with of whor. Dr. Eoven held that conviction. Dr. Eoven testiflod
to thrt effoct end it has been re-nfflmed by the witnesses Dorn,

Dr. Zofon, Seeders '•nd HoobsI.

In his ir.tcrrorr.tlon of October 23, I 9 U 6 , Dr. Eoven strtod oxpreos-
1 / th t ho killed or know only of the killing o of such persons of
who- ho was ccrtrln th-t their dseths wero nocossrry to sr.tb tho
lives of r -multitude of politlc -1 prdsonoro fron the vrrlouo countries,
•vt th't oarly drtc rlrer.dy he expressly strosaod thrt ho refused to
errry out rny of the killing ordors of tho oocp comnnndcr Koch; the
orlsoners who wore covered by his orders wero put Into tho Hospitrl
or hidden In sore otfasr w->y by Dr. Hovon.

2 ) Dr. Eoven had not negligently adopted tho conviction that
th=lr killing was esscntirl for the salvation of huge nunbero of
prisoners.

This Is proved first of all through the testimony of tho witness
Dorn, who gave nany detrils rs to the conns rnd cothods employed
b7 3r. Eoven rnd tht illegal err? ndnlnlstrrtion In the conviction
of th*. necessity for the killings. Dr. Eoven supplemented those
strteccnts. furthermore they were corroborated by the testimony of
t v * witness Srflol., Dr. Eogon, Secgers, Philip Dirk, Bar on von
P'llalnt v-r. Scrde through their affidavits. I refer to pp. 131-


11202


18 Jxiiy-A-B&-l6-2-?errln (2at. Eildesheiser)

Court To. 1

135 of sy closing brief.

3) Actually, the prevention of the planned crises, l.e., the mass
-■order of - r.ultltudc of done ■ tic er.d for el ,51 political prisoners,
could bo accornlisked only throng the killing of the epic* nnd traitors.
Tltero wi no other seen*. Vhr.t should Dr. Hovea have done to prevont
the crises plrr.ned ty the eplee end traitors? Those spies collaborated
with the S_ ernp cocnrnders to carry out Hinder's progran to destroy
the political prisoners. To vbon should Dr. Eoven have turnedt Pex^-
hrps to the SS c ct cor.-rnders >fco worked with the splos rod tr-ltors?

Or pcrhrps to the Cestrpo or to the police who worked undor Hinder's
orders?

There vr.s no other wry t*it the one which Dr. Hovcn went in order to
prevent crlr.ee.

I showed that with detrlle on pp. 13&-147 of ny closing brief. There,

I assembled the tostlnonles of tho witnoeeoe of prosocutlon rnd dofonso
who woro hoard on this point.

Here, I noroly with to stress, the following statements ty tho wltncssosi

In this court room. Dr. Kogon, r convinced Chrlstlro rnd r. deeply
rc 11 .do us nan, sa.id; "There «r.s really no other possibility for tho
r-.cn of the illcfi-1 crop administration. I, ps 0 convinced Chrlstirn,
do not dony those nor. the right to hrve killed pcoplo In cn ccorgency
w'-o in coll-bor-tion with tho SS encrogerod the lives of individuals
or of my, 1 End of ny cuotrtion.

The witr. -s Fleck strted: "It nry bo that the liquidation of nrny
freon innates and of S-> spies employed in tho c t.j nry erke Dr. Hovcn
r imrderer in tho eyes of cany; yet, for ne end othors who understood
tho red situation, he wrs r soldier fighting on our side rnd risking
very ouch."

This very opinion, Pieek - ae strted here - expressed also in n lettor
to the Dutch. ILinister of Justice, n letter thrt wrs oo-Bi.sied by the
City Council of Acsterdm and Mr. Droerlnc, herd of c denartnent of
the St.-te Institute for Vrr Oocusentr.tlan In The H-pie.

11223


13 July-A-SS-lO-J-Perrin (Ir.t; Eildesheiner)
Court “o, 1


rloCK is one of the few who ere best oquipped to nnswer these
questions, for he belonged to the Corcittee of doaeetic nnd foreign
political prisoners which forced itself at Buchecwnld.

Bather Katjetnn, presently Soprano Abbot of one of the largest reli-
•Tious orders in Cxecho-Slov-hin, declared that n n prisoner of tho
concentr-tico caep 3uchen weld in the presence of witness Dr. Horn thnt
those hillings wore cn inevitable necessity for the preservation of
the incr.tcs who had been abandoned b7 Justice in the err.?.

Sven the witness of the prosecution, Boenhild, hed to r.fclt on the
stand that it would have been inpossiblo to tnvc 20,000 prisoners
if those spies or trnltore when Dr. Hoven killed or of whoso killing
he knew, hnd retained alive.

Let ne nsk in this connection: khot would have h*-v'ened if r nan
of JCuohnlr Xuehnarev's calibre hnd not been killed, and if tho
curd or of tho Russian POV's in tho 3uchenwnld ennp ha.d been continued?
Vould Dr. Hovon not stand boforo this Tribun-1 evon thon? Then,
would not tho sane charge be na.de against Dr. Eovc.i a.s tho ono
lovcllod rgninst the Japanese Oovcrnor of tho Philifoince who was tried
-oforo nnAnoricrr. Military Court for not haring proventod ntrocltioo
and acusoo?

In another part of cy closing brief I suunarised tho rosult of ny
ovider.ee ccr.cerninr the good character end refutation of Dr. Koven
in the Buchan wild concentration cmp.

On the ba.eie of Wharton's Zvidcnco in Criminal Cases, I described the
legal basis of =y reasoning and ny evidence, l v stating,

1 ) the adcissa.bi lit7 of the evidence,

2) the Units of the evidence,

-5) the nature of the evidence,

U) the value of the evidenco for the problen of Dr. Koven'» f

Suilt.

»!y evidence in regard to Dr. Hoven*s good character and renutrtion,
re given on 121-202 of =y closing brief, led to the following


1120k


13 July—A-B^ lP - fc -?crrln (Xnt. Eildeshcincr)
Court He. 1


result*

a) The defendant Dr. Haven saved the lives of nunerous innate 8 .

b) Dr. Eoven helped o nerous prisoners to regain freedon.

c) Dr. Hoven assisted the prisoners of ths Buchenvrld concentra¬
tion crcp in their fight for life.

d) The defendant Dr. Hoven as the first SS ran attenpted, rs
far as in his power, to prevent the application of beating as
penalty.

e) Dr. Hoven carried out nunorous irproverents of nodical care
in the Buchenwald concentration carp

f) Dr. Eoven treated the lnnates always humanely.

o) Dr. Hover .'8 good character is siovn particularly by hlo
ettltudo towards tho Jews.

The taking of evidence concerning Dr. Hoven*s good reputation in
the Buchenwald concentration ersp rosuhsd in such e voklth- 6 f
notorial that it is not possible to aontion rll details. Above nil,
it hes bcor. provon on the basis of evidenoo that Dr. Hovon rosistod
noa.suros by high S - 3 officials, particularly orders of Hicajcr.

Tho Prosecution ir. the course of tho evidence ropcrtodly asked
•one defendants to list actions that could bo intorprotod ns
rooistance.

I deeply regretted that the Prosecution did not sutait this
question to Dr.Hoven in his cross examination, too. Dr. Koven


would have been in r. position to nention not only ono, not ten
or hundred, tut nany huadrods of acts by which he resisted tho
orders of highest authorities.

Let ue nention only the case of the seventeen-year—old Jewish
innate; of whoa the witness Dorn spoke, nn incidont I included in
cy closing brief on p. I 96 . Dorn related in how aoving e. nanner Dr.
Eoven gave r.edlccl care to that prisoner, rud that he repeatedly


went to the sick bed of that Jew. asking hie, Erve you any wish!


112 #


13 July-A-B&-;6-5“Perrln (Jr.t. HildeifceiMr)
Court ?o. 1 •


7 rco those frets the witness drew the only correct conclusion
which I could not better phrr.se ryself.

Your Eoaors l I c.-ji not lurglno thr.t r nec who ezeerts great
effort on behalf of r. Jew, who la the Sp*l state really was denied tho
the rl ;fct to live, ashed hia for his wishes and hidoe hin in the
hospital - that this nan should arbitrarily kill prisoners rnd
peruit killings which were necessary In the interest of the
preservation of the lives of nany prisoners.

7urthcrore, the witnesses Dora and Plcck agreed that Dr. Hovon,
after the liberation of the cr^p by the "nericra troops was taken
fro- an A-crlcan tank by the Jew /.August Eohn, the trustee of tho
Jows in tho Illegal cr.un odninistration. DB>rn rlso described
how Kohn addressed ra Ac.orlcrn officer: "Sir, don't ham this
nan, ho fought In our own ranks.*

At that tine there wero hundreds, nay, thousands of wltnosoos
lr. ^ichonwald who knew Dr. tfoven's work In tho Suchenvnld Crop.

Could Dr. Hovon have dared re-entering tho crap of tor liberation
by tho Ajkoeriorn Aray If he had conulttod tho things tho Prosecu¬
tion ehargot bin with? Vould not a terpest of indication havo
swopt hlc away if ht had boon the nan a* described by the Prosecu¬
tion? What did actually hapuen? Dr. Hovon was gladly and choor-
fully wclc-cod by the lnnotes cad treated as thd r guest for two
days until American troops took bin Into a POV carp.

I a:, unable to understand with wh-.t Justification on tho basis
of tho ovcrwhelaing evidence that speaks lr. favor of Dr. Hovon


112o6


1, July 1 i 7-!.-4T-17 * l3-Coct:-( ilrts. -i x -) Ta£e i

c ! "n

- ^ prosecution still calls '.ii a c'.rra.tiblo nurd^r_r.

First of all, I venture vj as!:: »ho should hav- bribed his? ?h_ poor
inr.tos -a called nothin their own but their lives? Po.tm't this ot-
s-:* 7 ation suffice to c_:.nstrat_ tbo absurdidy of the charge' In ropnrd
to bribery I oxerossad :.ysolf urc lengthily on pp. 1F9-202 of y
closing brief.

I further r.slc: Isn't it true that the aero feet that tho ~::-in-ates
I * 0 ,,jr - callod as pr aocutloo -.fitnesses -ad to speaJ- favorably of Dr.
oven, justifies oubts in Ids ruilt?

lot n* recall .lirchhu?. .>r'3 ovidonco? This prosecution witness uhon
rs:-.od by t:.. .rosocutar r. oven *ns a Sir ‘clc' zC in tho

"tle'.amrr-ld concentration co_ , di^ nov ruply tr saying ‘To!, but rather
n.unforod 'Dr. oven onjojul a ood. rcutrtion aaor.-st tSv prisoner*.!

wr. is r.vt .jr fact xdiich a: culd snake that char?oj 1 refer to t!w
Tact that irttn .ssjs 'avu ruehod hero to tostify for >J.-i and to sjrvo tho
tr.it;:, - ion fr . t:» ,„-at and the .at, i> : Csocho-Slow.Ui , an fruu
t - .ut -r.rids. isn't it also truo that tho thre. witncssos rh. wore
eallid ..re by tho prosecution to s,cck against Dr. ovon, ns forowr
-t.s :f fcbu c ncontr s ;re saved by r. ovun. / r«fcr to

hr. ;to<«on, Ire .«* or and kxxidld. Dr. fogon stated ..orsonrlly that Dr.
•o*/on saved Toeon's lifo tree ti oa. ,irch!ujinor ins on. of t > 12 X
..fa who-. Dr. 'oitnocUe ad .-elected for transport to t' ’orn'eurf
cut! Amain station. Tr ‘.ae d’ild'o ease loo it is .woven th-t T)r. !ovon
saved *.-i

The evidonco in t: «• cr.so of t* oven !^uS clcsrly s^xr.i
bis an ms not a corru tab. rreercr, but that he Has — fc o ro;.-at
bach's words — r •*. *.ur‘ on the side of the 'niicd Nations
r ' r * st - Dior cuel f- syati. -s o.‘ concentration ecu s, ri3:a.n *ia >m
La c-astantiv end pey-ng f:r this 1 'i :-t V spandin i years in the


11237

1, JvOy L7---.JI-17 ^ l8-Ceok-< .-ildoshiiar) Pa^o 2

c r.r i

^sta;i6 dunroons and as tt£cfc& ox t'.u techoorald cone or.trrt ion

•Such a an nfw actod oo oft^n in the rest interest of the United
l-ations, a an rosistod M-hosi af-icials so often in th_ int.rost
. - r, "nitid Mtions, r an .f.:* Xnuish«<J for that in tf* dun-cons of
-stnpo and cut ir-nte ©I '*> uc'tf.wcld concentration cciy — such
c an cannot bo called a anr crinlpnl end a criminal against ha enity
bef^ro *ny Tribunal of t’c ' nitod rations. TTvnk you.

T ~ ^SSIO: T: T:*j Tribunal will no/, bo in recoss for fifteen

idnutcs.

(A short reco33 was takon)


112 Go


18 Jul;-riij-l9-1-6ross (Lea)
Court 1


^glUSHaU The Tribunal ia again in sossion.

TS3 PB8SZBK: The Tribunal vill hear fron counsel for the
dcfrZant Beckor-?reyseng.

2 ?, TIP? for Gecker-Preyseng: Hr. President, lour Honors!

-ien, in May 1545, Gera an resistance collapsed and the Goman
Belch thereby ceased to exist, the iron carteln was lifted which
hca kiddoa so anny deeds and activities frou the eye of the Oonun
public for tho past years. «s unbelievable asthis nay sea: to
those outsido, tho Orman public had until then no knowledge of
aary cf tho events thick had token place in national-socialist Go^-
aeny. But I think I con os suae that this fact as such hod been oi>- .
tab 11 shed os a certainty by the recent triols in no little way by
those trials held uorc in Kurnburg.

Tho tlafta >a*.ch before the coll<s>oo woro completely obscuro
to the aajorit- *f tho Oeraan people includod everything connoctod
u'.th the oono*r.tration coups. Peoplo in Gomony know that thoro
voro ooncactvriioa ctcps, they also know of per eons who had boon
put *.nto theu, but nobody, unless ho hud a>no diroct contact with
the a# c.-tns, actually learned of at took place behind thoso bnrbod-
wtro foneOs.

The rovolotions ab-.ut the true conditions, in concentration coups,
about the nil lions of nurdors thich wore cocuittod thoro, aovod tho
Gerann pooplo to tho core. Only with difficulty could thay bollovc
that soaned to be proven by facts.

ttien, during those nonths, the assertion otpecrod in the prooQf
that ixcborc of tho Gerom nodical profession hca cremitted onomous
cruelties against hundreds of innocent ircatos of concentration cccps
and ti:en detailed evidence of theso assertions was supplied, tho
Gcmaa poople as voll as world opinion were inclined to despair of
tho Goman doctor, indeed of the Gera on aedlcul profession ns a whole.


1126 ?


re ruly^JU-lS-a-Gross (Lee)

Court 1


Iho charge* which were raised were to severe cad seced so "til
founded that a defeat* of the Gemac nedlcal aea who qspeur in this
trid nccr.ec hardly tea able at firot.

Public opinion which had been influenced to such extent, ad¬
versely affected tho dofenso in a®y decisivo points. I an sure I
was not the only one toons ny colleagues who hod difficulties in
securing witnesses and othor ovidor.ee, because witnesses ho&itatcd
to'put thaiselve* a t tho disposal of tho defendants.

In additional difficulty was that tae whole of the Goman
written nntorid wasin tho hands of the prosocutioa. all availcblo
notorial was &or.o through by the prosecution and was introduced
into tho ircdoodings only according to thoir own point of view. In
this rocpoct tho prosecution acted entirely according to rulea blad¬
ing fro then, but this does not provont nu fron stating that the dc»-
fonoe, freu tho beginning, was bolng put into a uuch woahor position.

If, in spito of thoso difficultios, the dofenao succoodod in
und ©mining tho charges tfcich at first sotuod so voll foundod, in
soao of tho ossentiol points, as in uy opinion they did, then this
result nuat a.-poar of particular slgnlfioanco.

Tor nary uontha now, prosocution and dofenso in this courtroca
havo reported ovorything which sosuod essential to clarify tho facts.
Tho Tribunal nust decide now trhat happened and \t.o cnong tho defendants
oust boor tho responsibility for those happenings. In this connection
only tho following ce bo said in genorcl:

Tho ovihor.ee hooshown that deeds wore doflo’s&ich are not cco¬
pat iblc with nedical ethics and the principles of nodical behaviour.
Under tho clock of nodical research actions wore carriod cut ii:ich
-TO not dcfeasabla. On tho other hand, howovor, the fact aiorgos
clearly and unmistakably before tho eyes of tho Tribunal and before
the oyes of tho world, that it is not the perpetrators of these crinos


11290


18 Jul 1 5- 3-Gross (Lea)

Court 1

who aro la the dock here. Tho bearers of the nauos cost frequently
nontloaod hero ure the very ceniho escaped huaan justice threugh
tholr on herds or vho, as Hascher, fell free a bullot free their
oua rrnks.

Tr. o feet that criaes have undeniably be a ca- ittod but that on
the other head the ,guilty coi ao longer bo edlod to account, met
not result ia other, nea being node responsible for doeds for idxich
the;- never had to take the responsibility. Xhe dooiro for puniah-
noat raut not load us into a courso vhoro the innocent instead of
tho guilty ere called to account.

jo the prosecution oppoers to have been avaro froa tho beginning
thet thoso vho vere guilty 0 f tho individual offences and aaong
thou of the worst offences, could no longer bo called to account,
they hovotried f roc tho start to throw tho voil of coauon conspi¬
racy ovor tho individual cases and to show ovorything thoy subnit-
tod in tho ir$>onotrable slui-dirkr.oso of confusing relatione and
conr.octionk,

S:o prococution repeatodl7 triod to croatc such connoctior.o
to tho tdvciitage of tho com-on planning doggodly alleged by then.

Zvcr. thou^i I cn of tho opinion that particularly In tho coco of
Dr. 3oci:otv-7rcyneng tho participation in such coason planning on tho
part of tho dafcedants basin ao way boon ostablinhod, it uust bo
pointod out that on the terrifying background which tho prosocution
intentionally and cleverly creatod for ltsolf fresj tho start, evory
incident was in dagger of losing tho character of an objoctivo fact
of tho case. It was just that indetorninate and undefined cooont
inUio accortions of the prosecution, »dio with slogans vuch as
•participation" arc "special responsibility" triod to sotablioh
tho connection between the actud hopenings and tho persons of
tho defendants, which ves the great dtr.gor in this trial.


112 5>1


16 July-ir-w-19-4—Gross (Lea)

Court 1

2he prosecution portrayed all defendants in tho sane style.

They voro represented as uorally and nentally inferior party fol¬
lowers who, having beccce subject to the party doctrine, no longer
cared about the subliue lavs of hunmity or the cedicdL profession,
but who cour.itted cruelties for the nero sake of it without regard
to their duties as doctors ard hue or. beings.

Against this, the ddfonsc, in laborious detail, hod to show
tho defendants os they really were. Only in this way was it poa-
oiblo to crack tho foundation of the charge and to shtp o the per¬
sonality of occh defendant, ond every individual case, free tho
confusod ness of collective assertions of guilt t&ich the prosocu-
tion hod producod, in ordor to show tho tribunal doid and guilt in
their true light.

Auong rl\ tho defendants, tho defendant Dr. 3odkor-7royoong
holds a special position.

ho I hrvo rcpectodly pointed ott, the prosocution has not oub-

t

aitiod its chnrgos ag.l r.st Dr. 3cckcr-Troysont In detail. In timy
of tho counts of tho iadictnont tho defenso, thoreforo, hod to uoxfc
on aacuisptionn. *hey oscunod that Dr. Bockor-rrayoong w„e ouppoood
to'co oncontially responsible bocause ho workod no a Referent or
AS-.iotant Roforer.t in tho Referdt for aviation Kodiclno in tho
KodicJ Znspcctortio of tho Luftwaffe. I ncod not do core than nor-
tion hov diddicult tho construction of tho dofenso wasiado by this
lccl: of substcnti-^i in tho charge. In tho s mo way wasit noconcrxy
to o:;tor.d the defense into every pos^iblo and acccivdolo direction
becauso of this lack of precision in tho prosecution's proceedings
in thic case.

Altogether, in tho icdlctnont tho prosocution hold Dr. 3cckor-
Troysing rosnonaible for tho high altitude and Tree sing oxporinonts
in concentration cr p Dachau, for typhus and other bacteriological


11292


I


IS July-i-::j-13-S-Grcss(Lea)
Court 1


e^orluontg in Hatrwoilor aad finelly for tho Sec Ifator experiments
in concentration cccp Dachau.

"oither for the hialtitude experiacats nor for tho 7roezing
oipcrinents has tho Prosecution suppliod the evidence on which they
neon to base their charge of Dr. 3ecker-Treyseng , s responsibility.

In os far ca'thcoc cap or in eat a are concerned tho objections
vhich I havo raise* in connection with all counts of tho indictaor.t
n;nly especially. i.g. tho prosecution did not onoe nontion tho nauo
of Dr. 3oc~oi'-7roysong *k.oz doaling with high altitudo oxporineats
oic<*>t in tho writ ton Indictment, furthoraorc they did not evon
subuit ono document xfclch originated in tho rofornl for uviation
nodlolno at tho nodical inspoctoroto of tho Luftvnffo.

Thoreforo I m of tho opinion that the prosocution has not
bocn nblo to prove by my corns that Dr. Bcckoi'-Prcysont was.in cry
nnnaor inplicatod in thooo exp oriu onto which took placo at Dachau.

2von lose has it bocn proved that Dr. Bockor-Froyoong was ro,sponoiblo
for thoso orporluouto.

jlth rogc.ro to tho frooting experiments tho prosocution ucnagod
to ubnit souo fow documentc wnich originated in tho codic.-l inspoo-
tornto of tho Luftwaffe. Only two docuconts ho^ovor show tho rafor-
onco naobor of tho roforat for aviation nodlolno.

ind nc regards thoso documents tho dofenso has proved during
presentation of its case that it was ndfc Dr. 3ockor-7roysont vho
dorlt with this letter, but tho Referent Prof. Dr. Anthony.

3to prosocution was therefore uncfele to provo in thoir caso in
chief that Dr. Beckor-Freysong was co an Sc tod with tho f reccing c;j-
porinents.

In tho case of the defense Dr. 3ecker-Freysong doclored hia-
aelf .if>t ;o had been ordored to attend during part of tho discussions
between Professor Dr. Hippko aid Dr. Hnicher in Juno 1942. Iho pub¬
lic prccocutoro could not prove this fact. They have up to hhis date


11293


JhL;* IS- ^-:^-19-6-Groes (to,;)

Court 1


aot ... dc - - s rah statement. h'obody but Dr. 3ocho;'-7reyscn£ know
6h..t ..o vss nrcaect at the diecuosion part of the tiiic, of which
the rosecution knew. So cd.iit.ed this fact bofor- the Tribunal,
without (.ureas and uentioned it ae an cxone-atijjg circuaatunco bo-
ca-.se neither he nor the defence considered this ns objective facto
constituting a crindnd action, on the contrc/y: ?or the infor.iction
-■hica hr. Socher-Treyaing received in the coureo of this diacuocior.
i;nvo l.i:i the i_preesion, that thooo exporinentB, \a ioh had been
plcanod entirely without hia aasietanee were altogether legal.

Oao reason for ouch a view war that ho reclined that hia nup-
orior, Soaoi'aloboratabsarzt Prof. Dr. Hippke had aiproved tho oug-
. .-cation aa auheitted.

2h\ Dodier-Prejaent did not hoar *jything about the execution
Of tho i. dividual experimenta.

Tho fire- tii:e ho heard afc<ut it *;oin vaa tdica, after the- had
been concluded, Prof. Dr. Eolzloehnor gavo a locturo during tho
Iwftvcffo aoeting concerning tho cold oxperiuonto in October 1942
in . n*nbc.-", Thia ledture concerned on one hand' 0 ^>ortoncca frcti
actual c-ipvrocko and on tne othor h and roaulte of oxporinontn with
ani.:ola and o^jeriencca gathered froc hgl a n experiuonto. Tho lact
nart of tho locture did not reveal that thooo opporiijanis woro at
ai criminal.

To no it aeoja particulaly iaport-nt that the realization, tha
tho ju. se.i: of Holzloohner's report uay not be bneed on thoae facto
"hich arc aou hnown about Sascher'a experiments. 2hio locturo hoe
to bo judged according to the facta down at the ti_e, and thie Imov.*-
ledgo LL: not make it nossible to uaderatuid fra*, hhe lecture, that
the cjwrlinati which were described night hare been at all oriuinaL.

2tc .articipati* n Cf tne defendant 3r. 3ecl:e>-:F r ey 8 er.g in tho


frooriu; e;pe -iuents therefore only conai6ts of participation in c


13 Jul-ix-::J-19-7-<Jro«s (Lea)
Conrt 1


discaasica to l hich he was ordered by bis supremo chief, Genoral-
oberatbbsurrt Prof. Dr. LiTpfce, which revealed nothing to indicate
a cr t a ir .al plan.


m?5


19 «Jul- f -^B-20-l-Ieonard (Int. Lea)

Court No. I.

It was also limited to listening to a lecture which did not reveal any¬
thing about crimes which had been comitted. This lecture was, at the
s^te time, attended by 90 physicians and scientists, who, except for
four other defendants, all er.joy ce-olete free dor and some of whoa
hold professional do's it ions.

The defendant !>r. Becker-^reyseng can therefore not be held
responsible for the freezing experiments in partied n r, or for oartlc-
ioatlng in criminal freezing experiments, b’sed on these circumstances
alone.

To deternine that his participation in these experiments, inso¬
far as one can csll it participation at all in view of the circumstances
set down, should be criminal could only be established provided Dr.
reckon-Freyseng considered the planned experiments criminal and yet
participated under these circurstvices.

A hia cannot be established, however, from the evidence.

Before saying anything further about the experiments Dr. Becker-
Freyseng is accused of, which allegedly concern experiments with typhus
wvd other bacteriological problems, the following should be pointed out
fundamentally:

The Prosecution left out two decisive facts connlctoly In their
entire c-se in chief. First of all, the f-ct th-t Dr. Becker-Freyoeng
did not hold the Dosition of referent for *vi?tion Sfedicin© from Aigust
19L1 to Viy 19L11, but was merely an assistant referent under the refer¬
ent Professor Dr. Anthony. Tho Prosecution presented their case ontirely
"s if Dr. Bccker-Freyseng had been the only referent. In fact, they even
made hin chief of a research institute for aviation medicine of his own,
*hich had been invented for the Prosecution.

The defense proved, on the other hand, that Dr. 3eckcr-Freyseng
Wss "alnly responsible for the jobs es assistant referent free August
l 3 Ll to 'Jqr 19!xlt, which had no connection whatsoever with the experi-
-^nts. The referent Dr. inthony dealt with all the other tasks of the
r^'rat for ‘viation 'fedicinc. The defense also Droved that the partic¬
ularly important subject of research assitm-ents was definitely not


11296


18 Ja!-:-¥3-2S-?-Ieon»rJ Tint. lc-»)
Court Wo. I.


bundled \rj Dr. Becker-Preyseng in the referet for Aviation Medicine un¬
til May 19W:, but by Professor Dr. -'nthony.

Ifcre will have to be said about that later on.

"Concerning the experiments with bacteria which the Prosecution
brought forward, they did not maintain that Dr. 3ecker-Freyseng took on
active nart in these experiments. In contrast to the high altitido and
freezing experiments, the Prosecution reported about experiments with
typhus and epidemic Jaundice which is, in their opinion, supposed to bo
the basis for the responsibility of the defendant Dr. Becker-Freyseng.

They submitted a number of docusents, some of which boar the
file numbers of tho referat for »riation Ifcdicine. On top of that,
they mentioned, in an oral ploa, that the Luftwaffe issued assignments
for research on these subjects, that the research assignments were dealt
with by Dr. Becker^Freyseng, and that he even gave orders to tho research
workers to carry out the oxoorlrents which tho Prosecution considers
criminal.

On the other hand, the following points have boon Droved by tho

defense:

1) During the yore 19!*1 to May 19 Uj, Dr. R ckor-Frcyscng, who
nt that time was assistant referent, was by no means in charge of re¬
search Assignments within tho referat for ftviation ifcdicino.

2) Part of tho documents submitted by tho Prosecution, in their
c*so in chief, do not bear the file notation of the refer->t for Aviation
Ifcdicine but that of the referat for Hygiene.

3) The c?se in chief of the defense has shown further that, al¬
though all research assignnents were informally dealt with by the referat
for *viation Medicine, i.o., for purely technical and formal reasons,
factual work was carried out in the referat for Aviation ifcdicine only
with regard to research assignments concerning aviation medicine.

All the research assignments in other fields of research wore
factually dealt with at the respective competent referats.

I:) On the other hand, »11 research aasigments given to Professor
Hanger. do not concern aviation medicine at all. They ’re all ir. the fiold


11297


13 Jul-A-lB-20-3-Leor.»rt (Inti Lea)
Court So. I.


of hygiene =nd bacteriology. Only the referent for Hygiene, however,

■?s cospetent to deal with the natters.

Thus, it is certain that Dr. 3ecker-Freyseng was not engaged
in these research aesignsents until V*y 19hh, ^nd that, until that
d*te, he knew nothing whatsoever about then. That further proves that,
ft»r '/ay he likewise dealt with the research assignments to

Professor H”gcn only in fons*l resDects, that the factual work was car¬
ried out »t the Hygiene ft-*fcr«t.

Furthermore, it is d roved that the research "s si patents, which
h’s been stressed so greatly by the Prosecution, were in reality re¬
search subsidies which were granted to the various scientists in order
to facilitate their work. Those research orders contained neither
directives nor Instructions regarding tho execution of the work. Its
execution was not checked upon, such • control was noithor custonnry
nor necessary, nor was it at all possible. In view of purely professional
reasons. Aithin tho scope of these research coeraissions, fin»l reports
wid occasionally into mediate reports were rendered by tho scientists.
Neither In the intonwdlate resorts nor in tho final reports were there
contained any details regarding tho work which h»d been conplotod.

Even ir the defendant Dr. Beckcre- p reysong had dealt with the
research orters glv»n to Professor Harden, he neither could have given
hin instructions nor directives for it, nor would ho have como to know
any of the detslls.

For this reason, the defendant Dr. Sockcr-Freysong cannot bo
ride responsible for mything that is supoosed to h-ve been done by
Professor H*agon.

But, besides these research assignments, the Prosecution his
net been -ble to subcit further evidence which enn prove »ny connection
between Dr. Beckere-Freyscng -r.d the work of Dr. Ha^en.

I should like to dr-w your attention to the following points of
the evidence given by the defense*

Dr. Becker-Freyscng, rhoa the Prosecution accuses of being res¬
ponsible for the alleged criainal experiments of Dr. Haigcn, has been

1129S


IB Jul-A-lB-20-!i-Leon=rd (Ir.fc. Lc-)
Court Mo. I.


examined here w * witness. He stated - in accordarce with the evid¬
ence Just submitted - that Dr. Becker-Freys eng h« nothing -t -11 to
do with this work.

The defense is hereby convinced that the evidence did, in no
w*y, prove Dr. BeckereFreyseng's knowledge of »ny det-ils concerning
the work of Dr. R»-gon, to s*y nothing of his boing resDonsible for
-■ny experiaents c-rried out by Dr. Haegen.

Before we le-ve this point, I should like to m-ko the following

clo-r:

Dr. Becker-Fn-ysong is to be cade responsible for -n -Urged
criminal “ctivity of Professor Hn-gen. In order to motivate, however,
such " responsibility, the Prosecution ought to have proved, first of
-11, th»t Professor Hoagcn actually did coanit crimes ng-inst hun-nity.
But the Prosecution completely foiled to do so.

Tho Prosecution h«e tried to orovo this responsibility bv sub¬
mitting « series of docurmnts -nd by tho testimony of several witnesses.

The c-so of the defense h-s shown thoroughly that tho documents
were not »ble to Drove -ny cridn-1 -ctivity by Dr. H--gen.

The testimony of tho witnesses w-s so vagua -tid confusing that
it is even loss Dossiblo to base -ny finding thoreon.

In 'Tdcr to opoose this extreooly weak basis of the evidence
for -n alleged criminal ctivity of Dr. H-agcn, given by the Prosecution,
the defense summoned Dr. H.-fgen himself wj » witness. I sh-11 not go
into tho dot-lls here of Professor H--«gen's highly scientific testimony,
but one fact cert-inly is obvious:, th-t his statement h-s not been re-
outed, his testimony th-t his work in the Natzweilc-r concentration c

"-S purely scier.tifio and entirely unobjectionable fren - nedic-l point
of view,

ill these reasons exclude entirely aqy responsibility of Dr.
Pecker-Freyseng «s f*r -s Ka-gen's work on typhus is concerned.

Kith reg-rd to the criain-1 exoerirents in the field of epidemic
-undice, alleged by the Prosecution, I should likr to refer to the f-ct
' hafc the ^Ttw-ffe Jfcdic^l Lnsoectorate did not even is-ue -s much -s a


11299


18 Jal-‘-lF-2t>-£-Iieon=rd (Int. Le=)
Court Mo. T.


rese-rch -ssignaent here.

This me-ns, fron the very beginning, th-t there is no connection
between Dr. Becker-Freyseng ond those exrericents in this field. The
only rese-rch -ssignaent sentloned in the tri -1 w -3 issued by the Ffeich
Research Council.

Beyond this, the st-teaent of the Prosecution’s own witness,
Edith Schmidt, proves th-t Professor Hppgen in this sphere did not con¬
duct ~ny experiinents on hirr-u; beings *t /'ll.

The documents -nd the testimony by Dr. H-cgen show, however,
th»t it vis pl-nned to experiment cn hua-n beings. But the plnnning of
such experiments does not constitute * crime. It is much more docisivo
on wh»t kind of Demons such experiment w»s to be conducted.

Tho Prosecution Vre fssortod th-t it »«$ Professor H-rgon's
intention to conduct experiments on orisonom, but It failed to prove
this. Cn the othor h-nd, tho defense h-s proved, through Professor
H--gon himself, th-t thoso tr-rsfor experiments were to bo c-rried out
with volunteers of tho studor.ta' coBD-nlcs of the Luftwrffo. Such n
schema, however, constitutes no crime "gainst hua-nity, but is strictly
within the fr-ccwork of wh-t is -drdas-ble intern-tion-lly. But, ovon
with these leg -1 pl-na, the defendant Dr. Beckcr-Kreyscng h-d nothing
wh-tsoev. r to do.

In sirTr?-ry, it n?y be seid concerning this group of experiments
th-t there exists no proof th-t -ny crisin-l experiments were carried
out or th-t they were plrnnod. Even wore, we l*ck -ny proof to tho
effect th-t Dr. Jtecker-Freyscng h«d anything to do with thoso problems.

The cost import-nt ch-rge -gainst Dr. Bccker-Frcysenp is hia
psrticip-tion ir. the se--w-tcr experiments.

In this reg-rd, the Prosecution did not el»lm th-t Dr. Becker-
r revs eng actively p-rtlcip-tcd in the experiments, but it called his
sh-ring in their planning - crimin -1 *ction th-t violates the lsws of
hum-r.ity.

The only thing th-t is true is th-t Dr. Beckcr-Freyseng, -s

referent for svi-tion ifcdicine in the Office of the Chief of the ‘Sadie nl


11300


I? Jul-A-’©-20-6-Leonard (Int. lc->)

Court No. I.

Inaoector-te of the Luftwaffe, In the course of his offici-1 duties,
o-rticippted In the planning of the experioents thnt were c-rricd out
in the sparer of 19ldi -t D«chm. The defense cl-insa ?nd h-a proved
th=t these experiaenta did not viol.M those sedlc^l orinciples th»t
••re to be '•polled in =edic>*l experissnts, neither in their planning
nor in their ctul pwrfore^r.ce. »ctuelly, they were in .-ccordxnce
with those standards -nd norns in every respect.

The following rust be s»id In this connection:

In general, the following dea-nds -re to be n-de in reg»nl to
aedlc.’l exneriaonts:


113:1


18 July-47-A-AI-21-l-Pert45 (ter.) (SI)
Court Jo. 1


1 ) The experiments suit be necessary In order to clarify the
question et issue.

2 ) "he experiment oust be thoroughly prepared by study of literature,
animal experiments, end self-experiments.

3) The experimental sub Jects must be rolunteers.

4) During the experiment proper the rules of nodical skill and
medical care ssust be observed.

In the opinion of the defense, nil these conditions were fulfilled
in this case.

Since, however. Dr. Becker-Treyslng participated in the planning of
these experiments only ns was officially concerned with them in his
capacity of Referent, I shall, in the following be able to touch only
briefly on all matters pertaining to the actual ex ecution of the
experiments.

As a preliminary remark I should like to stnto tho following!

I do not consider it my task to lecture again on this whole nspoct
in my final pUn. On the contrary. X deliberately confine nysolf to
clarifying those questions only, which are, in my opinion, docieivo.

At the noaent I consider, one factor abovo all, mntcrlnl. It is
the following quostlon:

Vns everything done, when the senwr.ter-experlments were being planned,
to furnish all data required for establishing the necessity of the
cxperlmentet

And I think I can definitely answer this question in the affirmative.

The Defense has proved the high sense of responsibility applied
to the Inquiry on the necessity of the seawater-experiments. Scientists
mt international reputation, like Prof. Dr. Spplnger and Prof. Heubner,
were consulted, and they definitely answered this question in the
affirmative. Kore can not be expected or demanded in the way of a
sense of


11302


15 Jul L7-:-*?-21-2-?errin (Le») (V3)
Court So 4 Ii


responsibility. In sy opinion, the sere fact th-»t these scientists were
'sked their opinion on the issue in question shews th^t everything w-s
done on the part of the Chief of the tttdic*! Service of the Luftwaffe
T.d his office to resch the right decision in this question.

Kith regard to the purely objective judgment of the sca-wctcr ex¬
periments and their necessity, I should like to refer to the statements
made in ny closing brief for Dr. Becker-Freysing.

't this point, I should, however, like to add the following:

The Prosecution has tried to make out th»t it was the Durposo
of these sca-w'ter experiments to decide whether Bsrkatit removes the
s'lt from sen-water. This contention of tho Prosecution h»s in no
been proved. I oust stress here "g’in, r»st erohatically, that this
was never tho purpose of the sea water experiments.

All people concerned realised th't Berk a tit does not removo the
salt froB son water. The question which w«s to bo clarified and which
necessitated the experiments w-s r-*thor the following:

Under tho action of the Vitrei ns contained in Borkatit, will tho
kidneys bo capablo of producing an urine with > higher sodium chloride
concentration than is normally the c-*so?

Dr. Eroinger has answered this question neither In tho affirmative
nor in tho negative; ho stated that this question could be decided only
by experiment.

In addition there w«e enother question to be decided, as to whether
in c a so of shipwreck it would be roro recomendable to endure thirst, or
whether marooned fliers should be advised to drink small quantities of
salt water. In 19lx2 - 19lrli this question *-s also raised in the US' and
England -> r .d there too, human experlaents were carried out. But all these


11303


19 Juiy-A-A::-21->Fcrrin-Lea (FL)

Court !'o. I


individual qUwStions Merc only part of the great issue, of hoi' ship¬
wrecked persons could tx helped to escape the agony and danger of dying
froa thirst, “xsc issues were the basis for the experiments conducted

in 1944.

It. ay opinion it is not admissible, to-day to arbitrarily corstrao
another issue, end to contend on the basis of such a never existing
issue, that those experiments were not necessary.

These i*3-died issues alone necessitated the experiments.

Other issues to which I want to sake short reference,were added
these.

Until 1$44 the world lacked an agent to flake seawater drinkable.

Such an agent vza an bbsolutc necessity. Kobody denied even then, that
..OFATIT, developed by the co-defendant Schaofor, would have boon an
ideal agent for this purpose. It was, how-ver, equally clear that this
~^ent could only be rermufactured by withdrawing the necessary raw mato-
rial, namely silver, Iroa other wnr-essential uses.

Furthonsorc, it was rot denied that Bcrkatit did not require in the
saas ensure raw .saterials in short supply. Another circu.aut~.nco to bo
considered, -a thrt Serkntit could have been produced in existing plants,
wnoreas it vejU have been necessary to erect n«n plants for the oro-
dacti^ of ’.'of.~tit. Accordingly these Uchnic-1 reasons favored tho in¬
troduction of Dcrkatit. It can hardly be denied that it was nooessnry
for a medical o.'.'icer conscious of nis responsibilities in war, to
consider these reasons when reaching a decision. Incidentally, tho export
of the prosecution, Prof. Ivy, also stated that these jvasons w-ro ab¬
solutely worthy of consideration.

«ccordin:,l - it had to be clarified, whether Bcrkatit could not,
after -11, be introduced for distribution to persons facing tho ri3k of
shipwreck, ~nd the inquiry into this Question was -.11 the oorc necessary
s, accordi. : -o the opinion of Prof. £ppinger and Prof. Heubner, r-
k 1 tit

- 11304 -


1 = July -i?-.s-.u<-2!-4—?erri.'.-(L-2)
COURT :


apparently cont-lined Vitamins which elloin .ted the risks
lr. urred by human beings "hen drinking seav ter, Whether
the opinion 02 ’ the experts, Heubner -nd Spplnger, was right
or not, could, at that tine the same as to-day, only be es¬
tablished by experiment.

Hence if the defendant Dr. Seeker-Freyseng lr. 1944, hav¬
ing examined all these factors and having apollei all
precautions possible, became convinced that the experiments
could not be avoided, and if, from this viewpoint, In his
offlolal o/.pnclty ns a consultant (Referent) he reported to
hla highest authority at that time, Prof. Dr. Scnroeder,
that he consideres the experiments as necessary, then, In my
opinion, he can In no way be char ,ad under criminal law on
th.t account.

Therefore, lr. my opinion, It has to bo proved that
Dr. Beoker-Freyseng considered zhaee experiments nocossary
.and that ho was entitled to consider them as necessary.

.etd this question llone car. be made the basis for an
inquiry into his guilt under criminal law.

Zlth regard to this point, I would like In conclusion
to refer to the testimony of Prof. Dr. Volhard. This world-
famous Physician, this research-scientist, recognized as
such In International circles, upon whoa, only a few weeks
ago, on the occasion of hie ?5th birthday, the highest
Sermar. decor .tion of science w is bestowed, namely the .roetha-
2 ed. 1 l for .c*t jid 5clar.ce, a ceremony In which nearly all
European -ountrles, also eterica. Joined, stated before this
High Tribunal and I quote:

■I regarded It as sign of a sense of responsibility that

In view of the increasing flying-accidents, the sea-


11325


16 July 47-«-.JC-21-6-Perrln-(L*a)

CO'JilT I

emergency-question ’■'as taken up ind these experiments

J ere launched. ■

Ir.sof -r, I consider the evidence established, that the plan¬
ning of these experiments was in no way objectionable.

I need only point out briefly that Dr. Schafer, on
orders of the ..edical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe, carried
out the necessary studies of literature, and that Dr.

Schafer carried out experiments onhlmself and on other
persona, and animals, on a small scale, and that the some
prjrequlsi:as had once more been given by the co-defendant
Dr. 3elglb6ok who had been ordered with the execution of
those experiments. Thus, also, in this case, a second
prerequisite was given for the experiments on other subjects.

The next question to be decided by the High Tribunal
is /hether the experimental subjects were volunteers.

However, also in this case I should like to point out
that the following may be dooislve:

Dr. 3ccker-Frey8eng, merely took part in the planning
of those experiments. He neither selected tho experimental
subjects, nor did he ever see them.

It cannot be decisive for the Judgcnnt of a person's
guilt, who, like Dr. Eeckor-Freyseng, merely took part in
the planning of an experiment, whether tho experimental
subjects were, inxfcct, volunteers; it is m oh more decisive
for such a person vheth.r he wanted such experiments to be
carried out on persons who volunteered. The evlience here
Iso proved clearly in this direction, that Dr. r^cker-
Freysertg, together with the other phvslcians, only did think
of volunteers. Beyond that, proof has been submitted that
for this particular experiment, it was an absolute necessity,
:ro - radical reasons, for the experimental subjects to bo


11305


IS July 47-<a-6-?errln- (Lea)

COS -7 I

volunteers. I believe that this Iribunal may well concedo
that for a scientist, with the fame as the defendant Dr.
5ecKor-Freys eng had, this medical reason sufficed, that he
requested the experimental .-'Orsons to oe volunteers.

Beyond that the evidence here has clarified unmis¬
takably, that the experimental subjects were, in fact,
volunteers.

accordingly I consider th evidence established to the
effect that the the planning of these experiments was in
no way i crime against humanity.

Finally I must point out that the experiments In them¬
selves wore in no way a torture for the experimental subjects,
and tnat the possibility of Injury was out of the question,
considering the directives given to the head of the experimen¬
tal station, Prof. Dr. 3olglgbdck.

.'hen the expert, Prof. Ivy, who had been called by tho
prosecution, ioclared hero, ha had never heard that
through * hunger or thirst-experiment an experimental subject
had been permanently injured, or that such an experiment
resulted in oath, then this statement can be unrestrainedly
accepted oy the defense.


10 Jul-i-UE-22-l-lfceh=n (Int. Le»)

Court No. I.

Dr. Becker-rreyseng *lso knew what Frof. Ivy stated here before the
Tribun-1. Therefore he had every right to regard tb.se experiments
~s being not dangerous.

It is htrdly necessary to det-il the execution of the experi¬
ments themselves.

Dr. Becker-Freyseng did not t-ke »ny part in the execution.

Concerning this point I should like to refer only to Prof. Dr.
Volh*rd's testimony. He w-s «sked whether he would c»riy out the so«-
w*ter experiment «gain, under the s==e conditions which were the b-'sis
of the experiments -t D"ch»u.

He 'nswered this question in the »ffircative, *nd then ho des¬
cribed »n •xperiment on 5 of his associates amongst them his own young¬
est son.

No asdic*1 expert in the whole world would be able to give n
s»re convincing Juatific-ticn for the planning of sn lrrepro?chsblo
experiment.

"Then* c»nnot be any talk of lnhua-nity or brutality that was
the conclusive expl-n-tion of the 75 yo-rs old scientist, Prof. Dr.
Volh*rd, concerning the question of tho senator oxporlnonts.

Tour Honors, In order to declare Dr. Bockcr-Freyseng's owrtic-
ln«tlon in the planning of the soa-w-tcr experiments • crime, it should
be ascertained that Dr. Becker-Freyseng did not think these experiments
necejsary; it should further be -ocort'lived, that he w-nted theso ex¬
periments to be carried out on persons who did not volunteer for them,

*nd finally it should have to bo rscertoined, that these experiments
"° re crimes wr-inst hua-nlty. However, »s the evidence h-'S shown, it
h *s not been proved th-t -ny of these assertions -re correct. Cn the
contrary I consider the evidence established th"t concerning this partic¬
ular see-w»ter experiment, it w*a the question of * carefully planned ex¬
periment, carried out irreproachably -nd scientifically, and according to
strict scientific rules, which 1 -ck =11 the ch*r--cteristics f » crime
M'inst hum-nity.

However, in =ny c-'sc, the defer.d-nt Dr. 3eckep-?reyseng, like


11306


18 Jul-»-WB-22-2-Meehan (ir.t. Lea)
Court He. I.


every defendant. Is here before the Tribunal under the protection of an
assured Innocence, =s the Military Tribunal II formal -ted it in the
trial against the Field-llarshall Ifllch. 's long *s there is the
slightest doubt in the guilt of a defendant, he has to be acquitted of
the charge against hin, according to the sound principle of the 4mer-
ican legal idea:

"In dubic pro reo"

•nd when passing the Judgwnt »s to the guilt or innocence of the de¬
fendant, his personality rust not be disregarded. However, I c*n
h»rdly describe the personality of the defendant Dr. Becker-Freyseng
bettor, thrn his hold lecturer -nd superior of n*ny years did, the present
Ordinarius for physiology ’nd collaborator of the U>dic*l Centre Heidel¬
berg, Prof. Dr. Strughold. Sunning up, I c“n any, that Bcckor-Freysong
Is a highly intelligent scientist, tr'ined according to superior prin¬
ciples, who by w-y of his scientific work, 'nd in particular by bis
h role self-experiments, "ccosollshod gre-t things for the progress of
hun«nity in his youth, and who will fill his ol"ce, algo in the future,

"s a physician, oagor to help, and as ’ careful scientist".

Your Honors, nlo-so consider the defendant's personality, as
well a S the facts stated during the c'so, a n d you will cow to tho con¬
clusion th-t in view of the evidenco offered hore, the notion of tho
defense is Justified, which is, to *>cqult the dofond'nt Dr. Bockcr-Frey-
sc-ng of an the counts of the Indictment charged against him.

THE PPSSIDFHT: The -rgurents on beh-lf of the prosecution and
-n beh-lf of the dofense counsel hpve not been completed.

The Tribunal will be In recess until 9:30 o'clock tomorrow
-.-ming when the Tribunal will hoar tho personal st-tenents by tho de¬
fendants.

THE v-F5H*L: The Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30 o'clock
t-rorrew rrmirw.

( A recess was taken until 19 July, 19li7, 0930 hours.)


11309


(Int.^rnilk)


Official Transcript of the American
Military Tribunal in tho matter of

th: United States of America against
• • •

Karl 3rnndt, ot al, defendants, sitting
• #

at Nuernberg, Germany o.a 19 July 1947,

093° Justice Beals prosiding.

THE 11ARSHALL: Persons in tho court room will please
find their seats.

The Honorable, tho Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in saesion. God savo tho
u nitod States of "acricr. and this honorable Tribunal. T horo
will bo order in tho court.

THE PICSID2KT: Ur. Marshall, will you asoortain if
tho defendants aro all present in court.

THS MARSHALL: May it please your Honor, all tho
defendants aro present in tho court.


THS PHSSILEKT: Tho Soorotary Gonoral will note for
the rocord tho prosenoo of all tho defendants in court.

This morning tribunal llo I has oonvonod in order to
hoar statements by tho defendants in person. It is not
obligatory upon any defendant to make a statement if ho


doos not dcsiro to do so. Tho privilege of making such a
personnel statement is accordod to such of tho defendants
as wish to avail themsolvo3 of that privilege. Tho defen¬
dants sitting in tho first row will make their statements,

•

those who d>sixa.to do 30, from thair placos. Tho micro-

y'v T n

phone In front of each defendant. Any

defer/^aht who docs tiot . desire to make any statement will
simply-inform the tribunal of that fact when the microphone

\ oV. • / /

is pluo-d in position ^sfora him. Thj defendants in tho
roar row,when their namo3 are called, will step to the
-ntrance of the dock where the microphone will be in


U310


19 'uiy-Jf-IL-l-2-?03tcr (-nt, 7rnnk)

Court I

position and will n-Jco their statements from that point.

The defendants will speak rathor slowly and distinctly in

making thoir statements, so that it any bowoll and fairly
interpreted. The Tribunal will now proceed to hear the
personal statements on the part of the defendants. A3 I
call the nano of each defendant, ho will proceed with his
statement. Karl Brandt.

Defendant KA3L BHAJTDT: There is a word which scorns

so sinplo, and that is the word order, and yet how atrocious

*

are its implications, how inmoasurablo are the conflicts
which hido behind tho word. Both affected mo, to obey and
to give orders, and both arc responsibility. I nra n doctor
and before my conscience there i3 this responsibility as
the responsibility towards non and towards life, 'iiito
soberly, the prosecution charged crimes and murder and thoy
rniood tho quostion of ny guilt. It would bo without
3ignificanoo if friends and patients were to shiold mo and
to speak well of me, saying 1 had helped and I had honied.
There would bo many examples for ny actions during danger
and my readiness to holp.

But all that 13 now different. ?or ny sake I shall

not evade thoao charges. But there is tho attempt of human

justification which is ny duty towards all who bolievo in
• •

me, who trust in mo and who rolici upon no as a man, as a
doctor and as a superior.

I have never regarded the hen,an experiments in what-

*

ever sh'-pe I night hevo meant it as a natter of course,
not even whan it was without danger. But I affirm it for
the sake of reason that it is a necessity. I know that from
these contradictions will ariso. Tho things that disturb
thi conscience or a medical nan, and I know tho inner feeling
that urges one when an order or when obedience decide tho


i


11311


19 Jal7-M-IL~l-5-yostcr (Int.Frank)
Court I


-or•'.la of any type.

It is innaterial for the experiment wh-n this is done
with or against the will of the parson concerned. For the
individual the event re an ins contradictory, just as contra¬
dictory as ay •’ctiais as a doctor seen to be if you decide

•

to isolate it. The sense is ouch deeper than that. Can I,

as an individual, reaove ays elf fran the conaunity? Can I

be outside "nd without it? Could I, as a part of this

conaunity, evade it by saying I want to thrive in this

• #

community, but I don't want to bring any sacrifices for it,
not bodily »*nd not with ny 3 0ul. I want to keep ny cor.scicnco
cl^ar. Let then try how they can get along. And yet we,
that conaunity, nr- socohow identical.

Thus I oust suffer of these controversi-s, boar tho
oonsoquonocs, even if thoy roaain inoonprehenslblo. I oust
bear then as the fate of ny life which allocates to ne its
tasks. The sense is tho motive, devoted to the community.

If for their sake I an guilty, then for their sake I will
justify ny3olf.

Thorc was war. In war ono'3 actions are all alike.
Sacrifices of war affect us all and I stand by thorn. But
-re these sacrifices ny crine? Did I kick the requirements
of humanity and despise then? Did I step across human
b-ings and their lives as if th;y were nothing? Yes,
they will point at ne ~nd cry 'Euthanasia' — and wrongly;
useless, inoapabla, without value. But what did happen?

Did not Factor B odolschwingh in thi middle of his work
at Bethel last year say that I was an Idoalist and not n
arinin-* 1. How could he do such a thing? Hero I an,
subject of the nost frightful charges, v&at if I had not
only been a doctor but n nan too without a heart •'nd
without a conscience. V/ould you believe that it was a


11312


19 July-;r-iL-1-4-703tor (Int‘.?rank)
Court I


pi-".sure to ae when I received tho order to start 3uth,anasin?
*" or years I had labored at th~ sick-bed and every patient

was to go like a brother, ovary sick child I worried nbout
as if it had boon ny own. And than that hard fate hit me.

Is that guilt?

*/as it not cy first thought to linit the scope of

•

Zuthanasia? Did I not, the moment I was inoludod, try to
find a linit and find a cure for the incurable? V/jro not
the professors of the Universities there? ’.Vho could there
be who was noro qualified? But I do not want to spo-Jc of
these questions and of thoir oxocution3. I defend myself
against the charge of inhunen conduct and base philosophy.

In the face of those charges I fight for r.y right to humane
treatment. I know how conplicatud thi3 problon is. 'Vith

•

tho deepest devotion I have tortured nyaolf again and again,

but no philosophy and no oth-r wisdom helped here.

Thero was the decree and on it there was ny nruno. I do

not say th"t I could have foienod sickness. I do not live

this life of cine in order to evade fate if I neot it.

And thus I affirmed Suthanasia. I realize the problem is

as old ns nan, but it is not a cricc against non nor against

humanity. Here I cannot believe like a clergyman or think

" 3 * Jurist. I an a doctor and I 3oe tho law of nature ns

being the law of reason. Free that grew in ny heart tho

love of non and it stands before ny conscience. When I

•

talked to Pastor Bodelschwingh, the only serious warning

•

voice I cv:r net personally, it seemed at first as if our

thoughts were far apart, but the longer wo talked anl th3

•

r.ore we came into the open, the closer and the greater
became our naitual understanding. At that time wo weren't
concerned with words. It tvas a struggle and a search far


11313


19 J oly -”-IL-l-5-7ost-r (int. Frink)
Court I


beyond th-. humn 3copo in d sphere. Shan the old Pis tor

Bcdelschwingh of tar anny hours loft :io rind wo shook hinds,

h_ siid as his last word, "that was tho hardest struggle of

cy life. 1 ' To hin is wall is to no that struggle rominod,

md it ronninod i probloa too.

If * wore to siy to-day that I wished that thi3 problon

had n-v^r hit oo in its trenendous drinatic force, then this

could bo nothing but superficiality in order to niko it

raorc canfortablc for aysolf. But I live in ny ti/BO and I

experience that it is full of controversies everywhere.

Sonowhere wo ill ruist mko a stmd.

I or. deeply conscious before ny3olf that whan I siid

•

'Yes' to Suthinisii I did that in ny deepest conviction,

ju3t is it is iy conviction today, that it wio right. Death

cm noon relief. i>aith is life - Just as auoh is birth.

Never was it leant to be nurder. I boar this’burden but it

*

is not tho burden of crine. I boar this burden of nine,
though, with i heavy heart 03 ny responsibility. Before it,
I survive ind piss, and before ny conscience, as i nan md
is n doctor.


U32li


19 Jul-K-VB-?-l-Aralnger (Int. Uibertdl)

Court So. I, Cw So. 1.

TVE PFFSIPFV7: I row c»11 udor the Defendant H-ndloser.

HT>IOSFF: During my first interrogations here in
Suerr.be-rg in ‘ogust, the interrogator cxnl-ined to ne:

First, you h-ve been the Chief of the frjy ifedic»l Service,
"bother or not 70U knew of isorooer exoeriments does not matter hen*.

•s the Chief, you «re responsible for everything.

Second, do not try to come with the excuse th*t -mong other
nations aimil»r things, or the s-me, have h-pnened. We .»re not concerned
with th-t here. The Germ-ns -re under indictment, not the others.

Third, do not rely upon your witnesses. They, of course, will
testify in your f-*vor. We hnvc our witnesses, md we rely upon them.

Those were the guiding principles of the Prosecution until the
1-st d-y of these proceedings. They remained incomprehensible to mo,
bocruao I -.lw-ys believed th-t s criainrl hrdto be . m *n who did wrong,
-nd bee-use I wre of the oDinicn th-t oven the Prosecution h*»d the desire
to be objective, -t lo-st until -ftor the end of the oresent-tion of
orldence. The fin-1 d1o« by the Prosecution, however, told me th-t I
m-do a mist-ke. The sDeech by the Prosecution did not t-ko into -account
the m-teri -1 submitted in ovidonce, but it wre - surrr-*iy -nd - repetition
of one-sided st-t«nents of the Prosecution without t-king into recount
th»t which wre submitted in the course of the presentation of ovidonce
in ny c-ae.

I h-nre full confidence th.-t the High Tribun-1 h-s gained - true
impression of my retivity end of =y -ttitodo. Just re I have tried
throughout .my entire life to fulfill the treks which were put to ee by
fnte, recording to the best of ry crpreity -nd in the full knowledge of
my responsibility, I »lso tried to pres this =»st serious exrain "tion
before this court with the -id of this strongest we-pon which I possessed.
That is the truth.

if there wre -nything which could reconcile me with the ment -1
suffering of the lret months, then it w- 9 to be conscious, to know, th*t
before this court, before the Gere-n peonle, -nd before the woplo of the
*orld. It would become cle-r th-t the serious general ch-igcs of the- Pros-


12315


19 Grainger (Tnt. Uiber-11)

'-curt io. I, C-vse So 1.

ecution *-g-inst the ifcdlc’l Corps of the Gerr.-n ! rr»?d Forces h-vo been
croved to be without -ny foundation.

It c-n be seen how unjust these charges were by the f~ct th-t,
according to ry knowledge, not -g"inst single leading doctor of the
Ger-.an •rued Forces in conb-t or ->t ho re, including my two chiefs of
staff, were -ny charges raised or -ny proceedings initiated. As the
l _ st lfedic-1 Inspector of the ‘rsy, -nd os Chief of the lfcdic»l Service
of the 'need Forces of Germ-ny, I think with pride of all the medical
officers to whose untiring devotion hundreds of wounded a n d sick D«tients
of this dreadful w-r owe their lives -nd cure -nd their possibilities
forexister.ee. Sever <*nd nowhere were the losses of -n ’ rey ‘fcdioal
Cores, vore tn-n those -song the ■ rmy in the Officers of the Gorn-n ’med
Forcos in cTrying out their duties.

Ifore th-n 150 ye-re ago, the guiding orinciple w-s ere-ted for
German nillt’ry doctors nd thoir young successors, "Scientia, Hun-nitati,
Fatrire", "For Science, for Hua-nity, .-nd for the Fatherland.” Just -s
the oodio *1 of-'icors In their entirety ’Iso renained true. That guiding
principlo is in ry thoughts -nd in my actions. May the Joint endoavors
of -11 the nations succeed in recognising the waning of peace, *nd to
-void lr. future the iroe-sur-ble -lisfortuno of war, tbe drc-dful phase
cf rhich, nobody knows better then tne nilitary physic i-m.

THE PPESIDEHT: Tho defend-nt P-ul restock.

r c FEHD‘VT R1ST0CK: I h-ve nothing to -dd to the pertlnont state-
-nts by :ry defense counsel, Or. Pribilla;. regarding the individual
Doints of the indictrent in this tri- 1 , but with reg-rd to the gener-1
ccsition of Gerw-n \*?dical Science during this w-r, there «re « few
words, which I would like to sre-k froo this dock.

•ithin my direct ex-nination, I have -Ire-dy st-ted why I, -s
the Chief of'the so-called Department "Science -nd ffcsc-rch," I under¬
took it to begin to work for oedic-1 science -a 1-te -a 1?1 j 3 -nd 19bli.

‘t that lire the problem w-s to avoid the considerable and -cute danger,
or, -i le.-st to reduce th-t, th-t teaching -nd rtse-rch, -nd with Gere
mjjr's universities, should be completely destroyed, ffhen this had bcc-n


11316


19 Jul-H-®-?—3-ndnger (Int. FV-nk)

Court \'o. I, C-sc So. 1.

nn?vented --t the very 1-st aoaent, there -'rose fron it the t-sk -nd
the duty to ire rove the rt -ns -nd the possibilities of the b-sic re¬
search which h-d beer, aore -nd acre restricted in the process of the
w-r -nd through th^ir dwindling resources; resc-rch in Gtrx-ny would
h«ve been conpletely destroyed. Due to the chaotic development of the
lst v»-r of the- w-r, success w-s cosns’r-tively United, but there w*s
success -r.d there wro * few things which were s-ved beyond the end of
the w-r.

Tod'-/ on the strength of the evidence in this tri-1, I know tho
re-sons which oer-lyscd the work st the tlao. It w-s tho striving for
power on the p-rt of cert-in org-nlx-tlons which used the effective
support of certain oxcu.iv» doo-rtaents who hold tho unrestricted power
of the Third Jteich. It w-s the cl-ia for * tot»litrri-n conduct which
w-s out forward by its org-nix-tions in the c-sc of wh-t they celled
the science of universities, but it wr>s there where wc founded tho
tr-dltlon of Gora-n science n cognised the world over. With reg-rd to
th*t they pursued tho -in -s shorn in sons of the testimonies given in
this tri -1 -nd sobc of the docuamts submitted for * politically direct¬
ed science of their own, which thoy wished to st»rt. Th-t wia tho
re-son why in this trl»l, tho evidence given to you in this tri-1, tho
-ins which I hwv referred to h«d to be without * conolcte success. To-
d-y ->t the end of this tri -1 T know how the situation w-s. ft th-t
tiae, in the* ye-r l^hlj, we did not know of this n-storly c-mouflpgod
-nd, therefor' , so r ry d-ng&reus opponent of th-t p-rt of science which
I syself h-d cooo uo -gainst. Throughout ry life I h-vc never by -ny
eo-ns worked for one fora of - st-tc or -nothcr or for uxy politic-1
D-rty in G'ro-ny, but, solely -nd -lone, for ry patients --nd for rredicel
science.

THZ = PrSITE.Tr: I now c.*>ll upon the Defend-nt Schrooder.


11317


19 Jttl-lMBO-l-Swiels (int. Uiber-U & ?r-nk)

CO'jr* ’lc. I, ~-se >.'o. I*

0"PSID»VT SCTPOEDFFi It i3 v? ry difficult for - defendant to
find righ^ 1-st word here. In aethedic-1, detailed work throughout
the 1*81 oonths, the defense h-s tried to rebut the charges of the Pros¬
ecution.

If the Prosecution states now in its fin-1 ole- th-t details do
not =»tter so auch but th-t the entire complex of questions h.-s to be
considered -s •» whole, one h-s to look -t a-tters -s -t ■> bundle of
sticks, not -s individual branches red twigs of the bundle. If, further¬
more, the Prosecution refers to » sentence pronounced in the F?r Erst
by r n * meric rn itilit-ry Court, by which r J-creese Gener-1 -nd ailit-ry
comrnrvder w-s sentenced only bee-use, ®s « corr.-ndcr, he h-d the respon¬
sibility for 'll the rets of his troops, reg'rdlcss of whether ho
ordered then, knew of then, reproved of then, or did not oven know of
they—if, flentlew'r. of the Tribunal, these principles "re decisive for
proceedings, then I h-vc to *sk, why bother *t *11 to at-rt nro.-ocdings
of th't kind, to nreo-re then, 'nd to coriy thorn out? Those decisions
could be n-dc much aero quickly.

TThnt c*n I, *3 - defendant, e-y -g-inst theso -rgunr.its? Th-t
is O'sily aeon by ry work, ny ret Iona -« - doctor "nd ooldior in 35 yo-rs
of service, '*ot -mbition for glory -nd honor w-s the content of ny
lire's work, but the firm intention to put ry entire crereity, ry full
knowledge, into the service of ny beloved r-th rl-nd, to holp the soldier,
-s » physician, to htd the wounded, which w-r-tiao snd pcpce-tise ser¬
vice hrs created, -s - prretic -1 rhysicire for tne individu- 1 , re well
-s the nedicwl officer for th. c-ss of troops which were in ry c-re.

Th"t w-s the D-th .-nd the go»l of -y work. I do not believe
th-t I h-ve deviated from th’t o-th. c-ycs were -lw.-y3 fixed In the
direction of the fin-1 go- 1 , to heI d -nd to he-l.

T'F PrFSFTT: The dofendret Genzken.

EPEVD-’NT r -ErZKE?l: During ry testimony I 3t-ted before the Trib-
*x-l th-t I took no D-rt in the types of experiments of which I n-s re-
-«ed. I h-vr nothing to -dd to wh-t ry defense counsel Dr. Me rite 1 h-s
s-ii. -or the drr-tion of - huare life I h--vc striven to live decently.


11313


19 Jol-lMB-3-2-0-nieIs (Int. Uibcr-11 & Fr-r.kl
Court So. I, C-so So. 1.


-s - doctor -r.d -*3 » soldier. If ry fatherly concern for ny 2,500 doctors
? nd 30,000 nedic-1 nen w-s ^tt-cked her* in this courtroom, then it is
nevertheless r zy duty to spe-k fron this ol-ce on behalf of those nen
who, in the a-Jority, were decent -nd br-ve doctors -nd a-dic -1 nen.

THE PIEFIDENT: Please spe-k r little slower, the interpreters
have difficulty in tr-ns’-ting.

DEFE!n>*f27 GENZKE’2: I -a procd to have been their leader, »
le»der of those who s-crificed their lives -nd blood with unceasing ef¬
fort to help ae in building up the org-nlz-tipn of the Jfedic-1 Section
of the W-ffen SS, -nd who suffered trencr.dous lessos fron the r-nks of
our coar-des -t the fronts.

The soldiers of tho W-ffen SS h-vc proven historically, in the
foc -1 points of uncounted b-ttlcs during -n uneven straggle, th-t they
were ’bio to meet the best equipped troops on this o-rth -s fn r ns
tr-ining, efficiency, rc-diness of sacrifice, soldierly vnlor, -nd
c onto not of dc»th were concerned, 'lotions of rodem w-rfnrc presented
- picture, prrtly, of rurder -nd horror, -nd, I s-y, on cither side.

Tho w-nte to r-iso his hc*d before God -nd g-lns-y it?

To, the nen of tho W-ffen SS, went into c-ptivity out of
-nguish, out of unho-rd physic-1 *id nont-1 w-r distress. Th-t crptivity
*-3 not free of bloodshed, ill trv-trent -nd dishonor of v-rious kinds.

To the nen of the W»ffGr. S'* there w-s -dded to tho weight of such c-p¬
tivity the frightful rc-liz-tion of the f-ct th-t their supreme cocm-nd-
1 r, Hisrler, h-d misused their clo-k of honor -nd deceived then, th-t
they h-d been ebe-ted -nd then deserted by hio. These docent nen of tho
-ffen S$ cert-inly did not deserve th-t f-te, th- f-tc of being br-nded
wnbers of cri=in-l org-niz-tion.

*V request -nd ry wish is th-t our forcer opponents should
n iizc thc trueide-lisn of these victirs, do Justice to it, -nd give
then b-ck the true belief in justice.

T-Z PresiDENT: The defend-nt Gcbh-rdt.

DErEfiP’l’T GZ-H’HYT: I wish to th-nk the High Tribur.-l for h-ving
’r-r.tcd ne -r. opportunity, in the witness box, to describe ny person -1


11319


19 Jul-K-S£-3-3-Z>-niel3 (Int. Uiberell & ?r-nk)
'curt :.'c. I, C’Sfc !!o. 1.


position in 19L2 In th-t -uch detail.

The historical situation “t th't wise placed « In - tot’lit-
'ri-n st-te which. In tun*., Disced itself between the individual -nd
the universe. The virti*:-s in the service of the st-te were virtues -s
such. Beyond th’t, I did not know whether, in the world neurosis of
this tot-1 w-r, there w-s * country -t -11 where the spirit w-s not
used a s » tool for w»r. Everywhere, in some w-y, values '>r.d solutions
were put in the service of the w-r. 'nd here *gin, in the spiritual
field, the first step is the decisive one.

I nay be permitted to rce-11 that in the- war of nerves, propa¬
ganda with -nd for medic-1 preparations caused the first step, the order
to ex-nine the problen cf sulf-nilaaides.

In ry final statement today I want to describe ry entire attitude
«a p whole. In doing so, cay I utilise the most important of the four
American free dona, that Is to s-y, the freedom of speech, until the very
cr.d, in a enner wherein I will ref rein from any denunciation or from
incrimln-ting others. Without exaggerating the import-nee of try own per-


Howover, any physician c-n only be me-sured according to his idea
of redic’l scionce. B-slc-lly, I was neither - cold technlcrl specialist
nor a pure scientist. I believe that I h-ve always triod, for oxarcplo,
when carrying out surgical experiments, to see every disease as a purely
hurn-n condition of suffering. However, I did not see ny task as sou¬
thing to serve ry own advantage, nor in cheap gestures of theoretical
alt, but, in ry rerson -1 -ctive service, to support the wavering exist¬
ence of the suffering patient. That is how I s-w ry task. Jty goal -s
' physici-n w-s not so much purely technical ther-py for the individu -1
retient, but therapeutical care for the oarticularly underrrivileged
rreun of the poor, the children, the cripples, the neurotics.

I -a mainly interested in succeeding in being believed that it
-s not for morel baseness nor for selfish -rrog-nce of tho scientist
•hat I c.-rre into cont-rt with experiments or. hun-n beines. On the con-
tr-rj*, during the entire period in question I had -ninal experiments


11320


19 (Int. Clber-’ll &• Fr?nk)

Court '*o. I, 1-


c-rrfed out In -/ field of research. However, since I w~s the concetont,
responsible surgic '1 ercert, I rs informed =bout the inndnent exoeri-
rer.ts en hua-n beings In ry surgic’1 fields ordered by the Nriion’l
authorities, after the order w*s given, it wps no longer » question
of stopping these experiments, but the problem wps the method of their
being carried out.

"s »n expert, =y conflicts consisted of the following: For one,
the experiments th't h»d boen ordered h-d to be of nr-cticr'l scientific
v-lue, sod with the ’in th't » preventive should bo found to protect
thousands of injured -nd sick. On the other h»nd, I considered hun?no
safety measures for the experimental subjects most iaport’nt. The foe’}
ooint for no, indeed, w-<s never the purpose md the- go*l of the experi¬
ments, but the c«nr.or in which they were carried out. To do thrt in «
hun*»no w«y, I did not roarin "loof in the speci’1 surgic-1 field; I
did not restrict ryself to theoretical instruction, but I took p«rt
with ry clinic »nd with ’ll its s-fbty measures.


11321


1C joly-K-acJui-GrosB (Xr.t. Ciberrll)

Court To* 1

DH. GZ3EAB2T (Continued): I hope thr.t thin berr3 out the fret
tbnt in ccrrying out experlscnts I tried with the "best of intention#
to act prinerily in the interest of the experlnentrl subjects. Vo
did not trice adv-ntrre of the opportunity which wpb given us tv
Hisnler without liaitrtion. Thrt 1» to s>-y t eurglcr.1 erperinenta
were not followed by others. I believe that ps frr re thrt wpb
possible r.t tbnt period thrt I hive fulfilled ny duty n rn expert
uurely becruse these experlnents did not increase in the surgical
field in r'ite of the crescendo of policy r.t thr.t tine. Ky desire
wr.s to help end not to ,^ve n bed exrrrpls. In choosing tbl.i wry of
Justification, of course, 1 hrve c-.de r decision for nyself. I hope
that up to now I rlwrys stood up under critic!*• fron the very
beginning in foreign countriee without any secrecy but also without
the feel in.; of ;uilt for =y rctivity ne m expert.

Thrt activity of exoerlnente re p cilitrry physician, not on ny
initiative, brought ne in contret with concentration crepe I
cm understand. How hervy th-t deadly shadow oust weight upon anyone
who vre ever -ctivo there. The ghostly phenocenon of thrt sphorc,
which rt that tire wrs unicnown to no ne well, cm be recognised now
in retrospoct in full. V 0 rerlitc the torror in the secretly
negative ideology of extermination coablaod there with the negative
selection of the guards. Only fron the filos of the International
Trial could wo sec th/ t in the end of the 35,000 guard troops there
were only 6,000 SS non unfit for cocbnt. On the rest were scuns,
draftees, foreigners, etc., who to the greatest injustice end the
greatest share were given the erne ualforn that we wore in confect.

As chief of c well known clinic -ad eupoorted by its known
neraures of safety devices, in the interest of the experlceatd
subjects I got in touch, within the frmevork of ny duty as rn expert,
with concentration cren doctors. As far as it was at all ’coasibie I
tried to exclude that rt-osphere in ay field. 3ut, 1 believe it can

li>22


19 Jily-H-3£-k-2-Gro8s (Jcti tlberall)
Court So.- 1


be realized that cy counteractions wen; beyond purely dial col
safety cersurea In the latereat of the expoyjnentrl aubjeete b*-
cr.use of the several thousand foreign li rictea of this concentration
eacp, rr.ocg wboc as we were told here there were at leoat seven
hundred Polish wocen (only two hundred), but of thoae two hundred
alzty of cy expericental aubjecta, as wes ">r oved, at the end of
the w rr were turned over to the Sed Croaa.

At auch as I night try to clarify cy act;.on a ra r. doctor rad to
exoleln ny good Intent 1 ma rnd poeltlon then, here In the anroe
ernner ry final thought ahould be devotod to .self-crltlcisn rad to
concentrate on ry coral obligation.

In e pero'-y on a atrtenent by Eelnrlch Helno w*c cpy aee todry
■It la frte In ltaelf to h-ve been rn SS ura roadless In whr.t
oosltion*. Though I balleva and hope that I did cy duty In thie
confualon which hre been recognized lrtor ra being n =»•* dreadful
one - the confualon between the decent Vrffaiv-SS rnd tfte executive
organization, that I h-ve dono ry duty r.s rr. officer, a vloctor, and
a hunrn beln- - I atlll feel highly responsible rad I have ny own
reatltution frer. thla confualon - cy poaalbllltlca to do thz.t of
courae were ll-lted.

Without looking for sensation I offered to undergo n sclf-oxiiori-
nent ra proof, and that without any aur.rlcrl arfety neaaurea, a*
aoon «a the flrat opportunity existed. Xy rcaponalblllty to all
thoae who were ny subordinates I have enphaalzod. I further hnvo
a responsibility, which I etrte not only now In the die ll^-.t of
cy own defense tut drerdy atntod In May I 9 U 5 on that dry when
Elcnler released ua froc our oath and free our orders and he hlnaelf
left his poet without ray ethical reserve or Ideological foundation.
It was cy endeavor to prevent ray Illegal continuation of the idena
of the SS, to take the burden off the shoulders of our faithful
youth by burning over the SS Generals.


11323


19 JttIy-H-S&-4-3-Gross (Iat. Uiberall)
Court So. 1


lodpy os one Individual I crn only repeat to uy colleagues that
readiness. Sore, In .pite of =y .criouB endeavor, the charge, eeen
to give a different impression. Mry the consequence b effect ne In
guch a wry tha.t I ncy er.e the pxoblen to the younger onee who.
believing in ne. tlao Joined the SS r.s Burgeons. 1 believe thet this
nile of rubble of Oemrny crn not afford to let these good young
doctors perish In carps or in inactivity. Likewise I understand I
hrve ner.aure. which .bould nrke the work easier for the old Oemnn
universities end their ndr.ired tecchers.

If you ;»err.lt ne r lest sentence without referring to ry own p-rson,
in order to su^-rlie vhrt I h,ve found out in order to avoid possible
nistrkes, I would like to say. thrt fro-, basic social conditions the
only patholo.'lcrl e.cene rt thnt tine. a. well r.s today, would be
here e. well a. everywhere, to confuse and cor.blne the spiritual
with tho econonlc rod political concepts. It is a di.rstrous error
to confuse tho organised unnninity of voices with hrraony. Dootru«.
tive criticise educate. people only to bo cnpcblo of cooperation. Tho
private as well as tho public conscience can not be- subjugated to
any official virtue nor to any temporal nornl principles. That can
only find Its place within n God-given order. Thus. In the sense
of a constructive peesinlsr, ne I hare set forth before, this war.
lr. this sense wc alone find consideration for the renlity. full of

suffering, of this social ertastrophy.

Ky last statcr.rr.t of gratitude is to aP to Sr. Seidl who In this
tine which lacks of civil courage, has been our assistant as well


rs for ny colleagues as well ns for nyself.


1132U


19 July u7-«-S-5-l*+’ox3ie( Frank)

Court I

THE PRE'IDEW: Defendant Bloce.

"EFE*' JIT 5ICWS: T have testified quite openly before this high
tribunal that, particularly up to the outbreak of »*r, I was a confirmed
National Socialist «nd follower. I have also stated why I became a party
rsober in 1931, because political conditions in Gemtny at the tine
were moving with giant strides towards a final conflict between Coamin-
isn and National Socialise;, ra a result of the economic chaos and the
impotence of the German governments after 1919. I have caid that I
Joined the National Socialist PArty becauso I rejected the dictatorial
fora of the Communist s; stem. In ny book The rector in the Struggle",
vhlch was put to me by the Prosecution here in cross-examination, I also
explained why I went over to National Socialise. This book, however,
which was published in 1941, at the tine of Germany's greatest victories,
cl-erly shows ny re-xidiation of the Second *"orld ’/nr, to which I do
not refer with a single word, not even a hint, although ny experience
in the First 'torld "nr take up considerable space in that book.

After tho First ’ferld ’tor Gemnny was in great difficulties. The
situation became progressively worse and ooro unbeerablo, when at tho
turn of the thirties the economic crisis spread throughout the world
and even soizsd hold of the United States. ;.t that tine I realized that
in such hard times a nation which is drifting toward despair seeks a
lendor end follows hie in blind confidence os soon rs he con show big
successes.

That is the case of Hitler these were only shat, successes or
temporary successes the German people realized on?.y gradually, only stop
by step, and only at a tine ien it was too l?to to shake off tho dictator¬
ship again b; their own strength . For ye»rs the German people wore
deceived by tho leaders ns to the true situation. In deliberately lying
propaganda Hitler's governmental system until thn last moment kept
pro claiming final victory to the German people, ».vcn in the idntr of
1944, e nd even in tho spri'ig of 1945, when the Reich cabinet and tho


11325


19 July ^7-lE-S' -5-2-Hox8ie( Fr'-nk)
"surt 1


Party Leaders long cnew uh«t a terrible collapse was imminent. This
-overrcental 3ystec thus irresponsibly imposed on the exhausted tody of
the German nation still further useless losses of life end property.

Since the collepse, particularly since the International ’i»r
rimes Trial at yurnherg, we sec clearly that this frivolous method
of betrayal of their own people was an a proprinte part of u.e system¬
atical murder of foreign peoples rnd races by the millions.

I believe tlv-t there is no example in hi-tory of the boundless
confidence of c people in their leader being ro boundlessly misused
xnd difappointed.

The German people were b'-inded in their faith in their Fuehrer,
in a leader who constantly pretended to them and the world a love of
peace, a humane character, a selfless care for the people. Thus tho
German people became the victim of n political gar bier. His unrestrained
supreme power apparently knew only the choicebctwe.cn ruling and destroy¬
ing. ’ itler'o ambition, r. a I knew and Judge it today, had only ono
tin: . t any price to go don in history as a great nan. Hitler achieved
this goal ICO percent: He went down in history ns one of tho greatest
tyrants of *11 time, trcr.cndous in his nsnia for ruling, tremendous
in his brutelity in the ,* chic.ver.ont of his on is, not hesitating even
at the murder of his best fri*nds, his oldest followers, if they wero
in his way.

Hclcdng upon tne blind confidence of his deceived people. Hitler
cr'-f d f system in which til individually, ell sentient of freedom,
all personal opinion of the citizens was nipped in the bud n<d turned
into slaver;*.

V" succeeded in this with tho aid of ? very small circl" of
closest associates', who had fallen under his hypnotic infiuer.ee , in
part perh-ps deceived th^aselves by this an, but who became willing
tools in his h?nd for the enslavement of the German people vid tho
decimation of whcl= nrtiens.


11326


19 July z.7-ii-5T-5-3-Hoxsie(Franr:)
Court I


Un :er the fatal influence of a clever, deliberately lying propa¬
ganda, e gainst which even other countries were as good as powerless,
the German people and the Canaan doctor, too, believed that they were
following an honorable leader and serving a good cause; they all consider¬
ed it the highest moral duty not to desert the Fatherland in times of
emergency and particularly in wartime, especially since this was their
duty to the very extreme, since in this war the life or death 02 the
nation was at issue.

Luring the times of total * arfare, the times of air raids, hungor,
and the danger of epld«rics, working conditions for the German doctor
-ere terribly hard; so difficult that today one can hardly imagine ..ow
shat German doctors accomplished in tlose dcys for friend and foe aliko.
hath ar we twenty doctors hare in this dock are accused Justly or un¬
justly, it is a great injustice in any caso to defame German doctors
in general in ublic, as is constat,tly boing (tone, as former Deputy
P^ich Physicians' Leader I knot, conditions in tho Goman nt-dlcol
profession during the Hitler period, and I must say even today: In its
totality the German medical profession was efficient, decent,
industrious, and humane. Their willingnes to wort: under tho most
difficult conditions that one can imagine, their unselfishness to tho
utrest, thoir courage and thoir helpfulness were •xenplary. Beyond
ail praise u*:.re in particular the numerous old doctors who wore already
living in retirement and who, in spite of thoir great age, returned
to the service of the sick, and those innumerable wctien doctors who,
nsrri-d and often the mothers of many children, exchanged their house¬
hold duties for the difficult wort: of medical practice during wartime.

The whole German people know this, in whore midst and under whoso
eyes the German medical professions spent the years of distress and
fright, and who, therefore, will continue to place unlimited confidence
-n German doctors.

Of my:elf I can say: I have always, particularly during the Hitler


11327


19 July 47-M-S*-5-4-Hoxsie(Frank)

Court I


period, devoted all ny efforts to keeping the aedical profession i-t a
nigh scientific and ethical level and to developing it. And I found in
this effort the full support of all Geroan doctors, including the cost
famous scientists ard chief physicians of aedical institutions, .'ell-
known scholars throughout the world supported this work, which was
above parties and enjoyed an international rfputation.

But in the course of this trial it haw beccne cl<*rcr to co day
by day just how criminal the Hitler systca was, to which I sacrificed
in good faith many years of ny life, and I ar. deeply norod inside me
that I nust confess to ayself: For years I held a responsible poaition
in a systec which to ay I nust curso just as such as curse all those
Mho foroed upon the German people such a tyranny of criae and dobaao-
ennt of can.

It was ay mistake that I stayed in the oost wh.-ro fAtu had placed
R n and in which I had hoped to bo ablo to do good for our p.ople and
ny profession. It would often have been simpler to fivo up this post,

4 -.cn I bogon to roalizo, step by strp, the depravity of tho Third Roich.
If I did not do so , but stayed at ny post until the bitter end, I did
this because I considered it ny duty, especially in the hard tines of
total war, and because egain and again I succeeded either in protecting
the aedical profession froc hi.ro or in preventing eriflbs against human¬
ity. l.ven today I would have to consider it cowardice if I had loft
ny post In 19 Ul or ' L 2 only to put myself in safety or to evade threat¬
ened responsibility.

Ileeljffself free. of.the fullt of ev^h£ying_co.-«Uted or_
further ed prices against humanity^

THE PRESIDE! 7 !: The Defendant !:rjgowsky.

DEFEND.‘JiT WWt^Sri: M 7 attorney and I have cade every effort
during cy exacdnaUon on the witness stend and by b«mm of the cor.sider-
ableevide «ce which ve have submitted to restrict t*« charges 4.ich have
been raised against r.e, just as much as wc tried to 8 ssist in ascertain-

11323


19 July i7-M-S»-5-5-i-:ox8ie! Frank)

Court I


ing the truth.

The outcoce of the trial an! the evidence against tie io in the
hands of the Tribunal and its closing brief, and in the reply the
brief of the Prosecution. I as finely confident on the bosir of this
trial that this high Tribunal will Marine the evidence objectively
and carefully. Thus in ay final speech I serely would like to draw
your attention to the fact that ay life in its entirety was solely
devoted to ay profession and ay science. It was ay r.ir , not by any
eeans to represent sane political ideology, but to go to the university
and to reach the position of a freo and independent doctor and scientist.

Tho Prosecution has charged us, the dofcndr.nta, with destructive
tendencies which were supposed to have bean tho causes of our actions.

I d«claro cyst-If end know th't I an free of such tendencies. They
never occurred to ay collaborators tnd siysolf at nay time. In the "toffan-
SS too, the troops of which were arong the bravest divisions of tho
Gorr.an ara*xi forces, such tcndo«icies nevjr played n part.

As fer as ry own concopts of the cthiccl duties of th< doctor nro
concerned, they -re corfeoi'* d in a book regarding modicnl ethics, and
I b"li«'vo rlways to have acted recording to thu principles of that
book arid livod according to then. !'y Ufc, ry actions and nvy aims wore
clean. That is why now th>.t r.t the end of this trial I can doclnro
niyaolf free of psrsonnl guilt.

THT PR'SirB'T: Tho Tribunal will now bo in mcoss.

( A rocess wss taken.)


1132 ?


Court I

19 Jul 47-*t-7-l-ZEH-Schveb (Uiberall)

ZnZ MARSHAL: Per#ons in the courtroom will please find their seats.

Che Tribunal is again in session.

TER PSESZXSQR: The defendant Rudolf Brandt.

BRTLSTAST RUDOLF B3AHDT: How. after this trial has reached its
final stage, sy conscience ie confronted with the ouestion of whether I
consider myself guilty or Innocent. My rest>onsibility, in my onlnion,
is to be tested by a three-fold Question.

First, did I participate in the experiments directly and actively?

Second, did I at least have ary knowledge of the criminal character
of the experiments on human beings?

Third, what, if I had known, should have been ay attitude towards
HisBlerT

What ay basic opinion is of criaes against humanity I did not only
declare ayself on the witness stand but this has also been testified to
by a very cospetent foreign witness, a Swedish cedical counsellor, Folix
Koersten.

Before this Tribunal and in the full knowledge of what I say I
confess that I abhors - and did abhoro - any crime against humanity in
the years past and during my activity as a so-called personal referont
of Himmler. But I also frankly declare that perhaps during ths course
of these last years my way of thinking was not always as present in ay
conscious mind as it is today, tut I never participated in a crime
against humanity knowingly, intentionally, or with premeditation.

When passing on the letters, orders, etc. which Himmler issued to
third persons, and the result of which was the commission of cruelties
on human beings, I am confident that free the evidence and from tho
content of the various defenso affidavits the Tribunal will be con¬
vinced that that also corresponds to tho truth, that sy real sphere of
power did in no way correspond to the face value of my official position.
My real sphere of cower w*a extremely small. It did not exceed that of
e veil-peid Btcno^acher in the office of am influential man In Germany.
If the Tribunal were to start frea this fact, it would approach reality


11330


Coart I

15 Jul 47-K-7-2-IHM-Schva'o (Uifcerall)


such closer than the prosecution did in its indictment.

I got into contact with Bisaler when I was a young, immature man
vfco cane free a fnsily in nodeat circumstances. Nothing else but ay
ability aa a stenographer, which I had obtained through ay industry,
vas the reason for that, and this wae ay position until the last days
of the Gernan collaose, in apite of promotions in rank. At that tine
I was only too glad to get that Job because it enabled no to support ny
parents with noney.

When I started work with Eiaaier, I got, without internedlate
stages, into an agency, the chief of which woe to coabine, among other
functions, the highest executive powers in his hands a short tine after¬
words.

I ss convinced that I would not sit here under a grave indictment
if I had had the opportunity to continuo =y education, if I had nr.de
a start in a subordinate agency, and had risen little by littlo into a
higher position. Unfortunately, I have alv*y B hoen a lono wolf os long
as I lived, and I never vee fortunate enough to have on older friond who
could have corrected ay political inexperience and ay gullibility.

If, however, through all those yeara, I represented Himmler's
ideology, I did so only because I did not know the criminal part of
Hianlcr's character. Since I lived, so to speak, divorced from the
world around no and was only devoted to my more than plentiful work, I
only learned after the collocse whet stupendous crimes ere to be booked
cn Kicoler's account.

Ihe evidence has shown that I neither knew a concentration caap
sor had anything to do with concentration ceps in ny official capacity;
nor had any influence on the system of the concentration casus, their
administration and management, nor on the treatment of prisoners. T or
this reason I didn't know the meesure of the tragedies which wore enacted
there.

-hose matters, into which I had sufficient insight during my rest-
icso daily activities to permit me to distinguish between good end evil.


11331


Court I

19 Jul 47-X-7-3-i3i-Schvet) (Uiberpll)

were on a plena where they need not shun the light of sun.

I do not deny that some of the documents sutaitted here by the
prosecution went through ny hands, but I do deny - and I pray the
Tribunal say believe se - that I know the contents of the documents,
particularly the resorts end therefore the essential core of the human
experiment*.

I know that appearances are against se. Only these external
appearances led the prosecution to indict se In this trial or.d to pass
their coatent on se during their closing speech, without penetrating to
the bottom of satters. This way they arrived at a completely wrong
appraisal which does not correspond to the facts and overrates ny
position and ny activities.

These appearances which speak against se will bo dispelled as
soon as ay roel position will be considered In which I found myself no
ip-called personal referent of Hlsalor for many years. On the witnoos
•tend I testified to the truth, vfcich has been cor.flrsed by witnesses
vho know thr real facts froe thoir own experience.

It does not run counter experience that among thousands of incoming
and outgoing ltecs of sail - that is, hundreds of thousands during the
course of tho years - there should bo an insignificantly small number of
docuaents which a personal referent passes on to third oereons without
knowing their contents aore closely. Tho core so if they concern natters
vhich have nothing to do with the normal duties of tho personal referent.

I believe that an American tribunal will know hov to appraise tho
foregoing, though I am rather afraid that the situation as It existed in
Germany during the years before the collapse and prevailed in high
government agencies will never really be brought home to American Judges.

Therefore, I deny to nr/self to discuss again =y position at that
time and the ignorance of criminal experiments on human beings which vbe
tro eonseauence thereof. In this respect I agree with ny defense counsel,
•either need I fear Professor Ivy's statement who declared that even a
layman must be outraged by reading the reports of Kascker, because the


U332


Court I

15 Jul 47-X-7-^I=X-Schvab (Uiberall)


fact that the layman has read the passages of the reports wherefrcc the
obvious violation of huaar. dignity is evident vas, as a natter of fact,
the natural prerequisite for Professor Ivy's opinion, and that prerecui-
■ite did not exist in =y case.

In accordance vlth the truth I repeat what I have said in the wit¬
ness stand, that I had a general knowledge of experieents on huaan beings.

I car. no longer say when and on what particular opportunity I gained
that knowledge. But this fact alone does not deserve death, because I
never had the feeling that I had participated in such crises by ny
activity in the Personal P.eferat.

Such a knowing participation demands that the personal referent
knows the contents and the lsport of Eiasler's letters, orders, etc.
and passes thes on in spite of his knowledge of the contents and their
lsport. I Just said that appearances are against ce, but I bellevo I
did prove that I did not possess that knowledge. I pray the Tribunal to
follow tho line of thio evidence and, I think, this io not asking too
ouch since tho experience of everyday lifo speaks in cy favor.

The various affidavits which I have submitted and vhicV wore tho
subject of excited orgusent have found their explanation. In some
colnts I have learned and I have tried to correct ny alstakcs. I did
not want to spook on untruth knowingly which Bight be detrimental or
favorable to a third person. I ask the Tribunal not to forget that I
was in a very low general condition when I signed these affidavits.

Only a few sonths previously I weighed only forty-four kilograms; conso-
cuently =y cental cover was reduced to a sinlmum.

luring =y activities »fcich stretched over nan;.* years I exclusively
acted on the erprese orders of Himmler without ever making a decision on
ny own initiative. I say take it that this fact has fully been proved.

The question what attitude I should have assumed had I known the
details of inhusan axoericents I can only answer in a hypothetical way.

Had I had only a rough knowledge, as I have it today, I would have
resisted to pass on such an order by virtue of sy general view on questions


11333


Court I

19 Jul 47-K-7-Schwab (Gib,:rail)


of hua an lty.


1133U


19 Jily-M-aC-S-l-Stevert (1st. ~lberr.ll)
Court L'c. 1


Since, however, I did not have that knowledge it could not cone to
any reel stance on my part. I asked to take Into consideration that
during all those years. I regarded natters which were in my field
from ny own point of view, and tried to live up to ry own Ideals.

I saw ny duty In carrying out ay task faithfully end in the conduct
of c eloen, personal life.

I also intended to anke sure that I would not cause any damage to
ary human bein', but to try to understand the situation of a person
in noed of help, rnd then to help la a ennner os I would have wished
to bo helped or trerted if I was in his position.

I would renind you of the st-tenent of the witness Heiner, on page
^919 of the German translation of the 21 K"rch 19 U 7 , about the fact
that ojr si.natures «ro on the documents which have been submitted by
the prosecution. That fact h-s coved oc deeply beemse ay ontire
vlew of hu mlty rnd the Principles of humanity is oulte opposed to
th«t. tfhrt I understand by humanity, rlso rpolies end begins to
rpoly to the details of life.

In spite of ry good intentions, and that I ory ir. answer to a
question put ir. the beginning - in sol to of ny good intentions I vao
drawn into a guilt - I see it ns r guilt, into which human boings
car. be involvod by tragic circumstances without -my intention on
their pert, but to reco^iise this guilt was sufficient to upset me
deeply.

Tr.Z ?3ISID22*T: The defendant Poppendick.

n2TS2yi P0?F2*0ICJC: I Joined the SS et a time not to commit . .
crimes, but the reason was that a number of individuals whoa I knew
to be idealists among my friends were members of the SS. Their nenber-
ship C"used se to Join. That I thereby became a member of n criminal
org"mi ration was unisnginable for me at that time. Just r.s it is
Incomprehensible for me today. My activity ir. the '.fiasco und
.Siodlunf.s Amt (race and resettl : mer.t office) vrs devoted to the

, 11335


I? July—fc-3£-5-2-St*wrt (1st. 'Hb-ra.li)
Court 1


problem of-the fa-ily, on activity which In view of the destructive
tendencies during the period of the first Vorld Vpr secced lrjport-
ant to me.

If uy expectations ns a physlclrn were disap-jointed in more then
one point, at least I considered nyself Justified to hope thr.t in
the end this nctivity would hove positive results. The intentions
were always toward n constructive policy for the good of the family.
Sever did I have anything to do with negative population policies,
not even outside of policies of a legal nature, as the sterilisation
program of the State.

The assertion of the prosecution that positive and negative
population policies belong in the snno chapter, Just as the two
different sides rnd possibilities of one program, is erroneous. Then
there wer purely organisational reasons which brought about my
diroct subor'lnrtlon under the offico of thr.t nan whoso nano today
has such an lnhucrn sound - I scan Orawits.

Tho 1 i rcosion which the prosecution hr-s rendered of uy activity
and x»oitlon in Gravin' office is not in accordance with the facts,
in e'itc of tore features which seen to support the nsoortlon node
by t‘-c prosecution .

As for nodical experlnents on inna.tes - experiments on hun-n
beings wore nothin.: surprising to of, nor anything new. I knew that
expert .eats were carried on in clinics. I knew thrt the nodern
pchiovoaents of medical science had not been brought about without
sacrifices.

However, I do not recall that the fact of voluntary experimental
subjects had to be an absolute requirement, as it seems to be con¬
sidered rs setter of fact, according to the discussions in this
trial. I knew furthermore, that some scientific problems car. only
be solved by experiments in series with conditions remaining constant,
pad that therefore soldiers and prrticul-rly soldi:re in camps are

11336


19 July-K-B&-S-3-3tevart (Xnt. Uiberall)
Court So. 1


tued for experiments In rll countries.

Utader those circumstances it did not appear surprising to me that
during the wrr scientists also carried out exjcrlments in series in
concentration craps. I did not heve the least cause to assume that
these scientists in the craps would mo beyond the scope of that
which otherwise everywhere in the world of science was customary.

'*h"t I knew a tout nedical expert sents in the SS was, in ny opinion,
not Ft all connected with criminal natters, not any nore than thoso
experiments nbout which I knew from ay clinical experience beforo

1933.

In March of this year r young doctor, Dr. Mltchclich., in a very
one-sided way, published a book containing the lndictnent, "The
Dictates of Contempt for Hunan Life". The problen found in this
book, is the basis for on opinion, of course, and the basis for n
verdict seenod to be quite clearly offered.

During tho very lrst days, however, the Chief of Dr. Mltchellch,
a sreU-know Professor froa Heidelberg, Veixneksr, published a
study on the principle questions belonging to tho subject under the
tltlo "Euthanasia rnd Experiments on Hunan Beings", which ho had
submitted to the defendants. But here now we find an entirely
different language. The problen Itself bocones obvious. If one
reads this booklet then the extent of that entire problem car. be
scon, and its complicated features.

The orth of Hypocrates, according to Veisaccker, has nothing to

do with the problem. Velzaecker applies entirely different ethical

noma. Hi htly the spirit of medicine of Germany, or of Germany

%

under Hitler. It is found, therefore, that experts who consider
themselves competent even today, are right in the middle of their
endeavor to clarify the problems at the basis, thrt being the first
requirement for their solution.

3efore this trial all of these matters were no problems for no. I
did not know of pny transgressions. Moreover, I was always convinced


11337


19 July-X-SX-S-4-Stevort (la*.. Uibcrnll)

Court »o. 1

that anything which csme to ay knowledge about experiments on huann
beings in clinic* of the state before 1933. *nd within the scope
of the SS in Inter year*, were conscientious efforts of serious
scientists to the good of mankind.

The ethical foundation of these setters dso seened to be there
until this trial. Therefore, after sincere examination of ay
conscience, I cannot find nay feeling of guilt and expect with a
clear conscience, the verdict of tho Tribunal.

THE PHJSIDKFTj The defendant Sievers.

D3. SIXTIES: Tour Honors, in his opening plea, uy defense counsel
elrer.dy stated quite openly nnd frankly that all events were going
to bo presented with which I wns in any way connected, nnd In this
hour which is so important to ne, I can stato to tho best of ry
conscience that when I furnished =y dofonse counsol with information,
and during cy own examination on the witnoos stand, I always spoko
the full truth. I have, in fact, had the satisfaction to soe that
ay testimony was confirmed by a witness for th# prosecution.

During ny examination ns a witness on the stand, I oaid quito
truthfully thnt the experimental subjects to whoa I had talked
in connection with the la«t exr-criaent in Fntswoilcr had confimed
to ae that they were voluntary subjocts.

Witness Hallos, witness for the prosecution, conflnaed ny t.
testimony during his exaaination on tho 30tb of Juno in thio
' courtrooa, record page 10993.

With re.-nrd to the charge of participation in the malaria experi¬
ments, I have stated that I had nothing to do with malaria experi¬
ments.

Witness Tieveg called by the prosecution, confirmed this testi¬
mony of nine. Likewise witness Stoehr, pages ^95 nnd 638 of the
record.

I testified that the two experimented subjects whom I met in
connection with the altitude experiments, in reply to c question

11338


1C Jul7-u-5r-S-5— Stavnrt (Ir.'.. Frank)

Court To. 1

of -e, confirmed specif icrlly thrt they had volunteered.

fitness 5 eff of the prosecution confirms this voluntary status of
the witnesses, page b57 of the record. Likewise Dr. Romberg during
his direct examination eteted on the strength of his o« knowledge
that my testimony was correct.

The only experimental subject whoa I net in connection with the
typhus experiments answered ny definite question regarding the
voluntary act of the witness that this wrs so. The testimony of my¬
self was confirmed through the affidavit of n former prisoner, a
witness Grunsenhuber contained in ay second document book.

The prosecution says that they charged no with having placed myself
at tho disposal of XM? on the behalf of the SS. This wno rather n
peculiar statement considering ay own defense in this trial. I said
when I wrs on the stand that without ay own initiative, in fact
against ay own will the defense counssl for the S° c riled me in order
to use no as a witness.

Attorney Pelcteann, then defense counsol of the SS hao confirmed
tho correctness of the statements of nino in an affidavit. According
to that, I immediately informod Pelcknnnn at the time in writing
regarding ny foraer aeabership of the resistance covonent against
the national socialist regime and told hia I was not n suitable wit¬
ness. At the sane tiae I had also a copy of ny letter, in which I
placed myself at the disposal of the International Military Tribunal
through 1 ST as early as the 20 th of Decenb er, 19 U 5 , as the record
■hows. 1 X 7 shows on page 14929 .

I have stated ay regrets on this sane witness stand that qy
preparedness to aid Justice and to helt> in prosecuting past crimes was
not accepted and that considerable evidence was thus destroyed.

As early as August last year. I furnished the prosecution with a
re->ort about my activities in the resistance movement, indica.ting
pgain ™ willingness. This was passed over, however, when I stpted
that I was not prepared to sign affidavits which were not completely
true.


11339


3cart 1, Case 1

19 July 47 -4£-9-l”ABtr-Stone (Frank)

I openly ard frankly stated at that point that I lacked the under¬
stating for this action. I had to do this, and I could do it because
I bad been locking for truth and right at the risk of n y life, undaunted,
and even during the time of tyranny. Was one now to be a collaborator
in aetr.oda which I thought had passed with the national Socialist Regime?
And wfticn, as retains d y firs conviction, would never lead to a true
pacification of this world auch as we all desiro. I am mentioning this
with regret and only because I have always claimed that I myself, and
ay statements, during responsible times, deserve to be believed. The
Prosecution did not only feel in a position to doubt ay credibility,
but they even consented to call me a liar during their argument, again¬
st thoir bettor knowledge and their better conscience. Consequently,

I had to draw your attention to the testimony of various witnessco
which confirmed, in full, my testimony on the stand in such complicated
matters. I can truly be satisfied that it was not up to me, but to
the Prosecution witnesses, to contradict the incorrect statements made
against ao. History will honor such action, and Judge tr.o persistent
attempt to stick to pro-concoived ideas. There is no blousing connoctod
with it. I'm only sorry for those who are misguided by false ideas.

My firm conviction that this high Tribunal will fully boliovc my tes¬
timony during ay examination is based on these facts. In this connec¬
tion, with reference to the experiences which I have Just described,

I am forced to say -hat on tho other hand it was quite inspiring con¬
fidence to sec which wisdom and patience inspired ny Judges. T.da
Tribunal stood above matters and disclosed a conduct of trial in which
one could feel sholtorcd; all my friends, who fought in tho secret
resistance movement with me and attended this trial ropeatodly in the
audience, snare with mo the sentiments. I have explained to you. Your
Honors, for what reasons I was in immediate, direct contact with the
:;S3A? and tho SS. I have told you hew I always tried to prevent tho
application of medical research to the Ahnenerbo. This attempt failed,

113liO


Court 1, Ca=- 1

1? July 47 -M-9-2-ABG-Stono (Frumk)

due to the ambitious attitude of Hlaler. Only or. the strength of ry
own feelings had I to find an attitude with regard to this new question
of experiments on human beings. I did not approve of then, and I at¬
tempted to take the consequence, which could only be that I icnediately
resigned free ay post as the Reich Manager of the Ahnenerbe. I think
tne testimony of the Witness Hilscher, in this stand, and the affidavits
from Witness Deutelsoser, Witness Dellmann, Witness Schmitz, and others
prove beyond doubt that I hud the true intention of resigning from the
.nnenerbo. And these witnesses have also clearly testified why I didn't
do so, not because of personal ambition, not for reasons of comfort, or
for what other lew reasons aight bo attributed to mo in this point.

It was duo to tho persistent urging or. the part of my political friends
that I remained, in order to serve the task I have fought for. It had
taken c.o to tho .'BOAT and tho SS, but I refused to bo a follower of
the .’iSDAP and the policios which they roprosentod. On tho outsido 3
had to live up to tho nano of a National Socialist, if I was to hold
up the political ideal to which I hod devoted mysolf sinco 1929 and
r.ot to endanger it. In his affidavit, and it is in ay appendix to my
document No. 1, ’Witness Niebhauscr., who was tho most important mombor
in tho circlo of the socrot Goman rcsistanco, and who has acted on
behalf of Dr. K mpner too, and who is obviously a personality beyond
reproach, says that his illegal activity which continued for five years
acrid have been Quito impossible without ny assistance. I do, in deed,
not know what the Prosecution is prepared to recognize as being the
fight against tho Nazi R.gimo. Even such activities as those cannot
be eliminated as a fact. It is not necessary to read all the details
which have been testifiod to in this Courtroom. That in true rocog-
nition of the consequences which might be daily expected for myself
and my family I devoted myself to resistance, continued in it undaunted,
snd never abandoned it, is now the only reason why I find rys-lf in this
Jock. For that reason, I look forward to tho judgment of this Tribunal

i 13ll


Court 1, Case 1

19 July 1.7 -11-9~3-AeG-61 or.e-(7rank)


with confidence, due to ay conviction that I have lived for a good
cause and acted on it, on behalf of soacthing which at tho tice, as
a cattor of fact today, filled ne with true belief.

THU P3ESID3/7: The Defendant Rose.

DEPEOaST ROSS: Hr. President, nay it pleaee the Tribunal, the
scientists who are among tho defendants in this trial are confronted
with a principal difficulty, tho fact that purely scientific questions
have been made political, ideological queatior.a by the Prosecution.

In the opening speech by the Chief of Counsel, Coneral Taylor, the
political ard ideological nature of the indietcont hat been expressed
as clearly as possible. Subjoct of the personal charges against ay-
self is ay attitude toward experinents on hunan beings ordored by tho
State arxi carried out by othor German scientists in the field of typhus
and malaria. forks of that nature have nothing to do with politico or
with idoology, but thoy oorve t.ne gcod of hunanity, and tho sane nocos-
sitios can bo seen independently of any political ideology overywhoro
whore tho saao dangers of epidecJcs havo to bo conbatcd. Just go in
the caoa of malaria experiments nalaria research has to raako expori-
ments with human beings, in the sane way nalaria scientists of various
nations hod to carry out expvriconts on huaan beings. Just as Klaus
Schilling, with his own initiative, but with tho approval of conpotont
authorities of the State, was compelled to undertake human experinents,
before and after him solaria researchers of various nationalities wore
conpcllcd to cake human experiments. Just as Haagen, out of his wn
initiative and with tho approval of the competent Stato authorities,
tested th-. value of a nc v, living typhus vaccine, before hin that was
done in the cour3u of fighting plague by this great co-patriot, Richard
3. Strong, when ha experimented on natives of tho fhilippir.es, who wore
not American citizens, and when ho did so witn the approval of your
Government. Just as Dr. Ding, on the instruction of the highest and
decisive authorities of the C-ercan civilian health administration,
tested the value of the typhus vaccine or. humans in times o; .^r-atsst


H3u2


Court 1, Case I

19 July 47 -M-9-4-A3G-Stonu (FfMkJ


typhus danger. Others have done so before him in less pressing emer¬
gencies, in part upon the instruction of their governments. Fran the
witness stand I testified about the actual role which I played in re¬
gard to the charges of human experiments with nalaria and typhus. And
I have explained free the witness stand the legal evaluation of my actions,
and they have been submitted to you by my Defense Counsel Dr. Fritz. I
need not add anything to it. But my attitude towards the experiments
on human beings in medical research, as a matter of principle, I stated
probably not only in this Courtroom, but also when the :Jational Social¬
ist German Government was at the height of its limitless power. At
that time I was cut short by a nan. Professor Schreiber, who about a
year ago In this vory Courtroco, claimed to be a defendor of nodical
ethics. The fact is undoubted that human experiments, which wore ex¬
actly tho sane as those, the participation in which I am unjustly charg¬
ed with, have boon carried out in othor countries, above all, in tho
United Statos which has indicted no. That has led tho Prosecution to
place to proper point of its charges upon tho outside conditions of
tho porsons put at the disposil Tor experiments. In that connoction
tho question of fact whother thoy wore voluntary was put in tho fore¬
ground. I shall not discuss tho quostion as to what extent tho doctor
who is charged with the experiments i3 responsible for thoso oxtomal^
formal questions, at least a doctor who rras so far removed from tho
experiments themselves as I was. 3ut in connoction with tho principal
question of subjects' being volunteers, I have to make a few statements.

A trial of this kird presents probably the most unsuitable atmosphere
to discuss questions of medical ethics. But since these questions have
beer, raisod here, they have to be answered. Everyone who, as a scient¬
ist, nas an insight into the history of the dangerous nodical experiments,
knows with certainty the following fact. Aside from tho self-experiments
of doctors, which represent a very small minority of such experiments,
the extent to which subjects are volunteers is often deceptive, «t the


113^3


Court 1, Case 1

19 July LI -J£-9-5-A3G-Stcno (Frank)


very best they aaount tc self-deceit on the part of the physician who
conducts the experiment, but very frequently to a ois-iending of tho
public. In the majority of such cases, if we ethically examine facts,
-a find ar. exploitation of the ignorance, of the economic distress or
another emergency on the part of experimental subjects. I nay only re¬
fer to the example which was resented to tho Tribunal by iir. Ivy when
ho presented the forms for Aoerican nalaria experiments.


113! Ji


19 Jul 7 -!!—FI- 1Z— 1 -Urrv;* (Int. Uiborall)

Court Ho. I, Caso 1

You yourscLvcs, 5 er.tL. 2 en of the Tribunal, art in a position to oxa-
r.ir.e whether, or. the be si 5 of the information contained in those foros,
individuals of an average education of an i ro ate of a prison can ions
a sufficiently clear opinion of the risks of an experiment aa.de uith
pernicious n aL - . r ie. These facts will be confirmed by any sincere and de-
c-nt scientist in a p-rsonal conversation, though he would not like to
make sueh a state.:wnt in public. That I nyseIf aa, on principle, an op¬
ponent of the idea of dangerous cxpuriaor.ts on human beings i3 knovn to
you gentloocn of the Tribunal and proved by others than .ay so If.

The state, henover, or any human coar.unity which, in tho interest of
the well b-i. of the -ntire community, did not wont to forago
o orLr.er.tr on human beings, does only base itself on ethical principles
as long as It assuaes the full responsibility which arises thorofrojw
And if it lapo»-s sacrifices on enoaics of society to atone for their
crimes and docs not cover behind the method of a make believe principle
of voluntary submission which Imposes tho risk of tho exporimor.t on tho
ocporlxer.tal subjects who ere not in a position to foresee the consequen¬
ces#

Tl)e oros-cu-or in his plea criticized the submission of affidavits
during the re re tr.tior. of evi \>ncc on tho part of the defence. The dif-
ficultios ni-ich wist for a defendant in prison in Germany of today to
acquire other documents are almost prohibitive. In order to give an
exonple, • ,.n tte malaria experiments of Schilling's were discussed, tho
prosecution, n-aong other a.atcri- 1 , submitted to the Tribunal an uxcerpt
from tho Ns. 11 known Dachau sentence; concerning the facts stated — tho
stetefs-nts contained t ter-.in about the narber of victims in ttese oxpo-
ri -*.r.ts, I have stated here in tte .litness box that I rather dt ther-
~5 a defendant than to put =7 signature on the opinion which would con¬
firm th~5„ statements. How right 1 was in making that statement can x.
a ,n from r. letter by Professor Allenby of tho University of tondbo • ich,
unf or tunc to ly , has been received only nc*. by ay defense counsel, in


1231*5


19 July-IMT/-10-2-Urac7 (In*-. Uiborall)

Court I, Cci3G I

which he torrid the s to tenant t :ct 300 osperiacntsl subjects had died,
a grotesque untruth.

Kjr defense counsel in hia final plea hae quoted the passage of thr.t
1 -tter. The prosocufcion at that tie* when the excerpt of the Dachau sen¬
tence was submitted, prcais-d that the entire filea of the Dachau trial
would be put -.t our disposal. Unfortunately, ell ay efforts to gain an
insight in t.~s- files until this sooent have been ir. vain.

When Under-Seerotary Centi during ths war was toying with tho idoa
to ccrvniosion Frofessor Schilling, who was at that tie*. in Italy, uith
aalaria research in Gornan, I, at that tine, Chief of the Tropical !fcdi-
cal Institute, Deportawnt of the Robert Koch Institute, was assigned by
tho Reicn Ministry of tlx. Interior at first to eiv- an opinion. In this
opinion, for reasons which I have explained In th-- witness box, I rcjoctod
Schilling's -Inn. Had or* followed xy advice, the experiments oy Schilling
in Dachau would never have taker, place. In tho cour*. of those proceedings

I a-.de nil efforts to cose into the possession of that opinion but in

•

this case also I was unsuccessful, although that opinion in two copies
is in tb- lands of the .military Goverr.aont, possibly even in this build¬
ing.

Also, ir. vain, I ott-npUd to got the file note, so important for
ay d f-r.se, ..ich I dictated to the witness Brock about rvy cotiuroncos
with Order-Secretary Conti and Prosidemt Gilder*inter, after I had gained
knowledge about the conduct of the typhus experiments in 3uchc.mr.lu,
what little correrpordenco I had with Professor Hangul is apoaruntly
entirely in t c .cards of the prosecution. In spite of that, it has been
submitted only in -'-rt to you. That fact offered an opportunity to t b.
pros-cutior. to interpret passages taken out of the context incorr-ctlv.
Unfort innately, I have no opportunity to force anyone to submit the iss-
ing documents which would clarify natters in ay favor.

To evaluate tho work of ' agen, and ay dcf-r.se counsel has pointed
that out -ire:/--, the statenent of an unbiased -xoerl lould have b--n of


123U6


19 Jiila^SWIr-lO-^Uraey (Int. Uiberall)
Court So. I, Cc.sc, I


decisive iOTortrr.cc. Therefore, I can only regret ttet the interrogation
of thu Froocham Georges 31nnc, which I suggested and who has the best
knowledge in this iiold, did not take place, although h. had volunteered
to appear :efore this Tribunal as an export.

Proie3acr Lccrout, Director of the Institute Paster in Paris, du¬
ring this trial was frequently in Kurr.fcorg. After an interview, the >>ro-
Bucution refrained free calling hia as an expert witness to clarify 3Aac
c*ifficuLt questions resulting from the work of H-.agen. I ask the High
Tribunal to dr™ its conclusions from these facts and to assure that
the lack of -tose pieces of ovidenco, which I cannot effect, should not
result in c dr-rage to ay interests.

Prosecutor IfcRcnoy has oxplaL*.^! in his ole.a that one still had to
find that doctor caorg tbo defendants who would have subjected himself
to such ^porla-ats as nru covered by the indietaent here. I do not fool
that that concerns f*-, r.ot only from the stotaaont which I have made
r-re before you 'out also fron ny case history which was available to tho
authorities cf the r“iaon before I was submitted to that indictment.

It err. bo seen that r.ot only as an experimental subject I put .ay-
s^lf at tho disposal of vXDwr_.ents to evaluate vaccines but that fre-
quer.tly I gave oysolf infectious injections with cholera, typhus, .mala¬
ria and hepatitis epidcnica ar.d that, in pert, I aa still suffering from
the conscquc;.Ce3.

Finally, tho Trose-cutor UcHanoy has assorted in hie plan that all
of thoe- ir,. .cled fore are guilty of aurder, and that includes a- too.

If the Tribunal was to look at the oroblua at hand frea this point of
view, I weald re'ret to have s~id sin-le word in ay defe. s- . Kr- ever,
if you believ- that La ell actions of sine which have been discussed
here, I was only .aoved by sincere devotion to duty, then I put ay fate
-ith confid-uco into your hands.

TJE R2SEETT: The dufaidant Ruff.

IT’. T.ITF: Ac far as the written end oral statements of nr defence


113c7


19 J'-ly-::-FL-10-.'.-Urrh_ y (Int. Uibcrall)

Court No. I, Ci.sc I

counsel aro concerned which dc'.l with the points of indictment and as
far as ay activities as a doctor end scientist is concerned, I have no¬
thing or hardly anything to add. I can only repeat today what I said
at the ord of ay ocaaination when I was on the stand. Aft«-r dot“ilcd
inquiry into ay conscience, I still today hold the belief that I never
sinn-d agai..st ay duty as a rain and as a doctor.

THZ PRESIDENT: The defendant 3rock.

DR. KCCK: Your Honor, in 1929, I joined the >3J)AP when more than
six oillion German voters were already backing Hitler. His 1-tcr succes¬
ses during tho years oi peaceful reconstruction consolidated ny convic-
tion that he had forever liborated Germany from the misery in which it
seon.d to have fallen. For all those years, therefore, I had no reason
to have any ed savings with regard to Hitler's personality and thus I
also believed in tho legality of tho euthanasia decree as emanated di -
rectly freo. tho head of tho , -ato. The. state officials and doctors, com¬
petent for . c at that time, told «x that the euthanasia had r.l>i.ayo
beet*, an endeavor of r-rnkind and was morally .as well as m-dicolly jus¬
tified. Therefore, I never doubted tbs logr.l character of the outhnno-
sia decree.

In th: connection, hcwiuvur, I was aosifRtd duties, the extent and
import-nee of -hich I could not roroseo. Neither ay training nor ay qua¬
lifications sufficed for this tack. Nobody can deny, however ny good
faith in its justification, I fr-nkly retained nhat I did in the frame¬
work of the JUth.anr.sin censures and tried to prove that ay coLL-borntion
was no rely of a subordinate nature .and exclusively directed by human
aspects. I ca;uvot c_ ,-nnde responsible for later actions carried out by
other officers rand •..•itaout ay kneni-d’o. These w„rc the measures nliich
I deeply r-jXett-d and wh-n the prohibiti-n of the inclusion oi foreign
nation,-is ar.d Je*<n Wore infr igad.

Throu-'; ny activity in the Fuehrer Chancellery, I early b-c-aao ac¬
quainted ::ich tho Gestapo atrocities. The testimonies of ay ’.witnesses


19 July-Jf-FL-lO-5-Umj7 (int r Oitwrcll)

Court No. I, Case I

prcnxs hem I fought against thee end the concentration ceap aystca with
out hiving bed any direct kr. cm l^d#, of concentration casps. I did 30
h-causo I felt that I ana obliged to b_lp those concerned who suffered
from th, arbitrariness of tte Gestapo. I did not do it because I reco¬
gnized ever, ct that tiao syeptaas of a leadership that always and only
kne* arbitrariness and oppression.


19 July-A-IL-ll-l-Arningcr (Int.Trnnk-tfiborall)
Court I, Ciso I


But this is particularly the reason why I was so

shocked about the misuse of some of the euthanasia institu-
tions, for the action 14fl3 affected particularly those per¬
sons whose detention T c r .sidered unjust and combatted.

It was only in this court roam however, that I loarr.od of
this action.

That I did not hnte the Jews has bean proved by nu¬
merous documents, but without the hatred of the Jews, the
participat' en in the extermination of Jew a is hardly tanablo.
The no-suros of suppression to which the Taws were subjected
forced no to give them tho sane assistant within ny conpo-
tenoo no I accorded to the politically pursued persona.

I thus helped by ny activity hundreds of thousands of persons
during tho courso of the years. But thus cnly cculd the
storilizntior^iuggestions oone into existence. They wore
nothing but an nttonpt to provont the extermination of
innumerable Jews.

•

In spite of all the efforts of ny defense oounsel,
it w'3 impossible to procure the witnesses who could tostify
to thi3 effect. They proforrod to evado their responsibility
of serving the truth. I am utterly alone. I oust leave it
to this High Tribunal to ascertain on the basi3 of the pre¬
sented expert scientific opinions that nil ny proposals
were actua ly 30 formulated as to 3how ny convlotions of
their harracssness, and the impossibility of realizing
then.

I must al3Q loave it to the Tribunal to judge
whether a. nan wo intended th - extermination of the Jews
would apply for service -with the Army, just at the moment
when the ain which ho alleges that he pursued was achieved
and the extermination measures had started. Or does it not
appear paradoxical to assume that one and the son3 man


11350


1? July^!'-IL-ll-2-«r-linger (Infc.Frnnk Ciberall)
Court I, c~.se I


should give hia approval of tho oxtorcination of the »>cw3

• • •

and in fact aided such a progran, and, at the sane tine, save
Jews he has never known, such as Goorgi, ft*ssow, Uoyer,
'.’arburg, and others, froG such measures.

I can only emphasize that particularly these storilization
suggestions to Himlor appeared to no to ba tho last possi¬
bility to take any action to snvo Jewory. Had I boon in¬
different to tho Jewish fate, I would not bo accused today.

• •

3ut 1 also tried in this ro3poct, as was ny habit, to give

assistance and I an still convinced, that it had at laast
• *

delaying, if not preventative offect. Certainly, tho
realization that such proposals should never have boon node

by no on tho strangth of ny nodical knowledge or ny po-

• •

s-ition at th« tie«, even to the best or ny intention, is
something * could not reach until this trial was in progress.
My eood intention which was tho basis of those proposals
*nd ny goed will to help by neons of then cannot be
denied by anybody, and can in no event be understood as
.ay conscientious cooperation in the extermination of tho
Jews.

TH5 PRESIDENT: Defondant Ror.borg.

DE73IDAHT RCCSERG: Ir. tho oourso of this trial, I
h^vc h^d full opportunity to spook in ny defense. With
special gratitude we realize the fact offered to us and
wo took advantage of it, which was given by the possibility
to question individually Prcfe33or Ivy in this trial. I
have seen hew the Tribunal itself, by a precise questioning,
clarified the facts, and tc the statements cade by ay
defense counsel 1 have nothing to add, because they are
the truth.

THS P3SSIIEJIT: Defendant Beckor-Eroysong.


11351


19 Ju 1 y-JT-IL-11-3-Aninger {Int.Frank-ffiberr.ll)
C ourt I, Crso 1


DSF2TOANT 3SCX2R-F32YSZNG: Mr. President, Gantlanon
of the Tribunal: I also was given full opportunity to
subait all the statanents anl the evidGneo required to
refute the charges of the indictnont. For that I have to
thank the Tribunal and ay defense counsel. Dr. Tipp. But
I have nothing to add to it. For all the innaterial spite¬
ful talk which grew outside and twisted around the objective

•

atmosphere of those proceedings like a no3sy hedge, I
believe that fortunatoly the verdict of this Tribunal nust
bo and will bo the appropriate answer. I look forward to
it with tho firn conviotion that I havo acted in ray duty
to mankind as a physician and scientist, and as a soldier

0

to ny fathorland, Germany.

TH2 PBB3ID3KT: The defendant '.Yoltz:

D3FHOANT TISLTZ: I havo nothing to add to tho stato-
nont nado by ay defense counsel. I thank Dr. '/ilia for
his efforts made in ny defense.

THS PH2STDZIJT: The defondant Schaofer.

DZFSlbAOT SCHASF2R: May it ploaso tho Tribunal, since

I consider nysolf ontiroly innocont, I ask to bo acquitted.

0 0 •

I repeat ny request to bo sot free, , if possible, evon
before the verdict.

THS PIESI32IT: Tho defendant H 0 von.

DEF3HDANT H0V2K: I have nothing to add to Dr.Gawllk's
plea of yesterday. I would at this point like to thank
ny defonso ccunsol for the considorablo help he has given
no.

THS K56ID2IT: The defendant Boiglboeck.

D2F3NDANT BSIGLBOSCK: May it pleaso the Tribunal,
tho experiments which I conducted, I did not carry out
on iy own initiative, neither according to tho plans of
ly own, nor spontanioulsy, but the nodical part was


11352


19 «faly-!I-TL-ll-4-Aninger (Int.Frank-tfiboroll)

Court I, Cas.j I

played with th3 knowledge and approval of ny clinical teacher;

S

for r.ora than ten years, I was a disciplG of -ppinger. During
those tor. years I had cone .to know and respect his ways of
thought and his superior knowledge. Ky relations to him wore
based on personal gratitudo and awe-inspired devotion. If

*

thiro was anything which he ccr.sidorod right and important,
then fer psychological reasons alone, it would be imperative
for no to share his belief.

The experiments wore to solve the problem of saving
human life and that had to bo approved. It was a military
ordor which compelled ny to oorry thon out in the ntnosohoro
of a concentration oomp. I objoctod against that, but I was
not successful. So we had to carry it out in the concentra¬
tion camp.

Kay it ploaso the Tribunal, in your evaluation of this

fact, please do not fail to c^nsidor that this did not

happen in tines of poaco, nor in a country which granted

its citizens Individual freodom of docision in nil natters,

personal and professional, but during the bitter days of a

float horrible war. What I carried out, I did in accordance

with a plan provioulsy doteminod and specified. If i had

to roquiro of ay oxporiaental subjects to undergo hardships

and they suffered from thirst with all of its unpleasant

sensations, thosa physical and nontal characteristics, I

iid that in the nature of the experiments and this could

0 •

not be avcidod. I have not, hwever, done this without
informing nysolf first by an experiment on ny own system
hew it felt what I expeotsd thon to undergo, nor did I
..xpoct it of anyone else, unless I was firmly oonvincod
that he undertook it voluntarily. It is not true to say
that I might have forced anybody to do it, neither psycho¬
logically, nor by reprisals raised by throat, or force of

U353


19 J uly*’!-IL-ll-5-Aningcr (Int.?ran:<»ulbcroll)
Court I, Casa I


arn3. ^^iny eye witnesses havo agrood that ny conduct was

•

never brutal on an yono of the axperin3ntal subjects under
r.y care. «aong theso witnesses are even soma who wars
brought hero to tostify against no,

9 •

At last, in tho final stage of this trial, one experimen¬
tal subject could bo found who tought it appropriate to
introduce a dramatic noto in an atoosphero artificially
created. Based on a laymen's interpretation of indood
hamloss nodical procedures, corfcinod with tho uncertain
rooolloction emotionally prosontod by noro or los3 dis¬
torting and misconstruing ny motives tho attempt was mado
to lend an inpro9sion to ny oxporinent3 and tho part I
played in then.

In contradiction to that a dofonso docunont was
offorod bo othors who onmo from outsido tho concentration
canp .and who preservod their objectivity whioh rovoals
that my behavior in tho nodical sonsc, as wall as from tho

human point of viow was oorrect, to say tho lor.st. By

• •

•

ny experiments, no human life was sacrificed, nor did
they result in any lasting damage to thoir hoalth. I
also believo, that I hnvo prosontod proof that I intor-
vonad f^r tho inmatos, as far as that was within my power
and that I did not consider experimental subjoct3 as

individuals of an inforior typo whea I could woll afford

• •

to illtroat, for idealogioal reasons, as has boon charged.

?or over 15 years as a physioian I always felt tho
strongest responsibility for those ontrustod to ay core.
Thousands who wore ny patients will confirm it. My
assistants and oolloaguos have testified to it. «t no
tino was r.y conduct other than that of humaneness, that
of a physician. The experiments as they wore actually


19 Jttly-H-IL-ll-6-Aaingor ( In t.?r ank-C ib . r-11)
Court I, Case I


conducted hove never geno beyond that which con be justified
by the phlsiclan. I consider nysolf ns a physician and a
human being free of guilt.

THZ PRCSID3IT: The defendant Pokorny.

DZ72ND;j."T POKCSQIY: Your Honor, during this trial I have

often asked ays elf what I should have dcaa at the tine in

order to rocord ny tru ootivo for this letter I had written

to Hir-nler, but I believe that at tho time when 1 dispatched

this letter, I could not do anything else but to talk to

tho people in whom I had oonfidonoa and of whoa I know that

they would not betray mo and confide in them ny true roasons.
• • • •

If today, this lotter, which is against mo, may soon
• •

objective, then this is n foot with which * must boar, al¬
though to the end I must say in correspondence with tho
truth that not surface roasena wero the cause for my
writing this lotter, but that lottor was written boenuso
at the tine I had heard facts about Himmler's plans, and,
booauso at that tino in my position standing lonoly and
slandered because of ny family implications in a small
town in Chechoslovakia, I felt that I was able to tokG
th; aotion described.


11355


7? Jol-IME*—12-1-D-r.ie Is (int. Uibcrell ?• Fr-nV)

~ourt 2 .'o. I, C-se Koi 1 .

i retain the hooe th't 7ou, =7 Judges, will dr-w your conclusions
f r°° conduct ^nd the situation in which I found ryself -t the time,

•nd will co^e to the convict!™ objectively that the true motive r-s -
different one th-n th.it which is shown by this letter, •aid th»t you will
not sentence me but will believe me in wh-t I h-ve not only told you,

?7 Judges, but others previously during ry interrogations -nd, before
th»t, wh-t I h-ve told ry friends, -t a tire when this ore-sent situation
hnd not 'risen’, in order to clarify ry motives -s being true.

Kith this hone I ■* looking fonr»rd to your Judgment, -nd in
tht connection I -a thinking of ry children who, for ye-re now, h-vo
lived under the protection of -n -llied power 'nd who will not believe
th't their f-ther, »fter everything th-t he h*s suffered, could possibly
h've “ctod °s «n '.ncry to hus-n rights.

THE PfESIDENT: The dofend-nt Obcrbcuser.

DEre?.DST 09SFHFUSFP: I h've nothing to «dd to tho st-tements
I h-ve made froa tho witness box under o-.th. In -dministering thore*-
peutic -1 c-re, following cst-blishod =*dic-l orinciples, rs - wonen in

- difficult nosltion, I h-vc done tho bost I could. Jfareover, I fully
-grcc with the st-tc rents asde by ry defense counsel -nd will refr-ln,

t thla st ' B ot the trial, from a-ldng -ny further statements.

^ P^SIDENT: The defendant Fischer.

DEFEND*!.-? FISCHEP: Tour Honors, when this w-r began I w's Just

- young doctor, 27 ye-re of age. *y attitude towards ry ocoolc -nd ry

F-thorl and took » to the front line -o - treoo doctor. I there Joined

* n dlvl3lon * where I warned until I w-s incap-cit-ted for

further service. For 0nl7 . ^ brlef TCriod> durlng tbeaQ #f

W F> 1 WOrked  ’ Bedlc " 1 officer in 9 hoapit -1 b-ck homo, 'nd there
too rry conceotion of ry duties w-* directed by the wish to serve ry
country. During this time of ry work at home, I received the order which
aade “ ” s^Joct of the Indictment of this trial.

The order for ry particip-tion in these experiments originated
fror ' ^ Mgh€st nedic ‘ 1 ^ ^t-ry suoeribr -nd w-s passed on to re, *
the a#SiStsnt ' Rd first lieutenant, through Professor Gebh-rdt. Professor


.9 Jul-l£-yS»12-2-D-niels (Int. Uiber-il & ?r-nk)
’ourt So. I, C-se So. 1.


^ebh-rdt w-s thr famous surgeon -nd much honored creator of Hohonlychen.
’ Ij ° ’ ,,s “ scientific ■othority whom T looked nr> to with reverence and
confidence. is • general of the W-ffen SS he w-s *y uncondition»l
nilit-iy superior. I believed hin, th-t I h-d been e-na-rkad by him
to *33ist in the solution of <- medic-1 problem which w-s to bring help
nnd s-lv-tion to hundreds of thousands of wounded soldiers, -nd which
w-3 to be a cure for then; -nd I believed th»t this problem would rao.-n
’ question of life -nd de-th to =y people. I believed unconditionally
th't this order h,-d core to me from the head of the St etc, -nd th-t its
execution w-s - necessity for the St-te. I considered syaelf bound by
this order, -s were thous-nds of soldiers whom I h-d seen w-lk to their
de-ths during cy yc»rs *t the front, -Iso following m ordor by the
St’te. P-rticol-rly since I h-d h-d tho privilege during thet timo of
working in - hospital »t how, I considered syself doubly -nd p-rtic-
ol-rly subject to th-t discioline, -nd fblt ryaelf in duty bound.

w h-t this order der.-nded from mo h-d been introduced ng -
wthod of modem medicine in -11 civilised countries. I w-s only to
p-rtlclp-te in the clinic-1 p-rt of it, -nd th-t w-s t-king pl«co Just
-s - course of tre'-trent in the institute of Hohcnlychen, or -ry other
clinic. *h»t I did w-s wh-t w-s oniored, -nd I did nothing beyond thrt
ortff r. r believed th-t I, x » sirplo citisen, did not h-ve the right
to criticise the w-sures of the St-te, p-rtlcol-rly not -t » time in
•hich our country, our St-te, w-s eng-god in - struggle for life -nd

de-th.

I hope th-t through cy unconditional devotion -t tho front -nd
-- ~y two injuries, I h-ve shown thnt I not only -sked others to m-ke
s orifices, but th-t I w.-s prep-red »t - 1 y tine to srorifice nyself with
life - r .d ry he-1th. Within the scodo of the order given to me I did
* could, in cy United position -3 *n -ssist-nt dootor, for the
Ufe ° f tho e ^rioent-l subjects -nd for -n er-ct -nd proper clinic -1
- ••• lopnent of the experiment. I never found nyself in - position where
t0 rxT * ct »■* d^ths would occur. When such f-t-lities did occur,

* »-s -9 sh-ken by th-t event -s I w~» by the d- rf r - r


Jul-:^’^-12-3- n -n!els (Ir.t. Giber-ll & ?r*nk)

Court No. I, C-ae No. 1.

clinic. After th’t, the exoeriments were ieeaedi-tely discontinued, =nd
I went b’ck to the division -t the front.

Together with Professor Gebh-rdt, I reported about these experi¬
ments to the German public. Like many other Ger»»na, there -re m»ny
things which, in retrospect, I see sore clearly todiy °nd in o new
light. In cy young life I hove tried to be a foithful son of ny people,
'fri th-t brought ae into this present miserable position. I only wonted
■hot w's good. In ry life I h»ve never followed egotistic"1 aims, nnd
I w’s never activated by b-se instlnots. For that rooson, I feel free
of ’ny guilt inside ae. I h-ve -cted P soldier, ’nd *o a soldier I
-e rc-dy to be-r the consequences. However, th"t I w-s bom * German,
th’t is something "bout which I do not want to complain.

THE PRESIDENT: The person-1 statements by the defendants in
this proceeding, u«do on their own beh-lf, have boon ho«rd by the Trib-
unnl during this sossion in opon court, <\d theso statements "re now
concluded.

After over soven months of trial, consuming, I think, 139 trl"l
d’ys, he-ring over 80 or 85 witnesses, tho reception in evidonco of m-ny
hundreds of documents .-nd "ffid-vlts, tho trial, insofar as tho reception
of evidence, "rgurents of comae 1, end personal statements of tho da-
'•r.d-nts, is not concluded. The Tribunal will now recess "nd enter upon
ih" n reparation of the judgment to be rendered in this C"usc. How long
.V prep-ration of the Judgment will consume is, of course, uncertain,
rrob-bly not less th-n three weeks nor more than five.

Counsel for the defendants rust keep the Secret aiy General's of¬
fice advised of their whereabouts, so tint when the Tribun-1 is re-dy
to forr-lly render its judgment they will be available to appear before
the Tribmal.

The Tribun-1 will now be in recess, subject to c«ll by its own
ert ‘ r , to reconvene to render the fonaal Judgment in the c-use.

(^t 1225 hours, 19 July 19ii7, - recess was taken, subject to
=’11 by the Tribunal.)

ire


t - - — l-i-C-ok (at* Hamler)

Court 1


Official Transcript of the Asarican military
Tribunal in the .nttor of the United Statae
of Aaarica, eying t 'lari rar.dt, et nl, defendants,
sit tin- -1 ’hirnber.', Goman :j t on 19 August, 19li7,

Q930 — Jus i oo reals presiding,

T?S A^jVJiLi Persons in the oourt rooa 'dll pioaso find their

seats, i

The Honorable, tho Jud^os of ‘ Hilary Tribunal 1,

: Hi tar/ Tribunal I is noir ir. session. God save the Unitod States
of .’enorica and this ISonomblo Tribunal.

There nil! bo order in the oourt rooo*

TIC RSBIU . ; *f: :r. ars'.nl, you v.ve ascertained all defendants
are jvosont in .ourt?

‘A . loose your onor, all defondants are presont

in the court rocc.

re ’SSDCHT* Tho 3oerotary-^orv.ral will note for tho rooord
tho rossneo of all tJw dofondtnts is ’'ourt.

Tho ovid-jnoo in tho case of tire Urctod States of /_:orici versus
uorl Hramlt, and oc..orf, defundents, having been closod, counsel for
tho prcsscution and the defendants having filod their briofs and sub-
aitted than tc tho Tribunal, the -ibunal aft-r cons .deration of tho
•jvi lanco and tho rlofs filod, la rev roa<$r to proncvmco its judgment
in t'c case of ths Unitod St'.tos of Amorlon versus Karl Jirandt, ar.d
othora, presently ponding bofore this Tribunal.

In the reading of tho Judgment tho fornal title of tho case trill
r.ct bo road*

T .13 reading ill cojr.-nco iV: l «; judgment itself*

J U 1 C ;• IKT

:Hilary Tribunal I ras astablirhod on 25 October 1?I*6

■to. SZ issued by conaand of tho Unitod
fbr Gummy. It was the first cf
constituted in the Unitod States
,0 rdilitary Government Ordinance
of offenses recognised as arises by lew


1335 9


1 $ L 7 - J :- ; .- _ >-l- 2 -Ccok (Int. a=ier)

Court *>. 1

:fo. 10 of the Control Ccunoil for Germany.

By tho terra of the order 'Thicb established the igbunal
and designated tho undersigned aa renters thereof, "ilitary
Tribunal I was ordered to convex*) r.t :hemVa^ Ourrauny, to
hear ouch casos as sight bo filed by the Chief 0- Counsel for
Vor Crinos or hi a duly designated ruproaontatiro.

On 25 October l?iio, tho Chi : of Counsel for Ver Crinos
lodgod an indiotKmt against t .o defendants nsaed in tho
caption above in the Office of tho Secretary Central of
military Tribunals at tho lalaco of Aistico, IXicmberg,

Go many. A copy of the indictment in tho Goratn lanjuago was
served on -aoh defendant on 5 NoroBbor 191*6. Military Tribunal
I arraigned tho defendants or. 21 Kovcobor 191*6, each dofendant
ontorirv. a ploa of "not guilty to all the ohargos prof or rod
agrdnat hin.

Tho presentation of ovidonco to sustain tho charges con¬
tained in the indictment as bo^in by tho Frooccutlon on
9 “Jocotbor 19li6. At the conclusion of tho pro3ocution»s caso in
chief tho Sefendants began tho ,-roscntr.tior. of thoir ovidonco.

All ovidonco in tho caso was concluded on 3 •*»!/ 191:7. During
tho uoofc bocirrin Uj .July 19- t*w .ribunal hoard arguments
by counsel Tor tho .*rosooution nd borons.. Tte orsor.nl
statrsajnts e.* t' infondar.ts viro hi rd on 19 July 191*7 on
/tech da to tho caso 'fas finally concluded.

The trial was contacted in tiro languages - English and
Ooraan* It consur-cd 139 trial days, indudinf 5 days allocatod for
final arguments and the pers o n al statements of tho defendants.
Paring tbj 133 trial days us ad for the presentation of ovi ’.once
32 witnesses gave oral ovidonco for tho Frc3ecutior. and 53
-.ltnesses, including tho 23 defondants, gave oral evidonoe for
-.ho Defense. In addition, tho Prosecution put in ovidonco as


13360


1? August l 1 7W4HW~>CocK (2a. Harrier)

Cw*t c. 1

«hibit« e tc^al 5fO affidavits, report? and (tocunontsj

fi»€r9 put in a total nnc® of fdl — asking a Grand tpt*\
of lii71 documents reccivod in cvidenco*

Copies of all exhibits tendered by the Prosecution in their
case in chief uero furnished in the German language to the
defendants prior to the tiaa of tho reception of toe exhibits
in ovidonco.

Each defendant was roprosontod at the arraignment and trial
by counsel of his o-.m selection*

Whenever possible, all applications by defense counsel for
tho procuring of the personal attendance of persons n.ho nado
affidavits in behalf of the Prosecution wore grantod and tho
Persons brought to aiernberg for interrogation or cross-
oxard ration by dofonso counsol. Throughout tho trial groat
latitudo in presenting ovidonce '--ns allowed Dofonso counsel,
evon to tho point at tiros of receiving in avidenco certain
natters of but scant probative valuo.

All of theso stores vera taken by tho Tribunal in ordsr to
ailcv each defendant o present his defense completely, in
accordance with tho spirit and intent of J'ilitary Oovcrnaont
Crdiranco ho. 7 hich providos that a dofondant 3tall have the
right to bo reprosanted by counsol, to cross-cxnnino prose¬
cution witnesses, and to offer in the caso all ovidonce doemod
to have prebativo value*

The eviderce has now boon eu fitted, final arguaent* of
counsel havo been coccludod, and too Tribunal has hoard
p-srsonal. eta tenants froa each of tho defendants. All that
remains to bo accomplished in tho case is the rendition of
Judgment and the imposition of sontonce.

Jir-isncno:: of ra

?:v; Juris diction and powers of this Tribunal are fixed and
determined by Law ::o. 10 of the Control Council for Germany.

11361


1? .-.a-Tist L"- oo> (Ini. Pansier)

Court ::c 0 1


The nertinoni portions of t!:o Uni Tfith vrtdch ro are concerned
provide as follows:

Article II

*1. 2 ach of the follering acts is recognised as a
crinoi

"(b) 7cr h-icou: Atrocitf .s or offenses against persons
or property constituting violations of the laws or customs
of tmr, including but not United to, cur dor, ill-troatnont
or deportation to slave labour or for any other purpose,
of civilian population fron cccupiod territory, nurdor or
ill-troateont of prisoners of izr or porsons on the
coca, killin' of hostages, nlundcr of public or private
property, ar.ton destruction o“ cities, to -.to or
villegos, or dovaataion not justified by militaxy
noOo-'oity,

"(c) .'.gainst [Inanity ; ..trccMios and offorscs,

lncludis.' b".. not United to nurdor, extermination,
cnolavu»z:*., ionortation, isprisenaont, torture, rape,
or other inhunano acts caaaibtod against any civilian
population, or persecution on political, racial or
r listens grounds wbothor or rot in violation of the
domostio laws cf the country Jhuro porpetratod.

"(d) liis&orship In categories ef c criminal group or
organisation ‘oclared crlsinal by the International
rilitary Tribunal.

"2. Arc,' re on .lbhout «rr ri to nationality or capacity
in -hich ho acted, is dconod to have ccmdttod a criao
as lafined in ......this article, if be as (a) a principal

or (b) ras ar. accostory to the comlssion cf an;' such
orint or oricrcd or -he' ’ the r or (c) too’c a co&-
s r.'.ir. art V-:rolr rr (d) *,ras cornoctcd zrith plans or

11362


1 ■ " _ r'

Court !*o. I


r.v.r?risc3 involvin' its ccmiasion or (e) *U3 a zrr-her of
an;' organization or group connectod rith the conrissior. of
any such cr ixc .

"(a) Tho offici al position of tssj pare on, whether as Head
of state or as a responsible official in a C-ovomaont bspr\rt-
cent, docs no*, fr jo hin fron responsibility "or a crius or
entitle hin to ritijation of punisteor-t.

(b) TV fact that any person acted pursuant to tho
order of his Covoraaont or of a superior does not froo
hin fren responsibility for a arin'', but iany be cons*.dor od
in nitigation*"

Tho indiotaont in tho cass at bar is filed pursuant to thoso
provisions*

Aiigo Cracfor ill cor.airru reading:

J^JGS Cl. 70 7:


Tho indictnont is frarod in four counts.

C^unt Cno - IV lemon r osi :n or Conspiracy; Tho first Count of
tho indictcant chor^os that tho dof« nlrntr, acting pursuant to a
cen-.ou djoi.n, unlT./fully, llfully and krerlnrly did conspire and
t-rco togothor to comit -war crises and cricos against hurardty ns
defined in Control Council *ax ifc. 1C.

Turing tho course of the trial the defendants challenged tho
first count of tiio indictaant, allowing as grounds for thoir notion
fact that under tho basic last tV Tribunal did :»t *y\vo juric-
f ctior. to try the crino of conspiracy considered as a saparato
substantive of “once. Tho rr *ior -.r.r nt J oun for arpxmnt and duly
-tRued by counsel for . 1 . rosccution end the defense. Thoroaftar, in
on.- cf its trial sessions tho ~ribunal -rented the notion. That this

aey bo conylotc, tho ruling nado at that tine ia incerporatad
ln '^c judgscr.t. Ti, erd r "hiefc -is altered on th: action is as follows:

13363


1 ' 'i 47-: *—.TIVS-6-Cook (Int, -a-sslor)
Co- - "o. 1


■It is the rulin'; of thi. Tribunal that neither tha Charter
of the International “Hitar;.' Tribunal nor Control Council Law
;:c. 10 has defined conspiracy to cecdt a war crino or crino
ag&inst huranity as a separate substantive criaej therefore,
this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to try any defendant upon
a charge of conspiracy considered as a separate substantive
offense*

"Count I of tho indiciaon - ., in addition to tho soparato

charge of conspiracy, also allures unlawful participation in

the formulation and execution of Ians to comit rar crlnos

and cri on against humanity uhich actually involvod the

• •

comission of such crises. 'o, therefore.


11561


1G4?--—' l'Z-2-l-Cr fc _ Harrier


10 legust
“curt -


••-r.-,* properly strike the wh?le of Count t free the indictment, but,
‘■-'-fwr — c »w-s i charges the ccmiEsion of the alleged crime cf
c'nspiracy ac a separate substantive offense, distinct free any
w E r crime or crime against huranity, the Tribunal will disregard that


charge.


"This ruling. rust net be enstrued as limiting the force or
effect of Article 2, par^rr-ph 2 of Control Council L»,w Ho, ID, or
so denying to either prosecution or defense the right to effer in
evidenco any facta cr clreueotanccs occurring either before or after
"eptonber, 103 r , if suck farts or eiremstanevs tend to prove or to
dispro-’o the e-smlcaion by any defendant of w pr crimes or cricofl against
huaanity as defined in Control Council b’c, io,"


2fiXL£c


Tho second or.d third counts cf the indictment chargo the cocnlcolcn
cf war -rimoc and crimes against huranity. Tho counts are identical
in content, except for tho fact that in e-unt tve tho acts which aro
mado the b"sis for tho chpr.-os aro alleged to havo boon conittcd
cr. "civilians and members cf the armed forces thon at wor with tho
’ermon Belch in the exorcise of belli--oront control*, vhorepo in
count throe tho criminal acts aro allegod to havo been ccacitted against
■’“ermen civilians and nati nels cf other countries,’’ With this


distinct ion ebsorved, both counts will bo treatod as ono t«nd
discuccod together.

Counts *vj and three allog.o, ir. aubstanco, that botwoon Soptoxbor
1035 end Ap 1 1545 oil of tho defendants ’’w in principals. in, accocaories
to, orforOd, abetted, took a consentin'- p*rt in, and were connected
with plans pad enterprises involvin' modicpl oxpcrinor.tc without
the subjects’ consent .... in tho pc-tsc ?f which oxporlmcr.tr tho
defendants.committed murders, brutalitioc, cruelties, terturoc,
atrocities, and other inhumane acts.’ It is averred that ’such expcri¬
mes*- includod, but were srt United to" the followin':


19 -1--1C. 1^=7-LV'_ C-2-^ock. .. 2-u.*cr
-STTt i

^ S'fpfcT-taor.ta . ?ros an cut ^arch 1943 to u’bo-.sc

*»x-et 13 =-' axodrlacstc wore conducted at cho 'Xiiiar. ’'.o.ii—v;r,vcloi
%-jp : -r -••«) ol tar Gdtia . »i» fcrc- to incootiga-» ta<- linits

cf hcuAS -rjiirnQ'fc and «x-a5*t;a at --xtr.fc.3ij Uiga al.-a.cv.. ?iu
fcxporii_cu - -v carried otic la e low yrtsavra ePur.V.- »« «hlah the
•ts-.anhcrxc conditions end pioisrjis prwoi.vv e. High tito
!-tp to ^ 8 , COO c- v.l co d'-flln ;• i. -a- d*jb junta

vin. piccod -z. cl - ljw.tjrv-r.-xo cb.cb:<r .ui‘ - eh* ela-ilatel

altitude therein w« a ml tod.. Ka -7 rlotlut n'.ii -b a reerlt of tmo*
cjp-r'Ktt .* and others ouffoxed grava la.^ur. . torturo, 10J 111..
•roitj'M-. -fcj dof-.nduato £cr’ ~ J\. "threes-, 'Vohnvf.t.,

Ivtelf Br iid'.. H-UTiwcky, P'ppu&disk. S«r *«/•, 3 -x\f, * caber;;, '■‘oci'or..
Vrojc»«x, end olt «ro charged vi*h un-els’ 1 •t^oasO lilt/ »'•;:• *ux
rwrcliiya'-l n Is th. eo c-ioo-»

* (“>4MCU)t-'-xririil«:two Ire* abtui v-.^.ct -.04? tc ulou»*

".V 1 •*■•'' urpirlco.i.r we re CoroirteC a’. 3«clwn ^on-t.iv.-pt.o j Ct^cp yc\.'.
c*-‘ly for Iho bvnoflt of the. daruoo - lr frer ~«j vo iu/osil^aio 'hJ acat
•.1’fcet‘va r- of tr-.«t*-;.£ po. ».o;nc U»i biwy OOVOJ Olj chilled or
. rt-_>n. iv jr.o r.or'uj 0 / on.w.-fxut th . oubjoctr, <f.i« for«o\

*.0 Wiuilc *.i a rank cf ice «i.tor f«r puriodj -iy to three hovr--, 1».
rtx-i rl^-’r C.yv.ilcpcd in o chert tine. fcuaoroue Ticciuc died la Iho
ton Bo cf thc-o >.rpt r.Vot’s. i # U’ t’.iO nvi • ira wwc jv ul.\

'l-i. ’Orfnia'.'v; w~e Bitj-ytod vuriou* rtjn'. fc ~r. nrothcr corior

•

'"f -xporv ofl^c, the- euhjLoU v-rc kept niked our joori, for n-jir hovre
^t tPupe-rnti' fro--xit^, . >i- d«-fcrd^.in K^rl '‘ra\idt. < Handtoeir r

"chroodov; 1-ochfXdv, P-udrif BraT.ct, Mrupownl.y. roppontf lac, “love.-c,
r-tci.or-Jroys*a b and v 6i?»: nro ch.-rr-d with apt-CinZ rcapoaoibill -.7
fc- aid y’r* , -icipption in thc^a crime.

1 v- ' 1 '• a lar* t. r 1 -cnt z , Troo nhout PotruaVy 1943 to about

^pr 11 1945 cupevi-,rt: vire couductei a’ the -achsu r -cn»toutro‘ion
" r~c ‘n r J or tc i-rertli-e.to lxu -1 --tlou for and tve- tuonv of
ual-ria^ =elathy concentration coup irs»tC£ -'tre infocted by

11366


19 August X347—'-X3IL2_3_Co?fc _ Earner
"sort I

=osquitoas or *7 injections of extracts cf tho ctxecug glands of
nofle-itoos. Af-cr having contracted malaria the cubjcctc vero troatod
vi*h rari no drugs to tect their relative efficacy. Over 1,350
involuntary subjects w,re used in those cxocrinon*r. K a ny cf the
Tittins died and otfcerc suffered severe pain and permanent disability*
*h® defendants ^arl Brandt, Handle ror, Sostock, C-ebhprdt, ?lcnc #

Rudolf Brandt, Wrug evaky, Poppcndick, and “levers are chargod
with cpoclal rcpaonclbllity f c r ani participation in those crir,o 3 .

fra a t ('--A a terfl) spa -ip or' . serf' . At vori ne tirca to two on
Tcptonbor 1S29 and April 1945 oxporircn’r wire conducted at Snohoon-
haunen, • ••txwoilor, and other concentration cn-ps for th*- bonofit of
tho German Ara-d Forces to invest*-ate the lost offoctivo treatment
cf vouads caused by lor* as. Lost is a pciecn -on which is ccraonly
kr.ovn as Mustard gas. bounds deliberately lnfoctcd on tho subjocts
vtr 0 lnfoctcd with Lest. Scs» of tho subjects died as a rocult
cf thc-o ©xpericcnto end others sufftrdd intoneo pain und injury.

dofondantc *orl Brandt, Kandlocer, Plcco, Bcotock, C-obherdt. Rudolf
Brnndt, and Siovcrs nro char td with special responsibility fcr oed
participoti n in these criaoa,

”(“) Sulfanllwnldo Brpor*-.c-»c, Bros about July 1042 tc
eVut "cptcabor 1943 oxoorlmcnts tc InverU'ato tho cffoctivoncsn of
rulfanilor.ldo were conductod at tho Rarenabruock Ccncontrpticn Cn^p
* or *ho bonofit cf the C-orsan d r ncd Forces. Wounds dollboratoly
inflicted cn the experiment,,! subjects were lnfoctcd with bactoria
r*^ch r= rtrcptccoccuc, gac gangrene, and tot anus. Circulation cf
bleed * s interrupted by tying off blo:d vcrrole at both or.de of tho
v usd to create a condition similar *c tint of a bcttlcfiold wound.
Infection wea eg/ravated b y forcin --o d chavingc and ground glace
ir.t-a tho we-unde. ?ko Infection w c trcp*ed with euifanilasldo and
-• ter dru s tc dotorninc tboir cf'octivoncca. 5omo subject? died oa
? rcr -- '* t’ c?.o experiments and ethers cuffored serious injury and
intenro agony, -he- defendants Karl Brandt, Sandlcrer, B-coteck, “chroodor,

^ 36 ?


19 August lM~-X_:-:5IL-2_4_:oc k _ H a =lcr
-OUTt I


Ccnjce=, --cthardt, 3 lo=e, Rudolf 3randt, Mrugcweky, Pcppcr.dlck, 3cckcr-
Xre7scre, Cbcrhcu-or, nr.d ?ischer arc Charged vith special responsi¬
bility for end p&rticipati-n in theeo crirec.

11 (P) -cne, Muscle, ar,d Ker~o Eef-o^e-nti on ar'd Brp.p Tr/mapl nr—
taiifia ^xrcri.-.Qr.rr. Pros about Sep tenter 19*2 to about Dccenber 1943


cxporir.er.*B were conducted at the B„vcnobruck Concentration Carp
for the benefit cf the Gernan Arred Porcce to study bene, cusclo,


«d nervo regeneration, and beno transplantation froa one percen
to another. Soetlona of bonon, cueclco, and norves wore rer.ovod from
tho oubjoetc. As a result of t-oso operations, sany victlns eufforod
intense atony, nutilation, and permanent disability. T hc dofendanto
Earl Brand, Hanaioeor, Boctcck, C C c-.rdt : H^jolf Brandt* Oborhcuecr,
end Plarhcr aro charged with special rospencibility for ar.d


portiripation ir. there crises,

" • ) "flay a tor irperirentr. P ren about ?uly 1944 to about ~opt-
cr.bc r 1944 experiments werr conducted at tho Eachau Concentration
“asp for tho bonofit of the Gorman Air Porco ond S«ry to study
various nothodc of making ooi-wotor drinkublo. Tho oubjecte voro do-
prived of nil food and rivon only chcsicully prococood coawotor.

'uoh experiments caused crert pain ond suffering and roaulttd in
coriouc bedily injury to *-ho victino. ^hc defondonts Karl ?mndt,
-"ondloror r Bos took, "chrecdor, Gjbhardt. B-.d^lf ?randt ; Mjuecvoky,
Bcppendick, "ievorf, ?cckcr_?rcyccnr, Schaefer, and 3 0 i#:lbocck nro
charred with special responsibility for and participation in those


‘TiECS,.


" '- r -■' -rldcnic « nur.dl cc Brptr lrPros about June 194 ? to
ab:ut •'nnu.-ry IG^S oxporlrcntc wort conducted at tho Sach-enhaueun
and ^atrwoilcr "oncentration Ca-p s for the benefit of tho C-ornan
Arned ?orcoc to investigate the eauso of, end inoculations against


epidemic Jaundico. Experimental cubjccts wore deliberately
infected with opide-ic Jen dico. seno of when died as a result,
and st trs w w ro caused gre^-t pain ana suffering. The defender.*s

11368


19 a;* 1347-

lourt I


LA:E_2_6J?ock - Hairier

0 *

Karl 3r,adt. Sandloser, Eertede, ocfcropdcr, Cebhardt, Sudolf Brandt,

Sir-^vBky, Ponpesdlck, Sievorc, Sc to, and Bcdccr-Trcysenf

arc charred with special rcpocnol* ility for and participation in those

crises.

*C) n Irrorl -ant^ Brea *cut March 1941 to about

January 1945 sterilisation experiaents were conducted at the AuacJwitz
and B^cachrucfc Concentration Cac- 8j »r.d other places. The purpose
cf these oxporlconts vac to dorclc.- a method of sterilization which
would ho suitable for otoriliaia* r.llli-n- of pocplo with n slninnus
„f tiac and of fort. Theco oxperiaents w..ro cenductod by =cns «f
X-Hay, anrrciy, and various «rue». Thousands of victim were rtorllisod
and thereby suffered *rect cental and physical anguish. The dcfeiw
dan-.e Karl Brandt, Cobhrdt, Sudclf Brandt, H7ucvoky : To ppondidc.

Brack, Pokorny, pnd Cborhc-ucr no charged with special responsibility

for and participation on those crises,.

'(j) Spotted fever Experiments Bren shows Doconber 19--1 to
about Pobruary 1345 oxocrluonto vc-c conducted at the Buchervald and
S.twcllor Ceacontration Ca=. 3 s fer the benefit of the Ooratn A:- E cd
xercos tc irroctiroto tho effectiveness of opofed IV.*cr and othor
▼accinec. At 3uchcnvnld nuaorcua healthy innatoc wore deliberately
infected with spotted fever virus in order to keep tho vlru*
ollvo; over OOv of tho rictina diet. as a rovult. Other health/ iasatoa
verc used tc deter'inc the effectiveness of different spotted fiver
-U-Cines and of various ehcsical substance. tho cotffrO cf the o
cxpcrirents 75$ of the selected nunber cf innates ~crc vaccinated with
one cf the vaccines cr nourished with enu of the chcuicol substances
and, after a period of three to four weeks, were infected with spotted
fever Perps. The retraining 25 ? were infected without any previous
protection in order tc cceparo the effectiveness cf the raccln*c
pad the chcsical substances. A- a result, hundreds of.tho pcrccns
experimented upon died. L^crinents - 1 th yellow fever, nr.allp-x, typhus
paratyphyc A aad ?, cholera, and diphteria -arc also conducted,

11369


15 At; act 1347-10(lD_2-^-Cook - Hauler
Court I


experircats with like rcoultc w^c conducted at h'atevcilcr Concentration
c o=p. -he defendant- EnrI Brandt, E -dloacr, HostocJc, ?chrocder,
■'cnzkcn, Gc'-hardt, Rudolf Brandt, krugewefcy, Pcppcndlck, ?icrcre, Eoso,
Henker-Troyaeug, and Ecrec arc charged with special responsibility
for and participation in theso crlncs.

"(2) Expcrlr.cr.tr. with Polccn . In or about Scccsbcr 1943 and
in or about Octc v or T944 experiments were conducted at the ?uchcnvald
Cr nccntrptlon "asp to investigate the effect of various poslons upon
h’isan boings. Ihc poisons were occrctly administered to cxpcrioor.tal
subject* in thoir food. Che victims died as a result of the poison
or verc killed iszxdir-tcly in order to persit autopsios. In or about
-~cptcaber 1944 cxpcriccntal subjects were shot with pcoion bullotn
and suffered torture and death. The defendants Gonckcn, (obhardt,
J'.rvcwcky, and Pojpcndick aro charged with special responsibility for
rnd participation in these crises."

In addition to the stdical ex-cr'.ccntr, the naturo and purpose
of which have boon outlined as alleged, certain of the defendants arc
charred with crlninal activities involving murder, torture, and
111-treatment of non_Gcman nationals an follcwc:

"?• Setwooa «unc 1943 and "eptesber 1944 the defendants
Rudolf 3r P ndt and "levers... v v.ro principals in, icccr-icrlcs to,

.Tiered, abetted, took a consenting p-rt in, and v L ro connect*d with
plane and enterprise involving *hc surder of civilians and tempers
:f the rfzcd forces cf nations then at war with the Gentan Reich
in exerciro of belligerent control. °ne hundred tvclvo Jews were
role-tod for the purpose of completing a skeleton ccllcctlcn for tho
?ol °h ’-nirersity cf Strasbourg. Ihcir photograpeh and anthropological
asurcucntc were taken, "hen they w trc killed. Thereafter, coBpariscn
anatomical research, studies regarding rpec, pathclccicpl
features cf *hc bed;-, fern and size cf the brain, rnd other torts,
v,r - uedc. Ike bodies wore cent to Strasbourg and dcflcskcd.


1370


1? -i-m*t 1947A-X-ir^a 7-000-^6=10?

''csrt 1

6. Sctvc-cn Hay 1942 aid ''anli*ry 19'3 *hc dcfuc'ontc Blcrau -rx?
p-.-J.l-' Prmdfc#. were principals in accessories to-, ordorcd, abett'd.
re ’r a ooar.e-.i5iaf , art So, and were connected with plane and *Jutofp\-'c_-
isvol.-ia; the carder arri aistrertaent of tuns of thousands of >olxeh
national* vb vc.ro civilians and nonbv.ro of the arced forces of a
uaticn then r.t > ar with the ^emaa Boich and who were in the
c-.ctodjr ol the Gv.rnan 3„irh 'a exevci.*c c-f bolXlr-jrar.t joaSrcl,

7r._-c people '»or». ail reed to ho iufvctod viuh V.'.rorcblo teborcrlosia.

On iho ground of Insuring the Vu.-.h rnl welfare of C-criaas in
Poland, nanv tubercular Fclcc were ru*hl« ne_y t xtorcin&oed while otnera
wen xuolat-.d in death o«ft with fact. title- .

*3 t 2-twocn ."e-ptznber 193? end A— il 1043 tb - dofondar-a ‘■ur
3r*adt r 3r?c'c. and Kavw.... v.ra yrli»c' i- upcvriorios co,

or.-cd, rbwtts.:, too a conrontin* p»rt in : «•.* were conoctod with
plant and or.tc7j.rt«oi itn .-Ivins th> execution of 'ho cc-ca’icd
"o-.thnanair. 1 of the 6cra*x. -eVh in tho ce-rec el vM<& the

defendantr. litren mr^^red huadrooa of thousands of hunnn bolnre
includin': ••atrnno'ifc of O ur nu..occ'«riud ccuo-rlos, ?hlj pr.'grasi '_rw*
Tlrtd the 3J atettp.Mt and secret execution cf the aged in.;mo
incurably HI. cf deferred children, and other pcrsonc, by pao
lethal lnjccti-ur, ond llvoro ether ac n n= ia nuralxy: hoaug.
hcipircl-’- osd asylums, Surli per-. ran v-r.. regarded ae '‘unelcwn m'-f/
eid \ bureau to the t-erccn war uorcuin©. 2ho rolativcj cf these victinc
v.rc ‘nfrraoi tlv-t they oi A from natural »u«cs. 3uch ts heart
f»il—c C-c-vtnr. doctors involved ia tho "onthaansia" procr«: we.*o
tlsc rent to the —psttra occupied countries to areist ir the rase
cx*ernia.-.tioa if ."-vj , r

Cooc-.x -vo and three- of tlv indictment conclude with the
avert cat *h t the o”ir..r and iTooiti.e which ha/c boon delineat'd
"constitute violations of interna*, t'rial


}21T1


1® au urt—>-L-3ross (I-'.. 2r.-.-.ler)
Court I


conventions..., the lev* and castocs of *ar| the .cenercl principles
of cri iurl lav n derived fro= the criminal lavs of all civilised
n-tions, the internal penal lavs of the countries in which such
cri.: ;a wo *; con. ltted, pad of Article II of Control Council L r w Vo,
10 ."

C,ont J ur - iiesbershl? in Crir.innl Or-cnlsetlon:

Ch: f urth count of the indictncnt a-lleres that the defendants Karl
Sr-r. '.t, 3 nsken, Gebhrrdt, Rudolf Brandt, llru-ovsky, Pop .er.dick, Sievcrs,
3rrnk, Korea rad - r isch:r rrc ruilty of neabershi? in rn organisation
dccl-rod to bo criminal by the Intornr.tionrO. Military Tribunal, in that
each of tlx bo nmed defendants was r aeeber of VIZ SCSUTZST/J7ZX£ D2R
SaTIOXAL S02l-LISTISCE2r BSITTSOHSS .^aSICSaiRgSI (manly known r.s
the SS) aft or 1 Septcober 1°39. In violation of Prrwi-* 1 (d) Articlo
I! of Control Council Lav Uo. 10.

3cforc turr.inr our attention to the cvldcnco in tho ca.so vc shall
■t-.tc the law announced by the Interactional hilitnry Tribunal vith
reference to ncr.bcrship in an or-mit- tlon doclercd crii incl by tho
Tribunals

"I i -11 • with the SS the Tribunal i icludoo rll pirsors who had

- "n o'*ici'lir accented as nenbero of tho SS includin tho rierbero
of the -ii ccoinc S^>, neebera of the Vaffcr-SS, renbera of tho SS-

- - tc-ikopf "erbaende, -nd the rtenbero of any of the different police
f.rccc vho vorc renbers of tho SS. The Tribunal docs not include tho
so-c.-llvd ridin-- units....

"Tho Tribunal dccl-rcs to be cri-.inal within tho no min* of tho
Ch-rtcr f.vo -roup composed of those persons who had been officially
accepted -8 nenters of the SS a.6 er.u rated in the preceding para.srnph
who hoc re c or renainetf nenbers of the organization with knovlo&'o that
it waa boin- used for the conuission of a.cts declared crininrl by
Article o of th; Charter, or vho were personally inplicr.tod as ncricrc
the or r.-.iir tion in the con i s si on of such crlccs, excluding.


r372


1C .»u ist-.>-1-3-3-Gross (Ir.t. Ppeder)
Court I


v 0 vp«-^r, those who were drafted into censorship 'ey the State ir. such
r wry co to tIvo thee no choice in the setter, end who had oou .ittod
as such crlnca. The basis of this finding is the prrticiprtion of
the or .-nlzrtio a ir. Vrr Crises rr.d Crises rvpainst Eusrnity connected
with the war; this rrou? declared crisinrl cannot includo, therefore,
persons v. o had ceased to belong to the or.gniixr.tions cnunorr.ted in
the prccoiia: pnrr:rcpta prior to 1 Soptaibcr 1939."

P/CSIIS.T: Jud-- So briar will continue with the reading of
the ju tvrct,

jucoz srBT': the gaoo r a b rov-js cr,i::zs -jj csiiss

-*Gai::s? gttanrr

Juited by ’.v" otr adrrd of proof the record clearly shows the connisolan
of war crir.os r.-.f crises rgninst hun»*nlty substantially os rilo-vod
la counts two me* three of the indictncnt, 3o lain.* with tho out-
bre-k of Ybrld Tfrr II crisinrl nedic-1 exporirtonts on aonr-OuR.ua
nationals, both rrison. rs of vrr and civilirno, including Jowo rad
■r.socirl" persons, were carried out on r largo scrlo in QorTicay and
the occupiod countries. These ex a rir.cn ts woro not the lsolnted nnd
crourl acts of individual doctors rnl rononrehists working solely on
their own responsibility, but were tho product of coordinated pollcy-
nakift and planning rt hlrh rovcraeeatnl, nilltnry, and Knzi Party
levels, C'.nduc ted rs an intetrrl part of tho total wrr effort. They
were ordorc, sanctioned, permitted or approved by persons in poli¬
ticos 0 * author!ty who under rll nrinci~>lc6 of lew were under tho
duty to knot* about these thiu-s nnd to trkc stops to terr.inr.to or
prevent then.

?ir:iS3iz-Lz :zd:c^l z:z?z~z.~~s

Th. tc t woi ht of the evidence before us is to the effect that
certain types of ne&lcrl experiments on busrn boin s, when kept
■'ithin rc-scnr.bly well-defined bounds, coafora to the ethics of the
scdie-1 •'refessien roaerrlly. The iro try. mists of the practice of


373


1° .%u list-' -~‘T-3-3-Gro3s (Int. Sannler)
Court i


tirva experiment rt ion Justify their views on the basic that Buch cxperl-
-cnts yiol results for the rood of society that art unprocurable by
other nethods or rerns of study. All &-rco f honever, that certain
brsic pri'.ci'loa cust be observed in order to satisfy coral, ethicel
rnd lord concepts:

1. The voluntary consent of the huorn subject in absolutely osscntial.

“his terns that the person involved should hevo lecnl capacity to

ive consent; should be so situated rs to bo r.bla to exorcise free
povor of choice, without the intervention of ray olenent of forco,
fraud, deceit, duress, overreaching, or othor ulterior for.-, of con¬
straint or coercion; rnd should hrve sufficient knovlcdro rnd conpro-
honsior. of the elcconts of the subjoct cat tor involvod as to onr.blo
hit to oaks -a understmdin' rnd cnli htcaod decieion. This lr.ttor
decent re quires that before the rcccptrnco of an affimativo dociolon
by the cxucri.ucat-l subject there s* Julc. bo aado known to fcin tho
n-turc, ‘ur“tion, rnd purooso of the experinent; the rothocl rnd corns
by w 1 ' ic’* It is to be conducted; rll inconveniences rnd ho sards rorson-
rbly to be cx>cctod; and the effects upon his horlth or person which
ary nossibl.- cor.o fror. his prrticiprtlon in tho orocriacnt.

Ih: duty cud responsibility for rscort-inln - : tho rurlity of tho
consent rests u*»r. orch individual vha initiates, directs or oar.rtoo
in the oxierl-ont. It ie " personal duty and res-onsibillty which noy
nut be dol»v rated. to -notber with in-unity.

2. The experiment should be such rs to *icld fruitful results for
the rood of socioty, unprocurable by other nothods or no-ns of study,

-nd not random cnc unnecessrry in nature.

5. Tho enprinent should be so dcsi nod and. based on the results of
minnl ex crinantrtion and r knowledge of tho nr.turrl history of the
disease or other -roble- urfer stud; that the anticipated results
''ill Justify the rtrfomance of the experiment.

\ !’• c— cri-fnt should be so conducted rs to avoid all unnecessrry


1137c


1° in us!—: l-3Z-y~h~j ro « • (Int. ?.r~l:r)

Court I


pfcysica.1 and uentel suffering rod injure.

5. ”5 cxpcrinent should be conducted where there Is ca o priori
reason to believe that depth or dischliar Injury vili occur; except,

-x r-.r -3, i those ex'erinenia where the experimentrl ^'sicims also
serve ns subject b.

S. The derree of risk to he tricar, should never exceed tha.t detcrain-
ed by the humanitarian importance of the problem to ho solvod by the
experiment.

7. Proper preparations should bo .unde cad cdoqurtc facilities pro-
rldct’ to -u-otect the experimental subject r.rtinst even renoto
possibilities of injur:', disability, or do nth.

3. The oxyorinent should be ccnduc tod only by scientifically
qualified persons. The highest do rco of skill rad erxo should be
required throu ;h oil stapes of the ox'porir.ont of thoso who conduct
or cn t :o in tho experiment.

r '. 2urin the course of the experiment tho hunrn subjoct should bo
r.t liberty to brlnr the experinent to en end if ho has ronchod tho
nhyslcrl or mental strtc vhcro continuation of the ox'crinmt sceno
to bin to be Impossible.

1C. 3urin the course of the experiment tho scientist in chrrpo
-unt be rc-vred to terminate the experiment nt any stnpo, if ho hno
orohnblo C'usc to believe, in the cxcrcico of the sood faith,
s-x»ericr skill rnd c*reful judgment required of hi-, thr.t a. continue-
tl .a. of the cxycrlnent is llkcl7 tc result in injury, disability, or
-oath to the experimental subject.

Of t- i tea yrincimles which have been cnur.orrtcd our Judicial con-
ccr.-., of course, is with those rcquiro:icats which pro purely lc,;al in
n-.turo — or which rt lerst are so closely end clearly rolrtod to
• mttors lc.;~l th-t they assist us ir. deter-ininj,- criainr.1 eulpebility
Tinishnont. To ~o b«ycn J th-t oint would lead us into r field
tlr* would be beyond our sphere of com^cter-co. However, tho point need

11375


19 Mu ma:-; --:->5-Gro3s (Ir.t. Eeumle-r)

C -urt I

nos be labofei. V* find from the evidence that In the nedical experi¬
ments w itch Iveve been proven, thcec ton principle* were much nor*
freqcaatly honored la their breach than la their observance. Many
of the concentration ennp innrtes who wero the victims of these
atrocities were citizens of countries other than the German F.eich.
~Qt7 ucrc noa-Gemrn nationals, includin ' Jews end "asocial persons",
>Oth prisoners of vrr and civilians, who had been imprisoned end
forced to cubrit to these tortures rad berbexitics without so nuch
as semblance of trial. In every single instate rnpeaxin.~ in the
record, nubjrcts »<ere used who did not consent to the experiments;
indoc:*, ns to some of the experiments, it is not oven contcndod
by the 'cfendrr ts that the subjects occupicc* tho status of volunteors.
In no c-se vr-i the experimental subjoet at liborty of his own freo
choice to withdraw fron ray experiment. In neay casos exporinonts
woro >orfo:.\mcd by unqualified persons; wore conducted at rondos
for no a.choqur.te scientific reason, and under revolting physical
conditions. ,;11 of tho expcrlncnts wore conducted with unnecessary
raff or in rad injury rad but very little, if any, precautions v«rc
taken to protect or s«foTuard the human subjects fron the >ossibi-
litics of Injury, disability, or death. In overy one of the experi¬
ments tho subjects experienced extreme poin or torturo, rat in nost
of the they suffered pernanent injury, nutilir.tion, or death,
either as n direct rcralt of the cr crlncnts or because of lack of
adequate follo-ir crac.

Obvious!-. all of theso experiments involvir. • 'a-utalitics, tortures,
•lisabllr.: injury and death were performed in conplete disrexrd of
International conventions, the lrws and customs of wra, tbo cncral
nriaciiles of criminal lav as derived from tho criminal laws of all
civilised nations, and Control Council law 2o. 10. Manifestly
human experiments under such conditions ere contrary to "the principles
of The laws of n-tions-ss they result fra" the usa-es established


19 — - .n e t—1 -hZ-> 6—3ro b s (1st. Baanler)

Court I

civilized people, fror the lew; of huamity, end fron the
diotctes of public conscience.*
bhethar any of the defendants la the dock ere guilty of thoso
•troclties is, of course, another question.

Under the k;-le-Spxon ^stes of jurlr.>rudor.co every dofendent in n
crlrin. 1 epao is presumed to he ia.ocont of on offense charged until
tha prosecution, hy competent, crodihlo proof, has shown his ^xilt
to the oxclusion of every reasonable doubt. And this proscription
r bides with r defendant throuih each strvjo of his trial until such
do too of proof has hocr. ndducod. "reasonable doubt" ns the nnno
in lies, is one conforcrble to reason - r. doubt which r. rcnaonrblo
ara would entertain. Stated differently, it is that str.to of n cr.sc
which, after n full rod conplctc comparison end consideration of nil
the cTlt'oaco, would lcavo rn unbiased, unprejudiced, rcfloctivo
poroor., charged with the responsibility for decision, in tho etrto
of lr.d that he could not say that he folt nn abiding conviction
Mount in to r coral certainty of the truth of the ch-r^o.

If ray of the defendants are to be found ruilty under counts two
or throe of the indlctccr.t it nust be bocruso the evidence has shown
beyor." a reasonable doubt that such defendant, without ro'erA to
n-tionrlity or tho capacity in which he acted, participated as a
principal ir., accessory to, ordered, pbottcl, took r consentin' part
in, or van connected with pirns or ontororiscs involvin tho cocuis-
slon of -t least sore of the aedla-l oxporlr.cnts and other ntrocitlos
which axe the subject catt-r of these counts. Under no other circur*-
Bt-nccs nay he be convicted.

3e:ore ex-sining the evidence to which we nust look ir. order to
date t^ne Individual culp-billty r brief statement concernin;- soce of
tiie official agencies of the G c mrn government and Hr zi Party which
■'ill be referred to in this Judgnent oee=s desirable.


1X377


19 ’or !»7-Si-je-!i-l-Gto«s (Int. ?-=ler)

Coart So. I

PKSEEW: C^F ^ETIC'L SZF7ICE IS GSBfi-T

M*lf Hitler wsi the head of the Nazi Party, the German
OoVermont, art the German Armed Forces. His title as Chief of the
govenaant was "Fetch Chancellor". As Supreme leader of the National
Socialist Gern»n Worker’s Party, csr-only called the NSG»P or Nazi
Party, his title w?s "^hrer. *s hod of Germany's armed military
Bight he wrj "Sucre re Commander ‘r. Chie' of the German *med forces,
or XehrB»cht".

The staff through which Hitler controlled the German *nred
Forces wes known as the "Supreme Corrrand of the Wehnsacht" (OK*). The
chief of this staff wns Field Varshsl Allhelm Keitel..

Under the Supreme Comm art of the Wchnr.echt were the Sup re re
Commands of the »rry, Navy, sid *ir Force. The Supreme Connend of the
Nivy (OK'0 was headed by Or aid Admiral Karl Toenit*. The Supreme Con-
rand of the »ny (OKH) war headed by Field Varshal Walter von Brauchitsch
until December 1911, *r.d thereafter by Hitler hi-nsolf. The Suprec
Command of the Air Force (CKL) was headed by Ibichaarshal Hermann
Goering.

Each of the three branches of the Aehmocht maintained its
rwn medical service.

Army ^dlca^ Service; The defendant Handloser was the head
of the frny ’’edical Service fmn 1 January l'Hil to 1 September 19hlj.
While ir. this oos'tion he served lr. two edacities, namely; ns Army
’>dic»l Inspector ^ rs Army “hys'cl'ii. These Dositions required the
maintenance of two doosrtrents, each seoerete from the other. At ono
tire or another there were subordinated to H-andloser in these official
cac-cities t’rv* following officers, others: Generalerzt Prof.

Dchrciber end Prof. Instock; Oberstabsent Drs. Scholz, Eyer, Bernhard
"shmidt and Crerer; "berstabsarsts Prof. Gutzeit and Prof, "irth;

t.absarzt Prof, liewe and Prof. Killan, *nd Stabs ant ur. Dohnen.

Under his suDervision in either cr both of his official edacities were
•he Vilitary ifedicel Academy, the Typhus *r.d Virus Institutes of the


11373


19 Aug-y-’'r-L-2-Gr^ss < Int. Feeler)

Court 10 I.

TH »t Cracow «nd le-berg, ar,d the 'fedical School for Mountain Troops
at St. Johtflftl

Luftwaffe Radical Service : Free the beginning of the war un¬
til 1 January 19Ui Hiopke was Chief of the Lfedlcal Service of the Luft¬
waffe. On that date the defendant Schrceder succeeded Hippke and re-
sained in that position until the end of the war.

Subordinated to Schrceder as Chief of the Sfcdical Service
the Luftwaffe were the following defendants: frse, who was con¬
sulting medical officer on hygiene and tropical medicine; A’eltz, who
was chief of the Institute for Aviation Ifedicine in Munich; Becker-
Freyaeng, p ccnsultant for aviation medicine In Schroeder's office;

Puff, tto chief of the Institute for «vintior. ’tedicine in the German
Experimental institute for Aviation in Berlin; Foaberg, Ruff's chief
assistant, who toward the end of the war attained the Dosition of a De-
rartcer.t head «*t the Institute; Schaefer, who, in the ausner of 1°1 j 2,
was po signed to the Staff of the research Institute for Aviation Itodi-
clne in Berlin to do research work on the oroblen of sea esorgeney;
and Beiglboock, a Luftwaffe officer who performed medical exporicjer.ts
on concentration cacn inrtC3 at Dachau in July 19U for the purpose of
date reining the not ability of processed seawater.

Under Schroeder's Jurisdiction as Chief of the Luftwaffe 'fcdi-
c»l Service was the ’Ardicel cdery of the Luftwaffe at Berlin.

> Ifcdlcnl Service : One of the rest irport/nt branches of the
Party was t Ye Schutz3tnffeln of the MSDAP, commonly known as the SS.
Heir.rich Hin-.ler was chief of the SS with the title of fcichsfuehror SS,
*>nd on his personal staff, servirg in v-rious rurd sundry official cepec-
Itles was the defendant Pudolf Brandt.

The SS bp int pined its owr. medical service headed by a certain
r. Irawitz, who held the position of Reich Physician SS and Police.

A^dlcal Serv i ce the *affcn-SS : The SS branch of the Nasi
-*rty, in turn, was divided into several cor-nccents, of which one of the
"3t important was the *affen, or -rned, SS. The Tfpffen SS was ferred


12379


I? Aug L7-l'-V?-L-3-Gross (int. Faaler)

Court !Io. I.

Into military units >ni fought at the front with units of the v ehr-
■achti Such medical units of the *affen-SS rs were assigned to the
field, becar.e subordinated to the nodical service of the A ray, which
was suoervised by Hmdlcs*r.

The Chief of the Wpffen-SS Medical Service was the defendant
Gens ken. Bis immediate suoeri-r was feich Physic!-m SS end Police

Growltz.

Six other defend wits in the dock were se ir.be rs of the Medical
Service of the SS, under Grawltz, nrcely; Gebhardt, who In 191*0 became
surgical advisor to tho Awffen-SS and who In August 191*3 created and
took over the position of Chief Clinicpl Officer of the feich Physician
SS and Police; "rugowsky, who bec*e Chief of the Hygiene Institute of
tte Waffon-SS under Gem ken in Uoresbcr 191*0, and whon the Institute
w-s taken from Gensken's supervision on 1 September 191*3 and placed
ir.der direct subordination to Crawltz, remained as Chiefj Poppondick,

’ho in 191*1 was appointed Chief Physician of the Si-dr. Paco arid Settlo-
rtsr .t 0ffico in ferlin pnd who in 19l3 a ls became Chief of the Personal
Staff of the feich Physician SS and Police; Hoven, who fror the begin¬
ning of 191*1 until July 19b2, serwd as the assistant, and fron then
to Se-terbor 1^L3» ■* Chief Physician, at tho Puchcnwald Concentration
Taro; Fischer, an assistant physician to tb defendant Gobhnrdt; and
finally the defendant iberh^user, who In December 19b0 became a phy¬
sician at the Revorsbruck Concentration C»=m', and thereafter, fn-«n
Jure 191*3 until the er.d of the war, served as an assistant ohysician
under the defendant Gebhardt at Hohenlychen.

Civilian ’frdlc"! Service ; Throughout the war the Civilian
'•teilcal Services of the feich were headed by p certain Dr. Lennart
*onti. Conti had two orincipal can^cities: (1) He wa 3 the Secretary
State for Health in the Uinistry of the Interior of tho Government;
ir. this capacity he was a German civil servant subordinated to the
-Inister of the Interior — first *ilhelr Frick pnd later, Heinrich

’er. r 2) he was the feich Health Leader of the !ipsl Party; in this


11330


19 Aug L?-y-V'r-L-L-jrrss (Int. P-Taler)
Court No. I,


c-cecity he was subordinated to the Nazi P=rtv Chancellery, the chief
of which w-s Kertih Boramn* In his capacity as feich Health leader,
Conti had =s his deputy the defendant Bios*.

Feorganizaticn of 'ehrcecht Medicel Service: In 19ii2 a re¬


organization of the various -fedicel Services of the Tfehrcacht kps ef¬
fected. By e Fuehrer decree of 23 July l=b2, Handloser becace Chief
of the Medici* Services of the <ehre.pcht, while at the sa-e tine re¬
taining his position --s Chief Physician of the «rzv s rry ‘fedicpl
Inspector. Under the decree referred to, Handloser was given nower and
authority to supervise and coordinate "oil tasks corrrron to the Medical
Services of the *ehiracht, the X-fftn-SS end the organizations and units
subordinate or attached to the Aehrcscht." He was also cosrr.anded "to
represent the Aehrsacht before the civilian authorities in all cocrren
nodical problems arising in the various branches of the Achrracht, tho
'•ffer.-SF and organizations and units subordinate or attached to the
Kehraacht" and "to protect the interests of the 3chrracht in all redical
reaaures taken by the civilian aithoritios."

H-ndloser thus beewre supreme nodical leador in the military
field, a 0 was Conti in the civiliwi honlth and medical service.

By a subsequent ‘‘uehrer decree of 7 August l?Uli Hnr.dloser
was relieved of his duties =s Chief Physician of the Army and Arrv
’bdicol Inspector, but ret-ined his position ®s Chief of tho ilehrraeht
\bdJcnl Serv* ce.

By the J ocrec of 23 Ju’v l“'a? pursuant to which Hnndloser be-
cace Chief cf the 'fedlcal Services of tho 7'ehr-racht, the defendant Karl
Brandt beer* empowered, subordinate oaly to, and receiving instructions
directly front, Hitler "to c-rry out special tasks and negoti ations to
readjust the reqoiresents for dcct-rs, hospitals, nodical supplies, etc.,
between thp military and the civilian sectors of the Health -tA 'bdical
Services." The decree also directed that Br-ndt "is to be kept lnfor-ed
-bout the fundamental events in the medical service of the Xehreccht
and in the Civilian Health Service" =r.d “is authorized to intervene in

11331


Aug ii7-H-'B-U-5-Gross (Int. Evader)

Court !io, I.

a responsible Danner."

« subsequent decree issued 5 September 19^3 extended the
powers of the defendant Karl Brandt by providing: "The plenipotentiary
for the Viedicrl and Health Services ... is charged with centrally co¬
ordinating and directing the proble=s and activities of the entire
Medical and Health Service according to instructions. In this sense
this order aprlies »l3o to the field of aedic»l science and resoarch,
as well as to the oreanizatlanal institutions concerned with the onnu-
facture end distribution of redical nateri-l. The plenipotontiory for
the Ifedicel and Health services is authorized to appoint and corrcission
special deputies for this sphere of action."

By a Inter decree of 25 August 19*ih Ksrl SP‘ND7 was made

Fetch Corrrissioner for Sanitation and Health for the duration of the

t

war; the decree providing:

"In this capacity his office ranks •« highest fcich Authority”
ar.d he is "authorized to issue instructions to the offices and
organizations of the St"t«, Party, fcid .fchnracht which are con¬
cerned with the problccs of the Modic»l and Health Services."

Thus, by this series of decrees, the defendant Karl 9F*!«DT,
within thl3 sphere of coToetcnce, becAar* the suorewo nodical authority
of the reich subordinate to no ore but Hitler.

Three of the defendants -re not physicians.

The first is the dofer.d-nt Br-ck who bcc-wre subordinated to
Bouhler at the tire the latter »-s appointed Chief of the Chancellery
of the Fuehrer, in 193L, tid re--iwd rith Souhlor throughout the wpr.

The second is the defend-nt =udolf °F*'D7 who, from the tire
he .loinod the staff of Hi=rlcr in 1^33, served for a twelve vc*r period
ir. varying capacities. At first Pudolf Brandt was » rere clerk in the
Starr of the Fbich fuehrer SS but by 1936 h-d risen to chief of the
r "rsor.sl Staff of “ir-.ler. In 1935 or 1939 he bec*re Hi—ler's liaison
'ffleer to the llnistry ef the Interior end particularly to the 'ffice
-f the Secretary cf the Trrteri r. Vhen Hinr-ler bec-ne Minister of

11332


:? imz i7-il-'fr-L-6-3ross (let. Rzsler)

Coart No. I.

Interior in 19U3 Fudolf Brmdt bee?!* Chief of the Ministerial Office
■hen Hi-nler becace President of the ihnenerbe Society, hidolf Brar.dt
teepee lisison officer between Hiveler "nd the Jeich Secretary of the
ihnensibe Society, defendant "Holfr.-a Slevers.

The third is the defendant Sieve re, who wre a seeber of
Hianler's rersonal staff rnd fbich Business "»n»ger of the thnenerbe
Society froo 1 July 1935 until the end of the wrr.

T«S SCCTPTf

The ihnenerbe Society, of which Sievere was feich Business
I'-n'ger, wns in existence as pn independent entity as o<*rly as 1933.

On 1 July 1?35 the »hner.crbe bee re* duly registered as an organisation
to conduct or further “research or. the locality, aiivi, deeds -nd heritage
of the Northern race of Indo-Gcir-ns >r.d to dsss on the results of (his
research to the T°rli In »n Interesting sinner." On 1 January 19U2
tte Socioty bccaae part of tho Personal Staff or the fcichsfuohrer SS
«nd thereby a section of tho SS. Its nanegeroent wre conposed of Hein¬
rich Hi Trier re President, Prof. Dr. *uQ3t, Jbctor of the University
«f Munich, as Curator, and the defondant Sievere re fbich Business
""Ragcr.


11303


19 tug-!4-V?-5-l-Lcon»ri
Court No. I.


Subsequently, during the s-ae year, the Institute of Ulitwiy Scientific
Feserrcb w’s established *9 a part of the *hnenert>e. Its purposes are
defined in * letter written by Hiialer to Sievers, which directed the
following with reference to the 'hnenerbe:

"1. To establish *n Institute for ttliitery Scientific fe-
search

2. To support in every possible w»y the research carried
out by SS Hauctsturrfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hirt md to promote
all corresponding research and undertakings

3. To e^ke 'milable the required apparatus, oquirment,
-rcas3''rles "r.d assistants, or to procure them

L. To take use of the facilities available in Dachau.

5. To contact the Chief of the SS Foonccic and A-tainiatrativo
Wain Office with regards to the costs which car. he borr.e
by the Waffen-SS."

In its Judgment, the Intorr.rti''nal Military Tribunal made the
following findings of fact with referenco to the Ahnoncrbo:

"Also attached to the SS =’in offices was « research founda¬
tion known »s the Experiments Ahnonertoo, The scientists attached
to thl3 organization *rc stpted to have boon mainly honorary
numbers of the SS. During the war -w, institute for military
scientific research became attached tc the Ahnenerbo which con¬
ducted extensive oxoorl-onts i^volvinr the use of living human
beings. *r. cr«loycc of this institute w-o a certain Dr. Pose her,
who conducted those experiments with the full knowledge of the
•hnen°rbc, which was subsidized n nd under the patronage of the
F^ichsfuehrer SS who w-s = trustee of the foundation. Wo shall
row discuss the evidence as it pertains to the individual de¬
fendants."

riFl 3 P»SDT

The defendant Karl Brandt is charged with special responsibility
~ r, and prrtieimtion, in Freezing, V lari a. Lest Gas, Sul f anil amide,

11381;


19 «ug L7-*-lS-5-2-Iconerd
Court Ho. I.


=one, Muscle red Herrs feger.er-tion ?nd Bone Transplantation, Sep S?ter,
Eoide-ic Jeon dice, Sterilization, red Spotted Fever Experiments, re
-lleged under Ceir.ts Tiro end Three of the Indictment. He is »lso
charged in Counts Two end Three with criminality in connection with
the planning red carrying out of the Futhrerei* program of the Gennre
fetch. Under Count Four of the Indictment he is charged with Member¬
ship in the SS, »n organization decl-red criminal by the judgment of the
International Hilit-ry Tribunal.

Ki»rl Brrerit t»m 8 January 190ix »t lAxt-hlhausen, *lsreo,
then » portion of Gerr-ry, studied medicine, red passed his modicrl
oxardr.*tion in 1923. He Joined the Hafclon«l Socialist Party in Jemmy
1532, «nd bee re* a nesber of the S» in 1933. He became a member of the
fllgemoine-SS in July 193h T.d wss appointed Untersturmfuehrer on the
he Joined that organization. During the sum-re r of 1931 he becams Hitler's
"Escort Physician"--as he describes the office.

He w-s Drcnoted to the grade of fbersturr. fuehrer ir. tho »11-
gerroiw —SS or. 1 January 1935; and in 1938 was classed re deferred in
orl'r that in case of w-*r ho night bo fre'- to servo on tho staff of tho
fetch Chancellery ir. Hitlor's h'-rJquirtonj. During tho month of 'nrll
1®39 Karl Prredt wre pre-^ted to the r-nk of Cberstunrt>enr.fu€hrer ir.

•he Mlgereine-SS, T n 191x0 he wre transferred from the Olgcneine-SS to
the Vaffen-S3, in which cc-=i35ions wore •‘qulvalent to those of the 'nay.
r. 30 J-nupty 19U3, ho received p gr-dc equivalent to that of Vnjor General
ir. the Wfbr.-S3, red on 20 *rril 19U. w-s promoted to the cr-de of Lieu¬
tenant Gor.er"l in that orgpeization. "-ving at some previous date been
relieved as Hitler's escort physician, bo wa S -g-ln ->poolntod as such in
tho fall of l9Uu Gn 16 »rr 1 1^x5 he w-s -rrested by the Gestapo, and
tho next d*y w-s condemned to death by a court at Porlin. He w-s rele-scd
frer. arrest by order of the provisional government under Doenits on 2 !fcy
~n 23 1°L5 he wps pi reed aider re-rest by the British rethor-

'ti03.

Pv doore- be “ring d-te 2 July 19L?, stoned by “itlor, Keitel


113.5


;? »-jg-»7-'Me-5-3-!eon»rd
‘wart "o. I.


-r.d I^rr-ers, :<=rl Br-ndt was invested with high authority over the
redic~l services, rilit-ry -tA civilian, ir. Gcrn-ny. Paragraphs 3 *nd
. of this decree, referring to K-rl 5r-r.dt, re-d -a follows:

"3. I er.rorer Professor Dr. Karl Brandt, subordinate
only to xe personally rr.d receiving his instructions
directly fro-, d, to crry out soccial t -s ka and negotia¬
tions to readjust Ur requirer.er.ts for doctors, hosoit-ls,
nodical sup-lies, etc., between the rilit-ry and the
civilian sectors of the Health «nd '*dicel Services.


"b. Hy Dleninotonti.-ry for Health -nd ’.fcdical Services
is to be kept info reed -tout the fundamental events in
the redlc»l Service of the *ohm«cht and ir. the Civili-n
Health Service. He is authorised to intervene in *» res¬


ponsible Banner."

Py decree bearing d-t« 5 September l*>b3, signed by Hitler and
L-r.-erc, Brandt's authority w-s strengthened. This decree rc-da ->9 follows:

"In »-clific*tion of ay decree concerning the itodic -1 -nd
Health Services of 29 July 19b2 (FGB. I P. 515) I order:

"The plenipotentiary for the IVidic«l and Health Service*, 3ener«l Corc-
rlsoioner Professor !)r. ved. Br-ndt, is charged with centrally coordin-
"tlng and directing the nnblo-s -nd activities of the on tiro Medical
r.d Health Services according to lnstr.-ctions. In this sense this order
rnlics also 6 the field of '>dic-l Science -nd r i'sc=rch, as well »s
•- the organicatirnel i-stitutions concerned with the icanufacturo -nd
distribution of nedic»l n-teri- 1 .

“The plenipotentiary for the tfcdlc -1 -rd He-lth Services is authorized
*-0 -DDcir.t rnd coeroission special deputies for his spheres of action."

=y further decree bearing date 2 H fugost 19bb, signed by Hitler,

: '-■!>, Bor--nn, -r.d ‘eitel, K-rl BrT.dt received further authority.

•his decree rc-ds:

rcroby appoint the Gener -1 Ccrric-iorer for ifcdic -1 »rd Health r.attcro,
Pr.fessor r. Brandt, Belch Ccr-is-.ioocr for Sanitation -r.d Health r>s


11366


° ’us ^^-iccr.'-rf

Court "o. I.

311, for the duration of this *r. In this er?city his office riYa
c.5 highest Fetch -uthority.

Fetch Cor-issioner for "edio*! »nd u e»lth Services is mthorized
:c issue instructions to the offices 'nd orv-niztlor.s of the Stte,

--rty -r.d ehrv’cht, which *re concerned with the rroble-s of the Hrdlcel
-r/i Fe^lth Services."

Prosecution Exhibit U’5, - letter be-rinp d< to °t Munich, 9
;-r.ury I9h3, signed by Conti -nd m-rked “Strictly Confident!1", direct¬
ed to tho Leaders of Public Health 3-j Offices of the 'l-tlor.-l Socialist
frt—-n Workers' P*rty, refersto * decree of tho Fuehrer on "Suspending
the Pledge to Secrecy In Spcci*l C-ses." The letter continues:

"For your strictly cor.fiderti'1 information T sending

rtt-ched Fuehrer decree *nd tho circular letter I «a

writing or. th-t subject to the herds of the rfldic.-l

ch^cheni."

' not he r nortlcr. of the exhibit consists of r cony of Conti's
letter, pIso be-ring d-t*> 9 J nu-ry to the ho-da of the mcdicrl

ch-rbers, --,d re^ds ~s follows:

"Strictly Confidential.

"Subject: '’Uehror decroo on susDenslon of pledge to secrecy
in sooc !*1 c’ses.

"Tentlopcn:

“I —. sending you er.cl'3cd » Fnehr-r decree which I received
froi Frofossor ?r. ~r-odt...

"Cosr’ur.io’tions h-7irg bearing on the Fuehrer deerte should
be directed to the following -ddn:s3: Professor Doctor K»rl
Pr—.dt, Ftrsor.-l ••ttentim, Berlin ff-3, Ibich Chancellory.

"It is left to the discretion of the ohysici-r. r*o is handling
the c*s-: whether he wi 3 h.es to ecquwint the prtier.t with the in¬
fo ra~t ion hi-aelf."

Pi tier's J <'crc, be-ring d-te 23 ’'ece-bcr l°ii 2 , r* «o


r3.?


1*> , .7-K- , 's-?-5-l/>on-rd

Crur5o. I.

"I riot or.lv reliev- chysici-rs, -edic’l -'r^ctitiorers
-r<* dentists o 4- their pledge to secrecy tow-rds ay Ccn-
ri 33 1 oner-Gener-1 Professor Dr. Yed, If-rl Br=nd* but I
pl»ce uper. them the binding obligation to -dvise bin -
for ry own inf ora ’tier. - Ier-edi"tely after f final
dl'prosla hrs established - serious discese, or n dise-se
of illbodirg ch-r-ctcr, with « personality holding •»
leading cositlon or * position of responsibility in the
St-to, the Party, the Wehrmrcht, in I r dustry, -nd so forth."

Concerning this apt ter, K-rl Br-ndt testified thrt the decree
"in sped-'l c-ses" relieved Gorc-n physicians fror. one of the generally
•ceontcd princiolea of r*»dic-l nr-otice.

^roff the yo-r l°li? to the cr.d of the w-r K*>rl Gr-ndt w«s a
-erber of tV* Fetch Fcse-rch Council -r.d w's -Iso p tnenbor of the
Presidential Council of tht body.

y-rl Br-ndt, then, finally re*chod - oositior. authorising
hln to issue instructions to -11 the aedlc*l services of the St etc,
-rty, *nd rfehrracht cor.coming nedic-1 oroblens (Hitler Decree bo-ring
d-*c 2f ‘ug-ost l'XiU). The -bnve decrees of Hitler disclose his greet
rll»nco uror. K-rl Brendt -r.d tV high degree of oercon-1 -nd profes¬
sion -1 ccr.fidor.ee which "itlor reposed In bin.

It ts->y be noted th-t by the sorvicc regulation governing the
'hief of the .'fcdic-l Services of the - r ehm-cht, issued by Keitel 7
•ugust 19UL, th«* chief of those redic-1 services w.-s required to p-y
due rog--rd to the gorer-1 rales of the Fuehrer's Conrissioner Gcner’1
for ”edic--l -rri Health Cep’rt-er.tr. TV: regulation cont-ined the fol¬
lowing!

"3. The Chief of the 'fedic-l Services of the Tchrm-cht will
nf-rs the fuehrer's Cccrissicncr General »bout basic events in the
r, -d of the Sfrdic-1 Services of the Wchrr-cht."

By ’ pro— tr* -1 affidavit --de by the defendant H-ndl<ser
rut in evidence by the Prosecution, H-nd loser r-’/^es the st-texent


123*8


i? ug !7—!£-V9-£-6-Ieonord
Court to. I

•_h»t * =rl Br-r.dt w-s his n i=redi?te superior in cedic-1 effeire."

Cert ir. Sulf-nilrddc exrerirer.t3 xere conducted «t Pevens-
breck for - period of shout » ye-r prior to August 19U3- Those experi¬
ments were e -rried on by the defendants Gebhrrdt, Fischer, *r.d Cbcr-
hsuaer — Gebhsrdt fceir.r in ch-rge of the project. *t the third seating
of the consulting Physicians of the Tehr-cht held -t the Vilit'rh
Medic-1 ec»dery in Berlin fres 21 to 26 V-y 19li3, Gobh-rdt -nd Fisober
r-de » complete report concerning these exoerirents. K-rl Brandt w-a
present -nd he-rd the reports. Gobh-rdt testified th-t he m«*de - full
st-terent concerning wh-t he h-d dene, stating th-t experiments h-d
been c'rried out or. hun-n bolngs. The evidenc* is convincing th-t
rt-te-ents were »lso n-de th-t the persons experimented upon were cor.-
centr-tion c-cn inmates. It w -3 stated th-t 7^ persons h-d been >> xoerl-
rer.ted upon, th-t the subjects h-d b'en dcllber-tcly ir.fcetcd, end thet
different dregs h<-d beer, used in tre-tir.g the Infections to dotemir.o
their reaoectiio effie-cy. It w-s -loo st-ted th»t threo of the sub¬
jects died. It nowhere -npo-rs tht Krl Br-r.dt srede rny objection to
curb exreriror.ts or th-t ho r-de -ny investigation wh-tevor concerning
the sxrarlnents reported upon, or to gain -ny infonn-tior. *a to rhethcr
other hun-n subjects veuld b- oubjeoted to experiments ir. the future.

H-d he c-de thr slightest investigation, ho could h-ve -scert-ined th»t
such exreri sorts we re being conducted or. rvcn-Gorr-r. n»tlen-ls, without
their consent, ~xA in fl-gr-nt disrer-ri of their personal rights; -nd
th-t 3ueh experiments wore pl-nned for the future.

In the oidic-1 field K-rl Br-r,dt held - position of the highest
rer.k directly tr.dor Hitler. He w-p ir. - position to intervene with
-uthority or. -11 redic-1 o-tters; irvicod, it -pre-rs th-t such w-s his
resit!?B duty. It docs net -pte-r th-t -t any tire he took -ny steps
•- check redic-1 rlrents uren hun-n subjects. During the wrr ho

ted never-l concer.tr-tier. c-rp3. Occupying the position he did, -r.d
-‘ • r * physicist f -tiiitv -nd experience, the duty rested upon him tc


11389


■ ■ -
?virt «o. I.


r-Vce some adequate investigation concerning the medical e<-=ri*er.ts
which he knew h-d beer., -cere being, and doubtless would continue to
ty, conducted in tlr- concentration caeps*

IPI^VTC J‘UliPICE ■XP- i T 1 ? , 'TS:

K-rl Brar.dt is charged with criminal resDonsibility for experi¬
ments conducted for the ourpese of discovering -r. effective vaccine to
bring "bcut imur.ity fre= Eoldenic Jaundice. Jrrwitr, by letter d-ted
1 lur.e 15U3, wrote Hiscler stating th-t >'-rl Br-ndt had requested his
assistance lr. the - v r of rese.-rch -r. the cases of Frlde-iic J-undice.
Ornfitt at-ted th-t K-rl Brandt h»d interested hi-cself in this research
r.d desired th-t orisor.err be ol*eed -t his disposal. Ihe letter further
st-ted th"t -so to th-t date exoerir^r.ts h«d boon m»dc only on anirr«ls,
but th-t it h-d boco-a neccss-rr to pursue the --tter further by inocu-
1 -tlrp hu-vr. boirj-? with virus cultures. The letter st-ted that do-ths
rat be --r.t loir "ted, -nd th-t eight


ire


1 } 46- !i?-: -r JC- -l-lonr.-.r -l
Court I


prisoners ho h-i boon condemned to de Lh re re needed Tor .he oxperi-
cnt3 t she hospital oZ the conoentr'tion ccsp ct Sachsenhauson. Under
cL te ol 15 June 19L3 b:=ler pcbnowled-sd the latter front Omari tz and
directed t t eijht criminals iz Auschwitz, Jews of the Polish reois-
t.r.cc sate 1 .an*, condented to de-th, should be used for ex.erimer.ts vrhich
should bo conducted by Dr. Dohn^n t Scchsenhausen. Karl Brandt's
.cnowlots© oZ expcri.aents on nor.-Oorr-ar. n tionals is clo'rly shorn by

e foror'oir.T*

LOST (^IBT.JUJ) SA SXISP.E^IS:

It is clear fror. the reoord that experiments with Lost c*" were
conducted on concontr tior. ca p inn tos thro vJiout tlr period covered
by the indictment. The ovidor.ee -s th t over 200 concer.tr-tion cony
inv.tos, Rusoi'fls, polos, Czocho rnd Con. ns, were used as experimental
subjects■ At least >0 of t.*se subjects, nost of .Jhor. rrero non-voluntcors,
died direct . result of the treatment received.

Karl Brandt knew of the fact that such oxperioonts a.-ero being
conducted, "ho evidence is to the offset that ho knew of Loot gra
experiments conducted by Sicbor.bch rt Strasbourg during the fall of
l?!i3, in which Ruosi n prisoners were apparently used -s subjects sorao
of who* died.

A lcttor written b the defend*nt Siovers to the defendant
Rudolf Smndt, dotod 11 April 19uh, points to the fact that Kcrl
Brandt knew of still other such exporixnts. The letter states, that
in accordance -it:, instructions he, Aievcrs, had contacted Karl Prandt,
at Eoolitz, and .ad reported to him concern jar. the activities of a
cert-in Dr. Hirt, who the ovidc ce shews hd been experimenting with
Lost - s upon cancer.tr tion ©icp iirrtes at Hatzweilor. Ir. the letter,
hievers states, further, that Karl Brandt had told him th-t Ik* would be
ir. Strasbourg ir. *pril and *<«ould then discuss det'ils with Dr. Hirt.

Kncr-l?d.-e of ‘Sac conduct of at le*st sere of the experiments ws

•

■ZLrrri b Karl Brandt - hen he testified in his cm bel f. He

11391


19 auc 17-m>?jC-6-2-£eorare
Court I

at* ted that pursuant to competent authority ho had engaged in studies
concerning defense censures eg inst poison g-s. He c (knitted receiving
a report from Hirt, and that one reading the report could reach the
corcl 3ion that hman beings hc4 been experimented upon in connection
-with injuries free Lost gas.

FRZ3ZT. 'M ARIA, 30:3, HECI2 -ID SHV2 RBSLIIP-.TIOH a:D DOIiE

T8AIGPIAITATIOy, SSL TMEEL, SISRILIZ&TIDK, /.’Z) TTFHUS, EXP3R33ENT8*

The evidence does not shxr beyond a reasonable doubt that Karl
Brandt is criminally responsible on account of the experiments with
-/.tick ho is charged under those specifications.

The defend nt Karl Brandt certainly know that no died onpcrir.onts
*. ero o rr.od out in concentration crops upon huvn subjects, th-t the
ox. ori. "r.ts caused suffering, injury, and death, lotter be'-ring
dr.to 26 January 1?U : nrl Br nut -.rots o .olff at the Fuohror'3
(Kitlor«s) hocdqiartcrs .skins IF i* ,,ero possible to c ^rry out
"nutrition -1 on.wir*nts n in concentration oanps. ^ho nature of tho
dssixsd axporiaonts docs not appear* nor doos tho ovidonce Show, whether
./hot..or or not ouch oxporieents «-oro ovor mad?. Tho lottor, however*
indicates Brandt*3 knowledge of tho f-ct th t hua-.r. subjects could
he iV do avail ble for oxpori-antntion.

Defend-nt Rudolf Bmndt, by iottor d-ted h September 19UL, 'rrote
Bsunert* evidently noahur of Himlor's staff, ct ting that Karl
Brcndt had tolophor.od r.i roqueatod tht JUaalor direct th-t 10 pri¬
soners from Oraoionburg should bo ~ d- av ilablo as of tho next day
for two days to test - certain . The letter stated that the pri¬
soners •‘odd not b? injured by th/. test.

It appoara frer. an off lei-1 net? filed by Klicvo, of the Any
i'edic l Inspector-.to, dated 23 February 19U* referring to a conversa¬
tion vith tho defendant close cn th-t d-te, th-t experiaents concerning
biologic-1 • rfarc connected dth cl nt parasites, etc#, had teen

. : th -1 up to that dot no oxr ri -.-nts h d been conducted in the fi Id
3. human medicine; but that such experiments vero necessary and vero in

11392


12 ----- >?jC-6-3“£eonard

Court I


cor.tecpi'tion. The rcnor'nd'ja continues:

"Field Larshal Keitel has elver, per dssion to build;
Eeichsfuohrar-SS rvd Generalarst Professor Brandt
jjeve rssurod his of vast support, by request of
Field ll-rshal Eoitol the Arnsd Forces -re not to
hove responsible shore in th«e e;: erir.cnts, since
0 x-. 0 rist 2 r.t 3 .ill :lso be conducted on hunan beings

It is si&iifictnt tfc*t Hitler's Chief of Stuff should do?n it advisable

to direct th't t o Wohraacfet should hr/; nothing to do with experiments

on huern sublets.


EUnmSL.:

Defendant Earl Brandt is charged under Counts Two .-nd Throe of
the indlctoont with criainal activities in connection with tho Buthannsin
nrogr-n of the Gcrr-'n Roich, in the courso of •-hioh thous-.nds o: hurrn
beings, inclidin: nition ls o: Ger. 'n-occuo ed cour.trios, .-rare killod

between - -o;tQ-.bjr 1939 'rd *il 19^5.

On his awn letterho d .itlor, at Gorlin, 1 Scptonbcr 1939, sigrod

- socrot order reading s follows:

"Roichsloltor 3ouhlor rod Dr. 3r ndt, ! .D. are charged with
tho responsibility of enl-r^ing the authority of corti.in
pfcCfaicirna to bo dosigr/ led ty n r.J in such - armor th t
porsons who, -ccording to lurvn Julgaant, .are incur: bio rn,
upon r-ost criful di'-r.osis of thair condition of sickness,
he acco.dad r.jrcy dr th."

Bouhler rs holding - high office the Interior. Ho ws not a jrtiy-
3iclan.

Tho foregoing order vs not brsod on any previously existing
Oeman law; ar.daij oni.. authority ? or th cxocutior. of cuth-nasia
w s he secret order issuod by Hit'~r.

Tho evidence shows th*t Douhlor rnd Lari Brandt, who acre Jointly
charged rith the rdainistr tion of outhannsia, entered upon the duties
assignod then in connection with tho sotting up of procasscs for
c:rr;.-.n out tie ori--r. A budget - c • dopted; tho nrthod of deternining
ernd-d tes for ea'hanasia as established; - oati-nts transport corpora¬
tion r-s or n-*ed t; convey the selected patients to the gessin chan¬
cers. iuostionnrires were prepared which ~.r forward jd to tho >r*ds


11393


1? -Ur U7-: :-"J c -6-!i-Lc onrrd
Court I

of r.-vr.t'l institutions, one questionnaire to bo accomplished concerning
etch inmate and then returned to z ha Ministry of the Interior. At tho
Kinistry the completed questionnaires wore exusinod by so-celled experts,
vho registered t.-.cir profession-1 opinions thereon, returned them to the
oppropri-to office for final oxr.rxination, -nd orders were issued for
those patients -.-ho by this process ware fia'lly solocted for oxtoraim-
tion. The roof ter the condetuv.'d patients rero gathered at collection
points, froa whence they rare transported to outhcnosl stations -nd
killed by gassing.

Utaest secrecy oca dan ndod of the executioners throughout tho
entire procedure. Persons actively concerned in th.e program vero
required to subsribo r. written oath of secrecy and voro ir.rnod that
viol-tier, of that oath would rosult in aost aoriouc personal consequences.
Tho cone on t of the rd“ tiros of tho "incur-blos" ~'s not ovon obt inod;
tho cjuostion of sucrocy being doonod so import-nt.

Shortly eft:r the comonconont of operations for tho dispos-l of
"incur-bios", tho pro gran ms extended to Jaws, -nd th;n to concentra¬
tion c-rp ins*too. In this lettor phase of th: program, prisoners
deer-od ly tho ox-sdning doctors to bo unfit or useless for 1-fcor wore
ruthlessly wooded out r.d sent to tho oxtorain-tion st tionn in Croat
n-ambers.

K-.rl Brandt saint: ins tlrt ho i3 not ir.plic-tcd in the oxtenai-
n-tion of Jaws or of concentration o-.cp inostos; th~t his official
responsibility for outarnasia coasad at th. '-lose of tho summer of
19U1, t tt.ich tin: out* n-si Jrocodurcs against "incur-bios" vroro
torninatod by order of Hiller.

It is difficult to believe this assertion, but oven if it bo
true, ra cannot understand ho- this f*ct would aid the dof.nd.nt. Tho
evidence is conclusive that -lcost at the out3ot of th. progr-n nnn-
Qonor. r. tionals wore selected for outhon-sia ni oxfconrinatad. Koed-
loaa to say, these parsons did not voluntarily consent to b econo the
subjects o this procedure.

1139U


19 ~ui L7- -? jC-d-J-Lo or. ard
Co^irt ±

Krrl Brar.dt admits that after ha had disposed of th, medical
decisions required to be -'do by hi m with regard to the initial pro-
grra which he maintains “s vc lid, ha did not foil or: the progrrn
furth r but lift the adrririiatr.-tivo dat.ils of execution to Bouhlor.

If this to true, his failure to folio..* up progr’n for wh'ch h- tea
eh*rgod with speci'l responsibility constituted the gravost trench of
duty, a discharga of tht duty would h v; easily revealed what now is
so manifestly evident from the record: Th t whatever r.-y have boon the
origin *1 air. of th. proj^-am, its purposes were prostituted by non for
whoa Brendt was responsible, '.ad groat numbers of r.on-<3ornrn r.otion'l3
r.re extortin', tad under its outhority.

no have no doubt but that K-rl Bro.ndt — as h himself tostifiod --
is - sincoro tolievor ir. tho edainistration of outhsnasir to ersonn
hopelessly ill, whoso lives ora burdojwor.. to th.msolvos and on oxpanso
to tho at'.to or to their families. The abstract proposition of whothor
or not outharvaclc is Justified in cort-in c*sos of the class roforrod
to, is no concern of this Tribunal. -.bother or not state nay validly
enact logial•tion which inposoa outhr.naaia upon cortain classes of Its
oitisona, is likowiao* * question Which docs no- •t r Into the issues.
Asouoing that it nay do 30 , tho Family of Notions is not obligad to
give recognition to such logisl tion her. it manifestly gives legality
to plain nurder -r.d torture 0 .' iofonseloss and powerless huoan beings
of other nations.

The evidence is conclusive that persons aft.ro included ir. tho
progress "ho w..-rc non-Gors n n* lot 1=. The doraliction of the defendant
Brandt contributed to their netersdn* tion. That is enough to require
this Tribunal to find that h is crirln-lly responsive ir. the program.

'•To fir.d that Karl 3r*.ndt vac rasponsibl for, aided *nd abetted,
took c consenting part in, end w-s connected with plans and enterprises
i.avolvin nodical experiments conducted on non-Gc-raan r.' tion-Is age int
■. ir consent, nd ir. other 'tro cities, in the course of hi eh murders
brutalities, cruelties, tortures and oti. r irhum* ne acts wor- comitt d.


113 ?5


1/ Aug 1 7- !-?;• C-6-6-Ie cr. - re
Court I


To th. extent that these criminal acts did not constitute War Crimes
thojr constituted Cricas against Humanity.

.33EESBIP TXCKBaStL CBGAKIZATIO:*:

lender Count Four of tfco Indictment Karl Brandt is chorgod 7.1th
toing a neater of an organisation declared criminal by the Judgment of
the International Military Tribunal, nusaly, tho SS. The cvider.co choirs
that Karls Brandt bocauo a sonbor of tho SS in July 193U and remained
in this organisation at least until April 19!*?• Ac a member of the SS
ho v-s crinin"lly implicated in tho corsaiscion of ear Cringe and CriiM3
against Humanity, as ch-rgod undor Counts T-.ro and Throe of tho Indict¬
ment.


COX LX I OK

l ilit-ry Tribun-1 I finds -ar.de -djudr.s the defend:nt Karl
Brandt guilty, und r .r.ts Two, Thr . Pd Four, of tho Indictment.

Tho Tribunal -ill no- b? ir. roccc3 for a for ninutoa.

(A roooss was talon.)


11396


19 Au u:t-l-'.irloy (Int. Trenle)

Coart I

H3 -r .yr- -. cucit Sc-rln; >111 c o-.tir.ue with the readin. of the
■uijnait.

jmr "‘s The Case of

EAlTlOo-h

Sad.r : v :: T»o end rhree o' the I-.f-icfcsnt the defendrut Spndloaer
la oh r '-it'* s-eclel responsibility for, rat' wirtieipation in, Ei-Th
Altitun, veezin , :>lerl* t lost (Kuatrrf) T-ra, Oulfrallraide, 3one,
j.uacir v 1« -cner^tion rni 3onc Irpasulrnt^tion, Ser Vater,

lolde-tic J • lec, end Ty-jhua cxperlcentB.

Jfc« flier e of vrticlaetlon In the Hi h Altitude experiments hp.a
been p.J- l'onc- 'r/ the Prosecution, rad hence >'111 not he cor.aidorcd
furth-.r.

HrndloBor - a t profeaaior.pl eoldler, hnvia: ‘oecn eonniailo.ied in the
Kadlc-1 Do vrtnent of the Ocruen Amy in 1910. Marine tho first Vorld
Vnr ho roso to tho petition of Cornsndia Officer of a dlvialon mcdlc-
rl unit, ;c' on 1 ScV.enber 1939 he vra c.ipointei Chief -todicrl Officor
of the ll-e Amy. After acrvlco in the fiold, on 6 Eoveabcr

I 9 U 0 ho  0 rppoiatsd Deputy “ray Kcdic.-l I tsocctor. E« oocr::o Anny
Ufdlc-l I elector on 1 January loUi. me the following Aoril vre lvcn
th- -/ itio vrl o^ointntot of Chief Kedic 1 Officer of the Dicld Dorcea,
holdin -of.- -31110118 until 23 July 1°‘2, v-ea he heerno Chief of the
Vohra-cht he ld S<rvlet. H» retained -loo hio other pppointnont md
p< r'or • the ati<a of loth pocitiona. He v a .-etrinod in hio position

no

r-s Chi f o' V *'?hrc-eht hedicrl Sfrvicoa on 1 September
rtll vef of the duties pjrtrioln* tr the other office which ho hr c’
th,retoo * hrlc; - he hrvin - exerclacd the functions of both office
until t* - d t. 1 - at =fntioaed. Hla profeasionrl c reor ic Sore o-rtlc-
aiarlr . e-cri'M peeve.

Hrnfloser states thpt prior to his lrot r.point-.ent in 19‘‘- h *"> vrs
authorize; to izeue ■lnatractions*, hut not orders - testi'"ii thrt
after his Ir.tsat eppeiatneat he hrd authority to issue orfern to the

1-397


1 ? Ac -ua«-- .- 2 -J>loy (Ir.t. Frank)

C-urt I

Chief: c the icdical service* of all trenches of the Yehroecht. He
cl so >. jarladictioa ov«,r scientific uediorl institutes, etc., ns
deal nr tad b*a the service regulations ororruljc.tc^ r.t the tine of his
lest eppoiatoent. While the chief ae&Lesl officers of the levy,

and Luftvaffo wore under their rpnroprir.te ilitrr ■ superiors, Hpr.diooer
had eathority to coordinate the activities of all the Yehneeht Medical
serricas .it to establish their coordinctc rctioa. As to the Wrffen-
55, his -uf ority extended only to such units of thrt or ;mi*a.tion as
verc .-tt-ehr' to rnd cede pert of the Yehmrcht.

E-.Vlos .• t* tifled thrt the utilisation of nodical natcripl end
wrsei-'d iff — *, insofrr es the Yehruacht v.-s concerned, within his
Jurisdiction e.fter the entry of the decree of 2 > July 19^2, end that
u-wr. occasion ’ c called neetin of the Chief Hotter 1 Officers of tho
Yshru-eht e'cclrlists in appropriate fields of csdioine, in an
effort to rvoir* I'upliea.tion of certain rosorrch proclcas in connection
with r.-l-ri , typhus, par-typhus, rnd cholera.

as .vr  ical Inspector he v*o also ox officio prcolfont of tho
Scientific Sen-to, hut testified that this boty tt not scet :-fter 19 U 2 .
as an Ai-T^r physician he denied any specl -1 kro-rlod-e concerning scientif¬
ic probloss peculiarly affectin' th Favy or the Luftvnffo; hut on on
organisation ch rt prepared by hia ra J rccolvoC in evidence :s Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit 9 he is shown ac subordinate:' to Itrl Srrndt mf rn Chief
of the ..ccic 1 Service of the Yehrn*cht ocogyia. the position of
superior ov • the Amy I.edlcal Service rnd tho chiefs of the i.odical
Services c v 1 r.-y end Luftwaffe not cortsin other subordinate
p-enci ret iiir.- to the Vehr-r.cht. >.o chrrt also indicates hio
ruthorit- or.r fi chief of the Hcdic-l Office of the Y.-ffen-SS *nd
co-oon-x:- o' ;h Yrffen-S3 when attached to the Yehra-cht.

It "tv - 5 * t Handles-r hrd nuch to do in conisction with the calling
o' n -• o •-. "Consulting Physicists*; that *c desi -nttcc oo::o of
th: cu:J etc to he discussed rt these isetin c; an.’ that his suborcinrte.


3H33B


19 r ::-~-y~..rloy Ur.t. Irani :)

Court I

pr-Ti’.: retells.

A' -ce csetin' of consultir. sar ;onc ’-.eld 30 “ovcuber to 3

3 ece 1°''- ~t the ililitnry Xedlcal Acrdcay, ho nddrcsBed those
prose-.'- (re’errlnr to the neetin: ns ’-'1* second verk confere-.ee I-at") .
obo .rvti t represents'ves of the three breaches of the “ehrsacht,
of ■' ’ -SS rad Police, of the L :or Service-, p.cd the Or 'pnizetion
“odt, ver Iso present. Ec called attention to the presence of Conti,

He- of t’ < ..n'icrl Services in the Cirilip; Sector.

At t. rnerth ceetin.. of c or.tultln ?:;'slcirne held it Zohonlych.cn,
lo to If. *.j-- 19Uh ( Z rT i 3 r«ndt - in r' resbir. the ncetin - arid thet
Head loser, • eoldlcr end p nhyaicinn, vns ■rceaonsiblo for the uoo nnd
the ptrfornmee of our nedlcnl offictre".

Sc’reibor, until 30 Kry 19^3 r close ouhor^int-to of Handlooer in his
capacity 0 ’ a */ hedled Inspector, was r. noabor of the oeich Sescrrch
Council, >eyia *vrticul"r re.-nrd to the control of epi'cfico no his
onoel . .'I 1. , Schrelber frequently ro>ortc: to Krndlotvr, vith vhon
hr * ••o*h' 'or cone yeers.

i:-ns:

? o * 0 “ 3v. Eolslochr. r, 'ho vith Drs. JirJtc -nd Apschcr performed
fr' 'Si . t -nts on concentration err 1 in --.tcs ft Dnch.-u, tap.de roports

on 1 • t"c cccrslona to rouos of »v*sieipno conct lir. cold

nr.d si •rohl.-s. The first ouch report vr s ende -t r. :;ectin,t held
on 2 .> vo 27 October 192, Ich vrs c lie' to consider prohlexas concom-
in; col . Sc reiter, v*.o held r reeuo.'.siblc -Hjoitior. unr'ur Hendloscr
fro- 1 19 U? to 31 Key 19 L ?. v ~« present ft thic roetin , r.s vrs

Craer. r, v o' thr Zountpin Zedicnl Sc ool 1 *. the "ry rt St. Johran,
''rich "lao under E?ndloser'o Juriedictlos; 3hirin.tr th- -eetin - er.d
"ftor Holsloe’-acr h-d =rdc his re->ort, Erocher elso n-re s*. ter.enta
before t'c r.ajtir.- eoncemln these experiments, fror. v'rich 1 ' *«o obvious
•hr t a--:e -.*0 contained in the reports vere xtsed uocn observations npde
by zia L en.ti.. on hurtnn beis-s. Pro* th- tvo reports it v-a cle.'r that

1139?


i "'t- ilrloy (I-:, Jr- ft)

"or' t I


cor.cc fcrrtion crap Innate b hod beer eroeri rented uoo-. no thrt sone
derths her- resulted.

Kclzloehaer v*s Invited to lecture r rin upon this subject pt the
secon. notin' of the Consultln rh- alcir:ia of the tfehmrcht, held 30
• r ovi-b» -• to 1 fee enter I9U2, Pt i'-e ilillv-ry hedieel ACfdeajr pt 3erlin.
E . loser herrd this trlk by Eolzloehaer nd testified th t the setter
o’ col: - rtexlr.'; vre one of the uost 1 xjrtent problca* to the Army.

• 1 .--- It nrnifestly ciepr fro t; c evidence de*llr. with freezing
t> . 5- .'losor hr<J retupl hnowled e tVt such exoerlrcntc hr.d been
coifocte' u*or. Incites Pt Srchru Concer.tr tlon C«o, durin- the course
o' '-C- oufferlnr end depths hrf restated to the erperintnt-1 subjects.

5T-\. n zetS?e:z:ts:

?. loo Is ch-r ted with prrtici-O'-tior ir th t Sulfr 11 :ido oxpcrl-
t nts. cc acted by the defendrnt “ebh rdt. rhose oxpcMaonts were
con're ted pt arvcnsbruecie Concer.tr-tlon C Curln r period extond-
ln fro 20 July loU2 to Aumst 193• *X>n concsntrrtlon cri lna-tea
without their consent. Vhilo thesa experiments v-ero still 1' ?ro reon
Sebhrvdt w-s invited to present r rooort on his reserrch findings rt
V o t ird. ..eetln:


IjJjOC


I? iag-.7-u-W-9 <• l?-l-*'«eh?n (Int. FMsr)

Court So. I.

of the Consult In? Physicians bald on lfi wrd 19 'lay 1913, at the
-liiltary Medical /radery ir. Berlin. Har.dloser w«s oresent et that
see ting; in fact, he had addressed the nee ting prior to Gebhardt's
? iving his reDort.

! s at--ted elsewhere, Gobhsrdt nsde a frank »nd candid re¬
port of »h"t he h«d hecn doing at Favensbruek; honestly telling the
rr-un that hia ex«e rii-ent -1 subjects were net volunteer-, but were con¬
centration canto locates ccr.deencd to death, who had be«n given the hope
of reduction of sentence should they curviw the «»xoari , oer.ts. By Deans
of charts to Illustrate his lecture, he -«dc it cle»r that deaths hod
occurred won* the huasc subjects. «hen on tho witness a tend tho de¬
fendant Gefch»rdt testified that -rior to the reeling of Consulting Phy¬
sicians, he had discussed wtth cither Schroiber or the defendant
restock the subject -*tter of the lecture to be given, and that at that
ti?o Schreiber had stated th*«t ho had received data concerning the ex-
rerirer.ts through official channels.

*t that tine Schroiber was o direct subordinate of the de¬
fendant Hand loser, nr.d we think it ray bo fairly assured that Schroiber'-
knowledge w-s the know>dgo of y a n dloser. However, be that as it nay,

>e evidence is clear that Harvdlosor hoan the ’ecture bv JobharH, an
r'll as a subsequent lecture on the s»ce subject natter --'ven by the
defendant Fischer. Thor?* oar. hr no question, therefore, but that
'hen H-ndlcs^r ere nw -7 fro- the sceting ho was fully informed of the
f*ct that redical exnori cents wore being conducted in Faver.sbrack Con¬
centration Ctst with inravs who were non-volunteers. Noroovor, he
•'new tht de-<tv s ocrurr: -one tv: cxoei-nt-l subjects.

*fter the eeetine of ceos-'Mre ohysici ns h.id ended, Gebhardt
returned to. Paver.sbrucfc and conducted several nore series of sulfanilpnide
-x-eri-er.ts. The subjects used for the later expariraonts were Polish
—ran who had been conde-ned to Favensbrucfc without tri-1, ,md who did
not giva their consent to ?ct as exoerftfmtal subjects. Three of these
■^r*- Wiled b7 the exrerirer.ts.


mui


10 •ug-_7-’-~'S-7 4 10-2-'* eh?n (Ir.t. rr-rJl-r)

Court !»c» I*

-v------ rri*-rngyTS ;

Coder Counts ’ TV *o -nd Three of the Indictment Handlcsrr in
charged with spool’1 responsibility for, *nd oarticloatien in. Typhus
rxrerirents conduct' d in the Fuchcnw.'-ld Concentration Camp which were
supervised by * certain Dr. ?irg, ar.d like experiments conducted in
the Hptaweiler Concentration Cfco by n certain Dr. Heagen. f s shown
elsewhere in the Judgment, these exrericer.ts ^ere unlawful and resulted
in deaths of non-Geraan nationals.

Th/:re car. be no question but that in 1^1 Typhus «■»s a
potential menace to the German Arry wid to many Gen=.-n civilians.

The >ae of ar. adequate Typhus Veceine was therefore ,i natter of prim
importance. The distribution of vaccines to the Wehneneht w«s within
the control of Hendlbser. In thr- exercise of his functions he was
-Iso interested in Typhus vaccine production.

The Typhus 'nd VIra Institutes of the OKH at Cracow and I.em-
brrv were engaged In the production of the Woirl vaccine from the In¬
testines of lice. This vrecine w>s thought to bo effootivo, but the
Production procedure was conolic*ttd nd oxponslve; hence, sufficient
qu-r.titles of this vaccine could n^t bo furnished. AnotVr v»ccino -
the sc-ollcd Cox-H * agon-Oll do re is to r vaccine, produced fron egr yolk
cultures - could be quickly produced in large quantities, but its
crotoctiv' qualities h»*d n^t be'n sufficiently demonstrated.

evidence '.3 bofrr: the Tribunal that the general problem «»s
discussed at • -oetinr hold In Berlin, 29 Decc-bcr 19bl, attended by
Cr. Bicber of the -Inistxv of Interior; Glide re is ter; Dr. Seholts, a
subordinate of fUndloser; two physicians of the "governing body of
th.° Government General;" er.d three representatives of the Behring
'orks. It Is stated in the minutes of this conference that:

"The vaccine which is oresentlr being produced
by the ^rhrirj? Dorics frer chicken ec.-a shall be
tested for its effectiveness in ar. experiment."

”or the purpose above referred t*, “r. Dernlta of the Behrlr.c ~rka

would contact Dr. VTugowsiy. The minutes of the meeting » r re Prepared


19 iu.- VT-i-Yfr* h 10-3*-^eh =n (Tr.t k r'rrler)

Court ??cl II

by Bieber, ix.de r date U J er.ua ry 19U2.

A cony of the minutes of the meeting last referred to was for¬
warded to the »rcy Medical Inspectorate at Berlin. It thus apcears
th«t » representative of Hendleser's office, Scholtz, attended the
meeting, end that a coov of the minutes wos forwarded to the 'ray
ifedical Inspectorate.

There is also erider.ee th»t on the s*to day a conference wag
held between the defendant H-ndloaerj Conti of the Unis try of Interior;
ft iter of the Health Deoartcent of the ft lch; Oildencister of the fobert
Koch Institute; and the defendant I'rugowsky, at which tirre it was de¬
cided to establish * res.- *rch station at Buchcr.wald Concentration Crap
to test the efficacy of the egg-yelk, and other vaccines cr. concent¬
ration crap inmates. *s a result of the conference an experimental
station was established it Bpchernrald und'r the direction of Dr. Ding,
with the defendant Horn actirg •*« his deputy.

Inasmuch as coco of this information canes from Prosecution
Exhibit 297, referred tc as tho "Ding Diary", a dlscussi on of the docu¬
ment is now ftonrooriata.

Dr. Ding (who later Changod his n»-r to Schulor) wag a very
-rbltious rrn who w-»s anrarently willing to engage in any professional
potivity which hr Thought -ight furth'r hi3 radical carer r. He gladly
seised upon the opoortur.ity to c-r.duct cx-erirrnts cr. concentration cr*np
i nr»teg ir. connection with the v-ccine study.

Every Gerrir. officer holding • position coiroar^ble to that
held by Dr. wag required to keep ■ journal or diary showing his
official activities. It -w>ro»rg that r ir.g knot two diaries. Ding's
personal diary containing official -r.d rorson -1 entries and work reports
hao dis’pro’redj his official log or Journal concerning his work at
‘•uchenweld is the document in evidence. Thi3 diary was kept by one Eup.cn
logon, n r. inrsto at Suchonwald. & made tho actual entries and Ding
~ rifled and signed them.

logon, an ‘ustri?n subject, testified for the Prosecution. We


1U03


1? ‘u? 7 10- -'«eh»r. (Int. Hrvler)

Court 'io» I»

laprn free Ms testimony th’t he w*s » forrwr newspaper editor *rd held
ether highly responsible positions, '-*c x->s amt by the Gerr°n author¬
ities to Buchenwold In 1539 as p politic-«1 prisoner. In -pril 19U3
he -s assigned tc Din as •* clerk or Assistant. For r-ny months Drier
to that tire, however, he hod been on ext rerely friendly terra with hing
wvd as ? conseqoerc' w-a completely f-'allipr with ring's operations.
Indeed, so close wai the attachment that during the first hplf of the
yoar 19k2 Ding h*d dictated the first portion of the diary which is in
evidence, end Kogon had tranacr'bod it. AfU r officially becoming
“ing's assistant in 19h3 all correspondent of every nature with which
Ding was concerned passed through the hands of Kogon.

The diary croc Into Koeon's D03«ession at th- 1 breaking up of
the C‘=b, -nd rers-lr.ed In his possession, «s he Uslifle^, ur.til he de¬
livered It to the Office of Chief of Counsel for ■'far Crimes at h'umborr.

It is manifest th't the entries In the diary were often not

-ado on th. dy they bc-r date.; but this 'ccs not rear, that it h"3 no
probative value, *lrost ewry entry inthe diary is personally signed
b7 r-lrr. Tl-O and^egaln the entries in the diary hnvo been corroborate-*
by othor credible evidence. TVo dofervi'.nts the-solves who ncry f-ciiliar
with -.rerations at Buchccwsld have confirmed the entries in Important
•’sser.ti.’l particulars. >• consider the diary as constituting -videner
ef considerabl' nnonbiv value, -r.d shall clvc to the entries such
consideration as under all circurstar.ccs they »ro entitled to receive.

The Tlrst entry in the Ding Diary, undvr date of 20 December
l-'il, reads as follows:

“Conference hetw----n 'nr- ■'-nit-'tlor, Inspection, General
Chief Surjeon r r~frs^ r ?r. ' J -n'los' , r; Stte Secretary
for the "’eo^rt-ert of 'cr-lth of the Feich S3 Crimrcnfuehn?r
Dr. COSTI: ^resident r r-f--sa"r of the “ealth Dc-

nartmer.t of the Riich; ^xrsident Professor OIT^n’FKT^P of
the Ffcbert Kooh Ir-stitute (Fcich Institution to “orbst
Ccnt-’gous "is'--soc) --'r.d SS Strr.dartenfuehrer and Lecturer
f! oc'r.t) ''r. I'F’Tynsrr of the Institute of Hygiene, \>ffen-
Sb, 3crlin.

"It h--c befr. stabiished that the need exists, to test the
efficiency of, ’r.d resistance of the hursi body to, the
spotted fever senre 'xtr-cted frer egr yolks. Sl-cc tests
on animals are not of sufficient value, tests or. human
beings rust be carried out."

1UQ h


19 ug !i7-y-"r-7 4 lC-5- v hr-n (Int. Easier)

Court !'o. I.

This entry Dreceded by only a few days the actual coscrence-
cant of the ercerL-rents on concertr-tlor. c-'er ircwtes to determine th<
efficiency of the eeg yolk vaccine.

It serns certain th»*t the foregoing entry in the Ding Di-rv
t.r -5 written or rewritten at soce d-to later th-n th-’t which It bears,
but the entry =°y bo accented ?s evidence of orobativr- vrluo to tho
ftet th»t it x*a '-proed by so« cursors Ir. »uthority that experiments
with vaccine oroD«red froo epp yolks bo rode on concentration c«no in-
antes at Euchonwald. The next entry lr. the diary bears date 2 January
V>U2, arrl re->ds *s follows:

"The concentration c»=r Puehorw-ld Is chosen for test¬
ing the spotted fever sc n=s. SS Hauotstunafuehrrr

Ding is charged with those facts."

Har.dlosrr testified th*t veny conferences concerning typhus
vaccine took niece «r.d th-t he w ra interested in tho testing of chlckon-
egg vaccine "on a sufficient mrber of persons In e certain vicinity,
that Is, within an ere a where lyuhus h*d wlre-vdy occurred or there was
imminent danger existing." Ho also testified that during tho surrer
of 19tl by: -et “rugcwsfcv, who was recocronded to hlo by Schrcibcr,
‘ J -n J lcs"- , 3 subordinate. y e also testified th-t he discussed the
«'tt' r of th ohicker.-ope vaccines with Oil deeds ter and Conti. H»md-
loaer trstifled th-t ho wf*s creser.t at many conforepc's, both at the
fr>r.t ;nd In re t echelons, where such -nttors discussed. w nviow-
cky, in a letter dated 5 ‘ rf l^L?, reported to Eyor (who w»s a subordinate
of Handloser) of the Tyrhus -nd V-ceir.*' Institute of the High Coer and
at Crcow, describing the results of th 1 first scries of cxoerinor.ts
carried out In Euchcnw-ld. TV. exrcrironts covered both the Wcigl -nd
go-yolk veccincs. This ror-ort celled attention to the fact that two
experimental subjects h=d died.

Ar. entry in the Ding liar/ dat'd » February 19U3 states that
Or. Eyer rwi Tr. Schmidt, a hygienist on the staff of the Medical In-
a-ectorate, visited the Typhus and Virus Institute at ^henwald.

Scheldt, a subcr J i''«tr of H-indloscr frer 1QL2 until August ! 'M*, stated

11U-J5


1 = Jug L7-^-VP-9 & lC-6-*'eehm (int. r.-nler)

Court -Jo* I.

t h»t b* and Ever had visited 3uchenw»ld. Hr* testified th=t his visit
. -g concerned only with yellow fever vaccine tests which were being
Carried out at that station. This staterent by the witness is net con¬
vincing. From the Ding Diai7 it appears that infected lice were re¬
ceived by Ding orior to 30 Hovo-ber 1912. If this is correct, these
lico could here cos* only free »n institute under control of the 'nay
over which H»ndloser had jurisdiction.

Dine reported on his activities »t the nee ting of the Consult¬
ing Surgeons of the Wchrareht held in I'rf 19li3 in Berlin. H-ndloser *»s
oresent ->t that sooting but n'y not have heard the ret>ort, the report
h»ving toon rdc to the Hygiene Section, which ws presided over by
chrelber, Rrevilesor's subcniin-tc. Defendant Rase, having hoard the
reoort, openly objeoted to the character of the experiments carried out
at Hucher.wald. Schreibcr, then, hod full knewlodgo of the nature of
the ‘'xoerironta there carried on. fcso’3 vigorous objection w*s doubt¬
less - subject of general interest.

Hnndloscr testified th't on at leant two occasions he discussod
with Urogowsky natters connected with vaccines agninst Typhoid, Typhus
re.d other dioceses. He stated that he wns unable to fix the- d*tC3 of
these conferences.

The entries in the Ding Diary clearly indicate re. effective
liaison betwo-n the *rry thdical Inspectorate and the exn' rtnents which
Dine was conducting t ■‘uchen~?ld, There Is «lso credible evidence
that the Inspectorate w S in forced of radical research carried on by
the Luftwaffe. These ex-'erieenta -t ?uchenw--ld continued after Hand-
loser had gained actual knowledge of the fact that concentration carp
incites hd been rilled -t Tech-u -s the result of freezing; and that
inaetea at Favonsbruck h=d died -s victlsa of the sulfanilamide experl-
ents conducted by Gebherdt and -ischer. Tot with this knowledge Hred-
li-scr in his superior cedic-1 position rade no effort to investigate the
situation of the buopc subjects or to exercise ary proper degree of con-
tr 1 over these conducting experiments within his field of authority re.d
C‘rpeter.ee.


Ill; 06


19 ug U7--’*3-9 lO-7-’feehan ' Int. F-riler)

Court '>o. I.

Hid the slightest Inquiry been rade the f-cts Wald h?ve re¬
vealed th-t In vaccine experiments alre-dy conducted -t Buchenw*ld,
deaths hed cccurred—both as «• result of -rtifici-1 infections by the
lice which had been Irncrted froc the Typhus =nd Virus Institutes of
the OBI »t Crecow or Lenberg, or from infections by p virulent virus
riven to subjects after they had first been v pc cin*ted with either the
TTeigl, Ccx-H’-igen-Oildeselster, or other vaccines, whose efficacy was
being tested. Hwd this step been teken, end h»d Hmdloser exercised his
authority, l«ter depths would have been prevented in these particular
experiments which were originally set in motion through the offices of
the tfedlc»l InsTvctor-te "r.d which were being conducted for the benefit
of the Orman -tried forces.

These depths not only occurred with German nationals, but plao
r«cng non-Gcmm r.ptlon»la "ho h*d not consented to becoming experi¬
ment ’1 subjects.

crap Ex e sprr* f ^ ;

The defendant Hrndloscr is also charged with special respon-
sibility for, ar.d participation in, Valeria, lost Gas, Bono, Vusclo md
Iterve regeneration nd Bor.c Tr-nsp]antation, Sea *ter, md Spidorio
J-undicc, Experiments. Ir. our view the ovldonco is insufficiont to show
-ny oriair.pl connection or the defendant H*ndloser with regard to those
exet-ri cents.

The law of war iapoaea on a military officer in * position of
co—*nd *n affirratire duty to t-te such steos *s *re within his power
rnd oenrepri-to to the circ\Erst*nccn to control those under Ms cosrr-nd
for the prevention of -cts f hieh re violations of the !w of war. The
reason for the rule is p 1 *in -nd understandable. *s is pointed out in
- decision rendered by the Supreme Court of the United States, entitled
Application of Twaashlta, reported on 66 Suore-re Court, Fc3 3UO-3li7,
1 ^ 6 :

"It is evident that the conduct of ailitrry operations

by troeos whose cxessos -re unrestrained by the orders
efforts of their nder would nlr^st ccri-inor

result in violations which it is the purpose the

law of war to prevent. Its purpose to protect civilian

Uii07


19 =ug U7-lW©r9 6 I0-8-!i?ehm (Int. ?-=lcr>
"ourt Mo. I»


populaticr* *tt5 prisoners of *.--r from brut=lity would
l-rvely be defe-ted if the ccmander of *n invading
"rr' could with impunity neglect to twke reasonable
measures for their protection. Hence the 1 --" of w?r
presupposes th?t Its violation is to be voided
through the control of the operations of war by com¬
manders who »re to sere extent responsible for their
subordinates,"

ht h-s beer, said in this decision applies peculiarly t* tho
c»so of Rarriloser,

In connection with Hn^loeer's responsibility for unlawful
experiments uron human beings, the evidence is conclusive that with
knowledge of the frequent use of non-German n-tior.-ls n human experi¬
mental subjects, he failed to exorcise rny oroocr degree of control
ov'r those subordinated to him who were implicated in medical experi¬
ments coning within his official sphere of cospetoncc. This w»s a duty
which clearly devolved upon him by virtue of his official position.

Had he rx^rc'sed his responsibility great numbers of non-Otrarn riation«ls
would have b^en s-vrd from murder. To tho 'xtont th»t the cr-ires com¬
mitted by or under his authority wore not war crimes they weir crimes
-g-inst humanity.

COyCLUSIOK

Wlitary Tribunal I finds and -djudges tho dofer.dant Siegfried
Handles-'r guilty, under founts Two -nd Three of tho Indictment.

T V E »F£ST?"”?: Judge Crawford will continue with tho reading
of tho indictrflnt.

JIDOE CFUIF’SFD: rOSTCCF

The defendant Fcstock i3 charged under Counts Two and Three
of the Indictment with special r.sponsibllity for, and participation
In, —’l 9 ri", Lost (Vustard) Ga-, Sulf-nil'ride, Bcr.o, "uscle and Nerve
irgener^tion and Hone Transplantation, Sc- *ater, Epidemic Jaundice,

-nd Spotted "ever experiments.

Fcstock w-s a physicl'n of recognised ability. From l f, 33 to
IdJa he occupied, successively, the positions of Senior Surroon of the
Surgical Clinic ir. Berlin, Professor of Surgery of the "niv.-rsity of
Berlin, T.d Deputy Director of the University Clinic. In 19iil he w«s ,

lUC8


19 ‘ug U7-V-10-9 lC-9-ttf-hrn (In*_. Eraler)

Court Ivr. I.

■xDoir.ted Director of the Surgical Clinic, =nd in 19fe2 he becrne Dean
of the JVdlcsl v realty of the University of Berlin. Prior to the war,
he had Joined the NS^'F, pnd in 1939 he w.-s assigned to military duty
-5 - Consul tin? Physici-n. In 19l»2 he w-s appointed Consulting Surgeon
to the ! rey '.fcdlcal Inspectorate r. n d w*s subordinate to the Military
\fcdicel Academy in Berlin. He attained the r*nk of Brigadier General,
'fcdic-1 Department (Feserve). In 19li3 he w-s appointed Chief of the
Office for ifcdic’l Scior.co r.d Fese-rcfc, * department under the suoer-
vision of dcfend-nt K*rl Br»ndt, in which oosition Fostock remained until
the er.d of the war. From the tirfc he received the last-nentioned ap¬
pointment, fcstock acted re Brandt's dccuty cn the feich Fesoarch Council.

*s Karl Brandt's deputy, fcstock w-s his 'gent in the fiold
of medical science and research—Fbstoek being charged with the duty of
coordinating 'r.d directing problems -nd activities concerning the medic"1
horlth service insofar -s science «nd research were concerned, Ftestock
wre infor-ed concerning medic'1 reso-rch conducted by tho several
br-nchos of tho ^chn-reh, As he-d of the Office for Science -nd to-
sr-r-h, he ag-igned research problems -nd designated sotre re "urgent".

It w-s his duty to avoid duplication of work in scientific research and
to dccid'. whether er net * suggeste* 4 oroblor wa3 worthy of » research
■ssigrrent, rt is clc-r th-t F-astock -nd farl Br’rvdt we re Intir-to
friends of years’ standing.

The Prosecution dc^s not contend that Fostock ocrso.'.ally
r-rticio*ted in crl-lnrl experiments. It vigorouslv -rgue3, however,
th-t - with full knowledge th-t ccnccntr-tion c-no inn-tes wore being
cxreri rented uron - he continued to function uron research assign-rents
concerning scientific inv'stip-tionc, the result of which would Drob-bly
forth, r exreriecnts upon huc-n brings, Ihe Prosecution then prgucs that
his knowledge concerning these c-tters, considered together with the
position of rethority which he occupied in connection with scientific
research and the fret th-t Vr - f-iled to exercise his authority in ’n
attempt to sfoo or check criminal experiments, renders bin guilty re
charged.


3^09


1 ? -us-*-'3-9 *■ 10 -KMfeehm (Inti Hsnler)

Court Ko # I#

In this correction the Ptosecution relies uDon its Exhibit
i.57, ’ document which bc-rs d»te •’t Berlin, Xb Sertenber 15bb. It is
hc'ded, "Coc-issior.er for Vedical and Her 1th M=tter3," followed by
"The Delegrte for Science =nd Jfese*rch." 3elow -ppe-re:

"List of redic-1 institutes working on o rob lens of

research which were designated »s urgent by the dis¬
cussion on research on 26 august 19bb in Beelit*.

"(Sur--iy according to the 6?0 orders for research

subcittcd to us.)"

The docuner.t then contains list of resc-rch assignments
numbered " 1 " to "b5." Numbers b2 and bb re*d s follows:

" Strasbourg

"L2) Hygiene Institute (H«*GW) virus research

• • • •

"bb) r.-tcaic I I out (HIFT) Chcnical warfare agents."

The document bc-rs Fbatock's signature. Fivo of the problems concern
Hapatitis research: «nd three. Virus research.

It «cn*.-rs fror tbo evidence that Postock's duties included
tho >void«r.ce of duolic-tion in the distribution of Msignnfints for
redic"1 reuoaroh. If the head of the Jfcdic-1 Dep-rtxcnt of a branch
of tho .Tohm-cht assigned to sore particular physician or institute n
r-rticulT scientific or radical probl'n, a cony of the assignment would
bo forw-rdod to fratock, -ho would then coordinate the matter by - 3CC rt-
•ining whether or not tb t asslgn-ent w-s being worked on by some other
-geney or whether it would !c-d to worthwhile results, -ho classified
“S "urgent" the h5 of tho 650 criers for r 1 search d^cs not apec-r; but
it rr-y be assured that Frstock -r*7»rov?d th-t classification.

Doubtless restock knew that exrerlmer.t3 on concentration c-rap
lnn'tos were being conducted. Ho presided over the meeting of surgeons
held in V-y 19*13, there he-ni state-ents that axoorin^ntnl subjects
had been artificb-lly infected. 'Doubtless lr knew th-t the experiments
drrgerous and that further experiments would ni^b-bly be conducted.
rri'V r, it does not appear th-t either Frstcck or -ny subordinate of
his directed the work done on -ny -ssignrwnt conceir.ing crimin''} weperi-

11410


1? ! ’zr • XO-U-Hechrtt P^ler)

Court :*o. I.

z^r.ts. Cert-In of thes« cxroricents were classified ’3 "urgent" *t *
"discussion or. rese-rch” =s -bovo set forth. Nothing in the designa¬
tion of «cy such ■asigXBBnt s *ppe= i ra ir. Prosecution Exhibit 157
contains on its f^ce anything non: th-a - natter of oroper scientific
investigation.

The record does not show th-t the oositicn held by Rastock
Trsted in hie ’ay authority wh-tseever either th*n -s *bove stated. Ho
exrcrisents wen' conducted by -ny person or orv-'nis-tirn which w»s tc
the lerst extent cx.der Fostock's control or direction.

CONCLUSION

^ilitfiy Tribunal I finds -r>J "dju<?es tht the defendant reul
'-stock is not e-uilty '3 ch-rged under the Tnd'.ct-ent, »nd directs th*t
he be rolo-scd fren custody under the Indictr-nt when this Tribunal
presently -djoums.


19 Aurast 1347 -’—X?2-ll-I--c.ck - ’asalw
3~ur t I


-HI

3CH3CU3B

Tho defendant 3-hrcoder is charged under Counts Two Pnd -hrco
nf the Indictment with special responsibility for, end participation
In, Hi^h Altitude, Freezing, Sulfanllanide, Seawater, Ipidenic
Jaundice, lypfcus and other Taccir.es, and G fl0 2-xperinentc. ^e
Prosecution has abandoned the ch«jr$e th t he participated in tho
sulfacllaslde experiments and henco th-t subject will not be con¬
sidered further.

The defendant ser/ed as a nodical officer with tho infantry
d-irinc the first Vorid v ar. In the period prior to 1931 he vf> 0 attachod
as cedi cal officer to a nusbor of military units. °n 1 January 1331
he v« c transferred te the Ar=y Kedical Incpccloratc aa a ''"tioultant
Croferect) cn hospital sr.ttora and thorcapoutico with tho r 0 nh of
fberstobnrtt (Major). In 1935 ochroodor becnso Chlof of 3t»ff to
C-or.eralarzt Hippke in tho newly established Medical Department of tho
Heich Ministry for Ariotion, a o retained this pcsiticn oftor
Einpke ■ 'ps sadc Inspector of the Medical Sorvico of tho Luftwaffe in
1937. In February 1940 Schrcodcr wr* appointed Air Fleot Phyaicion
fer Air Fleet II with tho rank of Gener a l3tabaarzt (Major Goneral).

Gn 1 January 1W ho replaced Hippke aa Chief of the Midicol Service
of the Xmftwpffe, Simultaneously he wr 3 procotcd to Gcnoral-
oberstaborst (Lieutenant General), which vro tho hlrheat rank
obtainable in tho nodical services. Ag Chief of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe, all medical officers of tho Corcen Air Force were
subordinated directly or indiroctly tc “chreeder. After he became
Chkf of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe his lseediato superior

a

we 5 Hardloser, who was Chief of the Medical Service of the Vehruacht.
HIGH, ALUTtJIS i^plS XlOJTSt

The experimen-s were perfomed et Dachau Concentration C a =p
for the benefit of the Luftwaffe during the year 1342. details cf
the experiments arc discussed in other portions of this Judmcnt.


Uhl?


13 V-t 1347-XJ<S2.1 1 -^-Ccolc - Hauler
Court 2

Bering the period fren 1341 to the end of 1945 the defend-
art, "ehroder* in hie position as Air Fleet Physician of Air Fleet
II ves in the operati sal Ccno of Air Fleet II, which cc=pri B ed
the Kediterraneen Area. H o did net boccne Chief of the Kodlcal
Service of the Lufwaffc until 1 January 19*4. There is no
evidence thot whilo Air Fleet Physician he exercieod or could have
exercised any control over experiments then beinf conducted fer the
benefit of the Luftwaffe.

JpnJWXC JA’JiTJICT UPS lHIETSt

Schrslbor, a uerber cf Handler's st-.ff, who presided over a
cccforence hold in Bresl*i In Juno 1944 for the puipcso cf coordinating
Jaundice resear -tv, esnifned groups nf physicians to work together on
Jaundloo probleme. Pcfcnen, Gut*oit and Haagon wero acoi-ned to ono
of those breups. Gn 27 Juno 1944 Hoa. cn, a Luftwaffe off!cor, wrote
hie collaborator Hoik, a consultant to .“chroedor, rcking, "Could
you in your cfficiol pcoition toko tho neccccary steps to obtain
•ho roeulred oxpericental suhjeetol*

Tho rocerd shos th t H 0 iu:en subsequently conducted opidonic
undice exporiuonts on prlsrnnrs at i'atzweilcr Concentration r anp.
There is nc o-.-ir-or.ee, heve c r, to establish “chroedor 1 » crir.inal
connection with those exp rinoats. At nos* ell thrt can bo said fer
this evidence io th^t S hr coder ray h-vo gained kncvlcdj o of the
oxperinonts through Xelk, a nan'.cr of his -tuff — but oTon thrt
fact k*s not been cade plain.

HEZZSB 23P12lXXIS n 5s

Free-in/: experirr nts wero carried out at lachau ^cncer.trrtion
3 P sp fc r the benefit of the Luftwaffe, durinc the year 1942. Lotailn
yf these erpriuents arc discussed olscwhore in this *ud/nsor.t.

It is conclusively shewn from the cvidenco dealing with
freezicr thrt c early as the y«er 1243 .“chnodcr hnd actual knewlod e
that f -h oxpcricents had been conducted ^on inc-ntcs at Tachai
'’encentrrtion Caz^;, during tho course cf which suffering and deaths

hj-4 resulted to the experimental subjects.


;? August IS-" 7 — C-JCS2-.1l-o-~c-k _ ?-p—ler
Court -

hph^s siFBZXQrcsi

»peri=en*s in Connection with typhus v«re conducted at
"chirnec* and Satr^eiler Concentration Cacps during the year3 1942,

1943, md 1944. The details of these experiments are discussed olsa-
whtre in this judgment.

The erperinents -ere carried out by a Luftvpf'o Medical Officer,
Prof. Dr. Eaacon. As a medical officer of the Luftwaffe he -pa sub¬
ject to Schroeder'o orders after the latter bocace Chief of the
Mcdica- Service of the Luftwaffe. The office of Gckrcoder issued
and approved the rooearch assignments pursuant to which these experl-
nents vera carried out. It provided the funds for the research. One
of tb© Chief collaborators in the proems was the defendant Rose,
Consultant to the Chief of the Modicel Sorrico of tho Luftwaffo.

Corrospondence *•« cnrrlod on bet-oen Haagon and the Chiof of
Staff for tho defendant ."chroodor with reference to whether a
typhuo opidecic prevailing et Ratrwciler vs connected in any nannor
with the vaccine reaoerch then bolng conducted. Tho offlco of tho
Chiof of tho Medical Servico of tho Laftwrffo received reports
on tho experiments frea which it could be doarly percoived that
vaccine oxporiconts v v rc bolng performed ~n concentration CAOp insatoo.

Mhilo tho oxrerironts wore in pro.-rccs S^rcoder admits having
risitod Haagen at Strasbourg, tut dories that ho talked with Hoagon
about tho experiments. Tho defendant’s assertion tha.t tho oxpericonto
were not diecuseod docs ret carry conviction.

A s hnc boon pointod out in thic judgment tho lrw of war
imposes or. a military officer in a position of command an affirnativo
duty tc trie ouch ctepo at ero within his power end appropriate) to
the circumstances to control those under his command for tho prevention
of acts which arc violations of the law of wpr.

This rule is applicable to the ca-o of Schrcedor. At tho tice
he >ccacc C%«ef cf ?v e V-cdicel Service sf the Luftvaffo “chroodor knew
of the f«ct thrt freezing experiments for the benefit of tho Luftwaffo

ID till


:• A— E *. 1947-i_XSI)_lL-^_Cooic Semcler
Coo»t :

hed bees corried cut at Eechau Concentration camp by Luftwaffe Medical
officers. Ho knew that through these experiments injury ar.d death
had resulted to the experimental subjects. H« also knew that during
the years 1943 and 1943 typhus vaccine research had been carried out
by the Luftwaffe officer, Haarcn, fer the benefit of the Luftwaffe
Medical Service, at Satxweiler and Sehimeck Concentration Camps —
and had he taken the trouble to inquire, he could have known that
deaths had occurred ae a result of these experiments,

Vith all this knowledge, or naans of knowledge, before him
i*o commanding officer, he blindly approved a continuation of typhus
reeenrch by H#uw en, supported tho program, ar.d was furnished reports
of its progress, without so much a* taking one step to detercine tho
cirieumetnnces under which tho research had been or was bolng carried
on, to lay down rules for the conduct of present or future research
by hie subordinates, or to prescribe the conditions under which tho
concentration cp-p inmates could be used no expericer.tal subjects,

Ac wro tho c«-e with referecco to thefroc*ing experiments at
Cachet, ae-J-eran nationals were uaod .*o experimental subjects, nono
gave their consent, end cany suffered injury and death no n rooult
of tho experiments.

C-A3 TXPZSZKZSTSl

Lxpo imento with verion* typos of poison roe wo o performed by
Luftwaffe Officer Haanen and a Prof. Dr. Hl-t in tho L'atrvcilor Con¬
centration Camp. They bog on in i'ovcmbor 192 and were conducted through
tht SUT56T cf 1944. Daring this ported a great many concentration
caay inmates of fiusaian, Polish and Czech nationality were erprlncntod
on wi*h gac, at la,- t 50 of whom died. A cortain Oberarst Vfi-mcr,
a Staff Physician cf the Luftwaffe, worked with Hirt on tho fa? cxpori-1
mer.tc throughout the period.

V Q discussed the <*uty which rests upon a coseanding officer to
take ap repriate measures to control hia subordinates, in dealing
with the cr ’Q cf Handlecer. V© shall not repeat vh>*t we said there.

uio5


13 August 1947JCX3&.lL-&lCocjc -Bareler
Court -


Hd S ^breeder adopted the -ecsureo which the lew cf *r laposoc upon
one In position of ccnaend to prevent the actiono of hio subordinates
arourting to violations cf the lew cf '-ar, the deaths of the non-
C-ernar. nationals Involved In the gas experironts night well have boon
prevented*

SUUfAEE IXPLEIKUiTS:

Seawater expurlaonts were conducted on innate 3 of Dachau Concentra¬
tion Carry during tho lato Spring and Sumer of 1944. -ho defondant
'chrcedor oponly adalto that these cxpericents were conducted by
hlo authority. Vhon on the witness stand he relatod tho cireuostanccs
undor which these exporlacats were initiated ar.d carried through to
eoapletlcn.

As related by Schrcodcr tho xpe rlncr.t on “aking ooawator drlnlcpblo
was a probice of frost iaportnnco. “wo aothode wor 0 avallablo In
Goracny, each of which to sceo extent had beo n prevl usly tried, both
on nniEal end on buaan subjects. Those wore icnovn ns tho Schaofor
and tho B e rkntlt procoasoc, Voo of tho Schaofor Method on ooawator
uroducod a catiofactory liquid oceontially tho sane In its offoctn
and an tc potability as ordinary pure drinking water.

The Schnafar Process, however, callod for puantitlon of silver
which voro thought tc he u available. U 8 o of tho ?orka nrocoos, how¬
ever, resulted sjcrely In changing the trato of ocawotor, thus neking
it aoro pale table, without at tho sane tiro doing a*-ay with danger
to hoalth and life which always rosulto froa censuring considerable
Quantities of untreated ceavntor. Material w 0 -o avallnblo for tho

e

BOrka Process, but S^hrccdor did not feel th't It cculd bo adopted
until aoro was know of tho aothod. At Scfcrocder'e direction, tho
defor.dant Bcckcr-Xreyccng arranged for a conference to bo bold at tho
"orran Mr Ministry in Kay 1944 to discuss the nroblar. Prorcnt at
the conference, aaong others, wore ?crka and the defendants Bcckcr-
B-cycen^ ar.d Schaefer.

There is no doubt that the cc-fcrcncc was well inferred, and

UJ:l£


13 Jfcegua t 19±~-y~X SIUl-6-Cc ok - Sender
Court I


discusccd ell current data upon the eubject. Sadi feet appear! from
the -.inutes cf the me6tin.~, in which it is stated?

’...Captpin (Med.) Dr. Bccker-Jroyecng reported os the
clinical experiments conducted by Colonel (Ked.) I>r. von Sirany, and
case to tho final conclucion thpt he did not consider then pn hoing
unobjectionable and condueivo enough for a final decision. The Chief
of tho Medical Service la a evinced that, if the B c rlca cotfcod lo uaod
dasgc to health hf-r to ho expected not Ifter then 6 days after
taking Borlcatit, which dasago will result in p< raar.cnt Injuries to
health wad — according to tho opinion of K.C.O. (Mod.) Dr. "chaofor—
will finally roault in depth after not later than 12 day*. External
9yap tons pro to ho expected such «a dohydratlon, diarrhea, convulsions,
hallucination, and finally dorth."


It concluded nt this mooting ttvt it wruld ho necoaoary to
nerfem further seawater cxpirlao-'ts upon human bolngo in order to
dot* rmlno definitely whether or r 0 t the Borlcatit Method cf treating
oca w r tor c uld ho onfoly ooployod and uoed In connection with the
German war offort. Theco experimentc v»ri planned to ho carrlod on
in croup oorloo; each cf which would roqul-o air. d.-ys, and would
ho spdo upon husan bolr.a In thlo ordor: one group would ho
supplied only with Bcrkatlt treated soa water* p occond group would
recolvc no water cf aay kind; tho fourth group vqs to ho . Ivon ouch
water ns was generally provided in eeerrency sen distroso kite, then
uccd hy Gorans si’itory poroonnol.

In addition to the fir't experiment it was agreed that a second
cxporlnont should ho conducted, -he nrtee of the meeting which
dc»l with tho second experiments scricn reed as followol

"Persona nourished with sea water nnd 3 c rkatit, rad ns diet
also tho cccr oncy cep rations.

"Pflrstiga fit 12 day®

"Since in the opinion of the Chief of the Medical aervic, percenont
Injuries to health, that is, tho depth cf the expo imental subjects,

131*17


19 August 1347J-'-H3E_ll_?_C cok - Baaslor
Ccurt I


h n s tc to expected, as experimental subjects such person* should to
used • will to pub »t tho disposal by tho Beichfuchrcr SS*"

Cc 7 June 1944 Sehroedor wrote to Hlnnlcr through C-rawit* anking
for concentration casp inar-tc* to v o uo. d as subject* in tho sea water
experiments, which letter row's in part a* follows*

"Eifhly Hespectcd Boich Minister*

"Earlier already you made it possible for tho Duftvnffc to settle
urreat nodical natters through experiments on hunan boings. Teday
again, I stand beforo a docicion which, after ntt&oroua experiments on
nninnls a- well ns hunan oxpcrlscnte on voluntary cxporincntel oubjocts,
doeando a final solution* Tho Luftwaffo has sinultanoously dovclopod
tv© nothods for making seawater potablo. The ono nothod, dovolopcd
by a Xedicel Officor, rcaovoc the salt froo tho scawator and trano-
forss it into roal drinking water; tho oocond nothod, suggostod by
an onginocr, lo*vos tho salt content unchanged, »r.A only removes tho
unpleasant tasto from the son wotor. The latter nothod in contrast
to tho first, required no critical raw natorial. *ran tho nodical
point of viov this nothod nist bo viewed critically, as tho admlnlotrn*
tlon of concontr^tc* salt solutions can produce oovoro symptoms of
tolscnlng.

"Ao tho oxp ri-onts on human beings cculd thus far only bo carrlod
out for a poriod of four days, end an practical daoa n d s roeuiro a
remedy for thoso who arc in distress at see up to 12 days, epprepriato
experiments arc necessary.

"Required ero 40 hoplthy tost subjects, who cast bo avallablo
for 4 whole wocks, A 0 it i 0 known fren previous experiments that
necessary laboratories exist in tho concontrrtion Carp Dachau, this
camp would bo very suitable..."

Torino other parties tock part in correspondence upon this ap¬
plication, one of the writers suggesting that Jews or persons held
in purrantir.o bo used as experimental subjects. Another correspondent
conin?ted a social r ypay half-breeds as candidates fer tho tri-tnont.

Herr Hi-.-icr docided tht gypsies, plus three others for control

Uii 18


19 Aagust 1947-H.XSILll-b-Cccfc - Sailer
Court I


p^poecaj should to utilised*

In fairness to the defoliant it should to stated that he contents
the translation of the second sentence in the first paragraph
cf tho letter written by his to Eialer, which the prosecution inter¬
prets '•s moaning that experiments could nc longer he conducted on
roluntrry subjects, r.d that the words "demands a finnl solution" scant
that irr/oluntary subjects in concentration carps should bo enployod.
Regardless cf whether or not the letter quotod hy us io a correct
translation of tho C-orran ori' inal, tho cvldoncc shows thit within
a month aftor tho lottor was cent to Elsalcr through C-rnwitz oc*-
wattr oxporinento wore commenced at Dachau by tho defendant Bolglboock,

Ihc r.othod by v' lch the experimental subjects wore choson is not
known to tho dofondant Schroedor. As ho explained fren tho -itnocs
c*-ar.d with reforeneo to his lot ter and the sub sequent procedure: P I
cont It away only after I had consulted tho possibility of tho oxporl-
sent with Grawlt*. And aftor X had informed hid hew tho wholo thing
was thought by ua so that ho could pass on this information to
HitBlor in cp-o it bocaao noccosary. Then thia lottcr was sent off,
and pftcr possibly four weeks when Bolglboock had errived at Dachau—
in tho moantino ho was Ivon an op ortunity to carry out this work.
Vhatoror lay in betwcon thpt, hcv in tho administrative way this
waa organised, wo newer lcnrnod... it was an intor—office affair...

Vo only saw the initi"l point rnd tho end point of this routo."

Thus hcrar. another experiment conducted under the auspices »f
the dofondant Schrocder, wherein the initiator of tho experiment fellod
to excrcico tho personal duty of determining tht only consenting human
subjects would bo used, but left that responsibility to others.

A-pin io demonstrated tho cso of an officer in a position cf
sup ricr command who authorizes tho performance of experiments by his
subordi-at^s while failing to toko efforts to proccni'co tho conditions
which will insure the dcnduct cf the exporlrcstc within legally
permissible limits.


nJ; 1o


19 A-xrisi 1947-—-(SE_ll_9-"ook - 2«-=lor
“curt I


-be evidence ibO»i conclusively -bet gypsies of verier
rationalities wore used rb e.tporinental subjects. Iorae- 1 naptee of
Auschwitz Concentration C„rp ver# tricked intc coning to Dachau with
the nroniae that they were to be used i»8 richer? of a labor battalion,
*hen they errived at Dachau they w»-re assigned to the ceaweter
ex-eri=er.t»l st«tion without their consent. D-ring the course of the
erserinent rany of then suffered lntenee physical and aenral anguish.

The Tribunal finds that the defondant Schr c der •• s roononoible
for, aided and abetted, and tool: a consenting part in, r.edic*l expori-
nents nerforsed on non-£er=an nationals egeir-st their consent; lr.
the course of which experirer’a deaths, brutalities, cruoltieo, torturos
and other inhurano acta wore cosnltted on the experlsental oubjecta.

Tc tho extent thet there orperlcents did not constitute V«r Criooo
they conoititue Crises against Hucanlty,

C0HCLU3X0V

Military Tribunal I f inds and adjudges the dofondant Ocknr
Schrooder guilty under Counts two and threo of the Indlctsont,

THE P. 1SI HLiT: Tho Tribunal will now be in recess until 1:30
o’clock.

(A recess vps taken until 1330 o'clock.)


UirfO


-_g ,v- r 47-A-3J-12-l-Coolc-(F-aaaler)

Court'lie. I, C»ce *o. I.


APISHvOi. SIS3I0:i

♦

(The ...ar l:. reconvened a. Too- hours.)

THS MARSHAL; Pereone in the court roc- vill oleasa


find tx.eir setts.

The Tricon el is a; air. lr. session.

YZ PRTSIDSFT: Tr. roe'in. the Jud~:ent of the nerning
5 -eeior., dur to an error in reoarir./ t:.e .-.nstrr cooy, a pera-
.-rp'h voe ooltted frsa oege Co, otlr.g the last p* stf of the
discussion of the defendant. Handleser - I should have said
it vps fitted fro- mve 71, instead of ca« 55. Ve will now
read the - 'v- -rroh there, following the •• .rds ; "To the extent
that t io crises cor.oitted 'ey or under hie authority were not
war ctir. s, they w r<* crl .c against huoaftIty." I shall no¬
ne oc tn*. r.aro rooh;

■Ta« evidence conclusively enuvp that the Or.anr. w^rfi
1 fl-cic flecer', ae translated in the ir.clct tent as 'spotted
fiver', is »fore correctly translated Ly 'typhus'. Thio ic
rc-lttcd, >r.d ir. this Jud, ..ent, in uccord • itn tr.c evidence,

' jsc tn* verd 'ty hue' net cad f 'spot toe. Tc^.r'.

V« shall r.ov ^roco.d with tne reading of the Jud .tent
ir. connection vi;. r . t .* defendant, lent ent


CSTZKSH

The defendant 1'r.rh r. t c.-.»r*Tjd under Counts
Tv; >r.i Tnr: a -f tr. Indict rrh with e ocial reupon-
elcilSty for, and participation m, Sulfanilamide,
Spott-d Fav?r, Pole::., rr. Xncendlar 5 do >x:t 1-
>-ento. The Prosecution .:oa aoand-ned the t-_ latter
^ ?£p?:*a6 and, hence, t;;3; v ili not co c.ncld.rod fur-
.X-Tha defendant is also aborted under Count F-ur

/r i p* I ...

1933, lr.* .r anlzatlPn declared crlnlnl o. tr.e

Jud voy*: £ >Ir.t=mati-r.:.l Military Trl .unrl —


•A /


111*21


19 Au. 4 7-A-3 J -12 - 2-C o c'/.- ( Haasle r )

Court I, Case I.

namely, tne S5.

Jenzker. was co.naissicr.ed or. tne ..-dicel Service
of the 0 er pi. -»2V^ in 1912 er.c served through the
f.rst World far ir. taat capacit. . ?roa 151S to 1924,
he engaged ir. tne private practice of sealclne. He
Jolr.ac the BSPA? in l : -5, and in Octoo-r 1534 he vac
agpln commissioned as a reserve officer -f tne i'aval
Medical “ecr rtnent. 3n 1 Harch 1525 he vas transferred
to the Kedlcsl Deosrtaent of the SS, with the ran/, cf
Major, end assigned to the ..edlcal Department of =
branch of the SS which in the ou-aner cf 194C became the
Vaffer.-SS. He served ae Cnief : urge or. of tne S3 Hos¬
pital in oerllr. end was Director of the department
charted •■'ith sup sluing tadlcal eouioeant and v l tn the
supervision of edlcal ercor.r.el r. concentration
caeca. He was also Medical Supervisor to S'cfce, the
nead of all tne concentration caxce, *nicr. were «Unir.
Genzken' s Jurisdiction ins-far sc jedical ?:tcrc •••ere
concerned. In .tsy 1S4C Oenzhen was arpolr.ted Chief
t..e Medic. 1 Of:ice -f tne <af:en-S5 vim tne rank -f
Ser.l„r Colonel, i-ra.witz oeln n s medical sueror.

He retained tr.ls ojsltior. ur.t 1 tne close of the War.

In 194- ..e as designated at Cnief of tne ..edlcal
Service :f th*» "affen-S®, Division D of the 35
Operational Head-uarters. 9r. 2C January l'-'2 he
was appointed 5ru penfuehrer and Generalleutnent In
the aff-n-S3.

"LF AHILAIHD" KXPSPTKHKT3:

-The Sulfanilamide experiments referred to ir.
tne Indictment < - , ero conducted cy tne defendants C-ec-
hardt, Fiscr.er and Ocerhauser st Hr ver.se rueck Concen¬
tration Camp cef een 2C Jul 1542 an: .vu-ust 1 4o.

11122


2 Aur 4?-A-3«f-12-2—Cook-(Hammier)
court ", Cass I.

During- tr.ls marled cf time, ft r of the medical
branches of the 'sffen-53 vrre under Genzken, : r.-
cludir.- Iffice XVI, Hy.iene, of which the defendant
Xru 6 *ov6Jcy vb 6 chief.

It 16 suooltted b; tne Prosecution that the
evidence roves Krugovs l-cy to nave lven support end
ae6ieta:.ce tc. t..eee experiments, and tn&f, consequently,
Oentken ceco^es criminally liable because of tne
position of command he held over *.rugov t ->y. It is
also ur = ef t;.et o-ceuse v-or.then attended tne meeting
ir. oerllr. at which Leonardt and Fisc ter gave their
lecture or. tne experiments, that this likewise shows
criminal connection.

That Mrugowshy rendered asslntoncc to Sebhardt
lr. t e Sulf -nilamide experiments nt Ravnooruecfc Is
clearly rover., hru ova::- >ut hie laboratory and
oo-'orlcert at we'o.ardt's disposal. :-.e furnished tne
s cterlal cultures for the infections. .o conferred
with debhardt about tr.e Hadlcal problems involved.

"t • eo on t.-.e svivestion of j*u».owsky'c office that
wo 3d sr.avln.e u.d rr.und ^laeo ’•ere placed in arti¬
ficially lr.flicle? -*wunds ado or. tne subjects so
tnat oc-ttleflsld our.ds would oe more closely simu¬
lated. It also a peurc thr-i 31u.:.enreuter, wr.o wa6
t..e Chief if Of: ice XV under itonzfcen's direction,
may have furthered tne exoe-lmentc by furn’siting
surgical Instruments and me* lcines to Oecn-rdt.

Tne -rlcunal finds that denzken M as Mot present
a*-tr.e Berlin m-etlng.

Although Hrurovsky and ^lumenreuter may nave

aided Se'oharrt in his experiments, the Prosecution

hac failed to eh:--- that t ---as done ••ith ?enzien*s

11L23


19 Aug 4 -A-BJ-13-4-Ccok- (Racnler)
Court X, «a e I.


direction ' r knowledge,

-he Prosecution, therefore, has failed tc sus¬
tain the burden vith retire tc this particular speci¬
fication.

rrnus :3 :

Tne series -.f experiments “nlch are tne suoject
tf this specification were conducted at Buchen^sld
Concentration Camp and oe an ;n January 1342. S3
Hauptsturnfuehrer Dr. Ding, who was ottacr.ed to t.ie
Hygiene Institute of the Seffen-SS, was in cnar e f
these ex erlser.ts - “ith tne defendant KJVSN serving
as his deputy.

Until 1 o e pteracer 1S43 both Hrugovskjs, the
Chief of the Hygiene institute, and Ding “ere sub¬
ordinate to Gar.sfcen. Unt'l t:.e date last mentioned
the chain cf military command In tne field of hygiene
and research “ns ac f-llo“8: Hlasler - Orovltt -
Ganthen - Krugowsky - Ding.

c rlor tc* 1919 Ding had beer, cant physician at
3ucnen“old, and as such vac subordinate to Genthen.
During the earl, rontns of the “ar jer.zken served
os an «ro- surgeon lr. : e field - Ding celng his
adjutant. Durir.. t. fell of 1341, Ding returned
to buener/ Id and wer.zken t- his fficc at Berlin.
Durin e their service .r. t..e field oer.iken and -mg
had become v an persunt, friends. Ding vas attached
tc the Hygiene Institute -f tne »'affen-S3 and was
engaged in 1/pr.ue research for the Institute. Ger.zker.
testified that Krugowsky and tne Hygiene Institute were
in r.is chain of conoand prior to 21 August 1945. He
further testified that after the cate last mentioned
r.is office had nothin to do wit-, ring save to provide


1U2L


o»


iS Aug 47-A-3J-lo-5-Coci:-(Ra--ler)
ourt I, Case I.


money for king's ex~ns^s, there being n- other
budget from -r.icb aoney was available. Hrugowsky
testified that Genzken wes his superior officer
until 1 September 1942, end knew tnat tne Hygiene
Institute was workin or. thecroolea of providing
p.n efficient vaccine against Typhus. It Is admitted
tr.at Ding w 8 6 carrying out medical exoeri .er.ta -n
concentration caao inr.etes ir. order to determine
tne effect of various Typhus vaccines.

Tt is r.ot contended that such experiments were
not carried out. In the course of these exoerlraento
tv. ouildings or "clocks" were used. The experiments
were conducted in Block 46, and -nen a satisfactory
vaccine v no redded upon, Block 5C was uced for t..e
preparation of vaccines.

During the conrce of tne experiments vitn vac¬
cines in I’.arch 194t Ding hlnself contracted lyohus.
Oer.zken testified that ne vac aware of the fact tnat
concentration catc inmates v«re subjected to experi¬
ments, cut stated that he v ac not advisee as to tr.e
method of ex erimeutatlor..

It ic clerr tnat the ex-erlmenta necessary to
decide uoon a sat•ofact.ry vaccine precoded oy a
considerable period t..e "rtouc.ion -f the vaccine.
Oenzken testified that vaccine reduction began in
December 1943, that t: ; .rocuctlon establishment only
moved intc Block 50 ir. t .e middle cf August, ->nf tr.at
when production actur-lly began "This establishment had
already come under t~e agency of ura'-ltz anc it vno
not Subordinated ar.y more" to hia.

Under date -f 9 January 1943 the Sir. Clary

contains a len--tn> -ntry statin tr.at by Jenzker.’c

m25


5 Au. i7-A-BJ-13-o-Coc>- (--.Easier)
our- I, Case r.

ordsr tne Typhus research- stabler. oecaae tne
"Department of Typhus and Virus neaecrch, ■ that Dr.
Dlr.-r •••ouid be head of this department, and -hat
durine his absence defendant Hovsn vauld act in ..is
niece. The entry further stated that Tin v a s
appointed Chief -eh' rtnent Heed for special missions
in ny ler.e, etc. The Ting "Jarjr if diecuesed else¬
where in this Jud^T-ent. considering tr.e cencnstrated
desire of Dir.r for his oereor.al at grand! ze-nent, this
ehtry la not entitled to entire credit, as written.

"t refers to Genzken as "Major General" - which rank
he did r.wt receive until a few weeks after 3 January
1-943. The entry, fcovv/«r, has some probative value
u:-r. the "uestion of Ding's statue durln tr.e year
1943.

Genzken testified that ..e "o: roved" the
establishment of wing's depertaent for vaccine re¬
search. He also testified taat r.ic ceiartaer.t fur-
r.lsr.ed necessary fundo froo it6 oudget for Ding's
lnveetlgations.

rroa the evidence it aooears that prior to
1 September 19-iC, Hru o^sky retorted regularly to
Genzken, or. nn average ~f once er week, either orally
or ir. writing.

Under date 5 May \34i lirug.-wsky signed a
written report upon the subject. Testing Typhus
Vaccines." Tr.is report -er.t to six different offices;
the first copy# to Conti; t e second ccoy, to Gravltz;
end the third copy, to Oenzker.. *.te report coa-.ences;
"The fiesta :f f->ur Typhus vacclr.ae tade oy us or.
nuaan sucjects at the instigation of the neich Health
L.c&er -r. C ,.::i :.ad t..e follow ini results..." is


statsa that the


lli-26


O u*


47-A-SJ-14-1—Crcss-tRa.-sil* r)

-rt Case Z.

2 :ortality of vie vice of typhus curinj er. eoide.olc
"v s arounc oC oer cent" and that "during the sane
epldenlc four roups of ex a rloental subject ware
vaccinated v ita or.e each" of the four tytes of vac¬
cine described in the oe;inr.‘n~ -f the report. "The
erterlaer.tpl subjects --ere mostly In their fentieo
anc thirties. Care v pb taken vfc'n selecting tree
t..st they did r.ot co.-e 'rcc typhus districts ana also
to ensure ar. intervel of four to si:: veehs oetvaen the
protective vaccination ar.c tne outbreak of the clini¬
cal syittohs of t... ; disease. According to experience
tr.ia period is iatora-lve to achieve iSAupity."

The eff eta of tne four vaccines tested, ware
c.etcrlcec as follo-s. Tne report on tne .'algl vac¬
cine states tr.nt “nouocy hied'. The report on t;.e
Olld-coietar and Kaayen vaccine rlso states that no
deaths occurred. Tne report on the i-r.rlnynorarl
vsccine states that or.e person didd. 'he ©x-erluent
• . - - 3shrin -strong vac-. ne death.

The Ipst -srngraph of the report states: "in
the lr et t«o -roves sy-. .toae -r r e cor.sircraoly
^tronL-er t r. lr. th f rat -roups.... Ko dlff:r-nce
o*twf.-»n tr. f'O - c- r.‘e of : * ~ -hrir. Works was
observed, ‘.ho atter.dlny nnysiclsns stated t.,at the
general picture of the dlser.ee .r. rroup four was
r: .n*r .tore eevero co .'red ' that of the oetler.ts
of .roup tr.ree."

Ir. a su-.nation, :n*u._ow 6 ::y reccnaendec the -so
of s -vaccine "produced eccord n .o thr chicken e?,;
process, which, in its iununitatior. effect, Is acual
to t*.e vr.ccine after feigl.

“The eff ctiveness of protection co-ends on

3i.27


is Auj -rogs- 'Rf Her)

Court I, Case I.

■ ...a thod usee in iaklQg the vaccine."

Of course, experiments vitfc vaccines, conducted
because of Che urgent need for discovery of a pro¬
tective vaccine, cult list to scant results unless
the subjects vaccir.rted vere suceequer.tly ir. 6one
way eff clively exposed to typhus, thereby demonstrat¬
ing the effectiveness or non-eff ctivenose of the
vacclnptior.. '■fhile Krugovslty's report, rc vo referred
to, makes no reference to an crt’ficinl infection,
it toes state without forth r explanation that two
dertha occurred, pr.d *.n the last paragraph, cuotec
above, co.tipar: t tn? severity of "the disease"' between
:roups 5 . r.d 4.

On crose-expcilr.atlor. hrugowaky testified that
Tr. Dir.;; ' as to lecture iu ;* seating of Consulting
Surgeon* In the etrir.j of lS4c oni tnr.t *.r.e •••itneas
informed Ger.zher. concerting 4 the intended amount of
vaccines to oe produced o/ t.;e 23." liru.oveky testi¬
fied t.-.at he ave er.tken this information for three
reasons*, first, tr.nt Qensken had to ce advised of
tne fact that olr. : , es a cem'oer of the h’affen-Ss,
waa to give lecture to the surgeons; second, that
Oensfcen should ce r.forped concerning "the effective¬
ness cf e nus'cer of vaccines to ce used for troops;"
third, that Rentier, should kr.u-* v n sn h a could ex- ect
the fir^c production cf vrccir.ec fer the nc 3 and the
amounts "::e could count or. for etch month, Jfru oveky
further testified:

"T.-.e conference " 1 oh Dr. Gensken ’<pe extremely
brief. «s far as I reuen'oer ve v-re standing
close tc r.is dee... I told him tnat . .e various
v.cclnes -.iich I men:-Onec .o hi.: sac r different


13 Aut -J7-A-3J—14
C:-rt I.


Grose—(Ra-vier)


"effect; I cole bln that me effect varied rs to
—e length of tenners .ure r4 e reduction of
fatalities; pr.d I told ..in tr.ee ■'feer bavin--
vaccinated the entire 55 cou_d count on 60ne
protective effect for *11 ole 1 ere. 0;. tiat
occasion - dtowee ..i : fe-- -harts '•hior.

.\pL nanded over to ue c; t..t tl :e, the rase
c.-.arte which rm„ re-rod. cer *n .lie pnef, 9..r. I
used t..ese charts in o-,ier *o exolein t.ir ef r cc.-
lvenecs of t.-.e vaccines to

"I.:e tortallty U.ur i and th • t-nnerrture fl. uree
could be cer*ved fron tneee cl 9rt6, couldn't they?

A. "Yea, If I re sneer corr’ccly, on the heading: cf
theca charts t.-.e Information w. = «_-iven what day
of the • nfection w ae. This en re conference M)
V'jry cr ef and ' t Is quite ->'ost cl* that fr. .‘enthen
- «ho v 0B only concerned • lth t:.o tost important
pointc wh:cn he had to know _ . t is *ulte : ossicle
trust be overlooked that. I md no cruse to point
It out to r.i in particular gir.ee I »ts r.ot re¬
tort in - .c h'.h acrut Il.-iv'c o?ries of ax erln?r,:6
but v!,c only r -tortir.r to hi a about tr.o protective
value cf various v-cc.r.ss -hie.. he, no pedicel
cr.ief, r.ac to *no v . Ir.es j v?r® tvo completely
different r>oir.te of 7iev. n

Inc iricur.*l e convinced :nst trie;- to 1
Septeobe* l?-*!, l°r.: tr.ev the neture rr.fi scope

of t..e activities cfT his suoordinate*, Ilrurovely
sne Iinr, in t::e field of tycnus research; yet he
did nothin* to insure that such res-’ rcr. v -uld be
cor.'-' ctar. vlthin permissible Units. He knew

t.'.pt concentration cr-rct innrtes ^ere being sr'cj :, ct?d


.29


O M


3 Aug 47-Ar-=J-14~‘-Oro88-(Ranler)
curt Kc. i.


to cruel medical ri.uer.ts ir. t.ie coure 3 of wr.lch
deaths V3 re occurring; y*t he took nc steps to as¬
certain the etatue of the subjects or t.ie circum¬
stances under which tney v-re b?lr. sent to the experi¬
mental block. Hsd he “.ad 3 tre sit hteet Inquiry he
•<uld have diceev red that many of t.. 3 human subjects
us?c v 3 re non-hernan nationals vho had not g-lver.
their consent to tna ex? 3 rimente.

As the Tribunal r.as already pointed out in
tr.io Judgment, "the duty and responsibility for
ascertaining the runllty of tne consent rest6 upon
each individual *ho initiates, directs, or enjages
in the experiment. It la a personal duty and restor.-
Blcillty -hier. oey not ce dele, oted to another with
impunity."

’’e find that lenzken, in his official cuoaclty,
*-ae reepor.slcle for, aided or.-- aoett?d the Tychue
c-piriaento, performed on non-German nationals
against the'r consent, lr. the course of ••'hich deaths
occurred as e result of the trentnent received. *o
tha extent that these experiments did not constitute
‘for CrixoG they constituted Crimes against Humanity.

KSGtaSK;? ir C=I>3H XL -.3.sI*I2ATI0:; :

Under Court Four 01 the Indictment Oenzken

•V

is charged • J ith ct.r._ a aether of r.n organization
declared criminal by Juu. meat of the International
Military Triounal, nor. ly, t,.a 3S. The svjder.ee shows
that aenzken oecame a member of tna S3 on 1 Harch 1936
ar.o voluntarily remained in that organisation until
the end of c.-.e war. As e high-ranking member of the
Medical Service of me Vsffen-SS he was criminally
implicated ir. t.:e commission of .'sr Crimes and Crimes


12 -17-A- 3J-14-5-Cro s s- (Easier)

Court I.

a ainac Humanity, as charged under Counts Tvo anc
I me _ of the Indictment.

cohclus:oh

Military Trlounal I finds end adjudges the
defendant Earl lonzhsn guilty under Counts Two, Three,
and Four of the Indicttent.

83 -assist:?: Judge S:bring *111 continue radir.j the
Jud» ment.

TKt CAS2 G33KA3T?

Th? defondant J'Chardt Js cherjcc under Counts

Two and Ihra of erne Indictment v'tn special rcapon-

Blctlity :or> and part1clootion in, H’.;h Altitude,

Freezing, I.'lrrle, Lost Gas, Sulfanilamide, 5ono,

Kuscle er.d .larva ?.c generation -r.d Sons Irnnsplantat-

lor., St ''ter, Spideaio Jaundice, Sterilization,

•

Spotted Fever, Colson, rr. Incentiar. 3oao experi¬
ments.

The defendant Ueoherdt nelc. 06itions of -.rent
cover and reeoonsicillty in tae medical service of
t.-.e 3S lr. Karl :.r-.rr.y. He Joined the HSDAF lr. 1*'31
and the SS nt 1 ret P6 'prly °s l?-‘5. o tool: cart

in the Hp.zI Putsc:. of 1 T 2 , v hich aimed rt th* over-
t..ro--- of :h- so-called ’’eiaitr Republic, the derao-
cr tic government of Ger-.rny, coin- then n memo r
of th? illegal Fre Certs, "Bund Oberland." Whan,

In 1932, the hcecital c. ohenlychen -as founded
3esherdt --as appointed Chief TViyslcirr. of this Insti¬
tution. In 19o« r.a bcCM* the attending physician to
Himmler. He *-ts also :r3or.?l th sician to Himmler
and his family. Ir. 1940 Jachardt v?s appointed
Consulting our-sor. of th- -'affe.v-33 urn-, in 1243,
CniSf Clinical 0:fleer (woorstar Elir.iher) of tno


15 Aug 47—A-3J—14—o-lrose—(Healer)

C:art I.

Relcherrzt—S3 end Police C-ravitz. in th: Allgeaeine-
6S » bn f ret -ttnint-d the rank of e Gruppenfu2hror
(Hejor ‘j-ncral), rr.d in ths ‘affcrASS tn- rank of
Kojor General ‘r. the Reserve.
sulfaiu^-ie- T3>r?.r tts:

The purpose for ’hior. thee: cxo'riaor.t6 were
undertaken 16 defined n Counts I v o snd ±rhec and the
Indlctasnt.

Ir. the Ravensoruck Concentration Csap during a
o.-riod from 2C July 1 9<Z until *u. ust 1543 the de¬
fendant i>eonurdt, aided by c.fondants Fiscnor end
Oo.rnoueer, perforned such expcriaer.ta uoon huaan
subjects without their consent. Gebhardt oersonally
rocu.sted Heinrich Kia a ler's p-.rnlBSion to carry out
those cx rlnento, and he atteapted to ascurae full
responsibility for tr.aa and for any ccnsoounccs re¬
sulting therefrom. He hinself personally carried out
tnc Initial oo* rations.

Vnlle it ir not c .-. d strictly n'ceesary in
tnls Judfa nt to describe in any detail the pro¬
cedure followed n ■v-rforning thee experiments,
a brief ctpt; r.t •*111 no c. made tr, r-eon. The
ex-'rim nisi cuc^ ct6 consisted cf 15 raale cor.c-r.-
tration erne inmates usee during preliminary experi-
nor.te In July 1542, cut later 6C Polich '-’omen, who
w:re en: rin r.tod cr. in : roups of 12 subjects each.

In the first series of experiments the healthy
subj: ct6 v cr2 infected -' th v rious crcttrie, cut
resulting lr.fcct ons were not thereafter cons dered
suffici-ntly s nous to furnish a r. ans* r to the
problem souint to ce solv’d and further anoerlaer.ts
were tner. undert.-ken.


1.32


15 Aug - 7-^3J-14-7-:r.^-(H--fcer:

Sourt I.

Dr. <De chard t hr>3 adclit^c tr.at In t..o 2nd s r.es
of sxp:rXooa?8 3 cf t_*.o xprrin ntal suojrcts died es a
r suit ~f thi tri 2 ia-r.: t.ioy rc-colvcd. .-»I 1 of those
subjects ver; pors.ns wo had _e:n selected by the con¬
centration caxp autr-Grlt'es ar.d wno ’-crc not consulted
86 to t.;;ir consent or vllilr._n:ss . - orrtlcipate. Kot-
v lt..6tar.ding this, acvevor, t.:c esoo-rlo r.tal subjects
pr-tistec against •jxpsri’ur.te ctorallj rnd in writing,
6tatlng tart tr.cy ’jouIg nave preferr.d d etn to con¬
tinued excerlrocr.t6 a Inc: they weri convinced that they
would die In any event.

At. oxatlnrtlon of the :vld;nco r.reoer.tad to this
Irlber.nl in connection with ^ul fan? 1 acid o exo i rioents
p rf r-ed ucon ur.villir.r and non-consenting cor.cen-
rr?: on cccp 1 motes indicates conclusively, that
participating hur.an cuojcctc wore used under dur <.06
ar.d c-.rclon ir. ?xpirluents porfonc-d uoon their todies;
th>-t corsonB acting as euojects incurred rr.d sufferrd
physical tortur and taa rick of death; that in the
axoorLo.nte her. discussed at le^et five deaths of
rucjvctc wer: cn.scd :h refroa.

It is ciaincc cy Ir. r-obhardt that ell of the
ncxv-Ger,can cxcori * r.tai suojecto v : re selected frox
ir.cstjs of concent r-tior. caaps, r oncer cen'oars of the
Polish resistance novseent, *ho md previously been
condaoncd to death end r-- any event narked for
ligal execution. This i6 not recognized as a valid
defens-' to tr.c cnerge -f the lnalctaent.

The Polish woacn who v re used ir. tna exo'rlraents

had not .lvrr. their cone r.t to opeexe expcrln ntal suo-

Ject6. That fact v H s known to Ge'charot. The evidence

c r.clusivsly shove that : .ey h:d occr. c..-.fined nt

IU33


15 : 47_A-3J-l4-B-CrOBs- ( = - ~ . r}

Sturt I.


R^v r.e'oruck without pc such as = sanolancc trial.

-••ft- *act couic hav- b-«en Scnovr. to Oebnarat nad he
-ace the slightcsb incuiry of tnco concerning tnc-ir
status. 4r;.vcr, assuming for the moment thpt t.ioy
sac ce.-n concUsr.od to deatn for acts considered hostile
tc t.-.a German forces in tne occupi-re territory of Poland,
thecu -.arsons etill v rc entitled ,o the pro*. ction of
tne laws cf civilized nations, -..ile under c rtair.

6:ocivic conditions the rul'8 of r.d warfare r.ay
rocogr.izt the validity if an '^c.-tion of stlc-6, war
rcc:iG, or oth'r resistance vork*ra, it does not under
or.y clrcu .stances ccuntonnr.ee tno *.nfliction of r.eath


or ot.t *r punishment cy - nin^ or torture,
-rfscu: a® iravs aso-a-ttATToi? >;;d £cxs
voz-:\r:.z3:


i..cee er. erir.ents ••• re c.rried ou; m Anvine-
sruci: Concentration Carao durlr.; t.ie sa:? tlv;, and >r.
t.ii cam.' -Troop of -'list cne:. a-C ir. tj.c selfnn'xa-
.uicic exp£rl3onts. Vpon ese Polls;- 1 -t» s 'i.re*!
klr.uf -f oone Gparationc Here performed nrti fie .oily
induced . racturee, oon: t rcr.c 1 motions, oor.-i eplir.ts
t.ns conditions of r.. o-.eretlcns delr. t - opee*.a?.ly

falad 0 .-- Oul r :.s,. 5,-r iris vara re-


cu.rii to subnit to o rttior.t cevr -1 ti c. 7 n ^r.e
Inc'one, era.: rio:.c of •'iculfie r t hen *.r»

another lretar.es t ■oerlosteim of tra I-..- v, fi removed.
Cases ccct.rred ’■ntr. cu- tie vert excerlranted on 'ey
deliberately •'rrcturir.. treir llobr lr. e-v ra* -lac 26
and restir.: ti.e ?f_ ?ct or certain rstt nte. In at

a

1 -ft - = n* c = - bor.a ; r. title ns *-:r? - r: trned :r. s euc-
.‘?c- Blx a:': In r care shoulder


bird f


: p out


- *£Ct


*-os


:v?r.

I—3li


13 Aug 4'»-A-BJ-l4-9-Gra6S-(Rp.^.-:r)
Court I.


Furrier roc it-I of the so sctiv* ti»u _s ss
unnecessary 3s v r the operations t.^ns-lvic. T.'e
tseticon;' fc.-arc. and oxhlclts filed -:.c exanined c;- the
Inounal conclusively sustain tho al ogatior.s of t:io
Ir.dictcont vith reference to tns oxporlaer.t6 asntioned
therein.


m?5


-- 1-Gross 3r nr. 1 - r)


STSIS ~~) TF32IIS3TS:

* -d .” wo- testlnoay trust be rccr-itf' ra credible teotilioi
co-.c^r .1 r~< rlaects in which eo.icec.tr: tiou cr>=? ir-ir.tos were

uaod wirVov.. 1 consent rad v r r* thore 'ter injected vith pus. He
t stifi .o -7 1 »r at two aeri*o of cr cj-i^-ntc V icb raevlted

fete Ur 'or L o the oub'ects.

The Pro: ertic . clriss, end It is likely t t these biochcuicrl ox*
prriafate vert p-rfertted In the 3*ci i Oc icxitrrtion C i vere

cocpleaeitto ir.t forced prrtc of th odfi .11 ide exwl:fnts in
2rVKvibru«o , s , sored by the defendant ..

»*. is -«a: «v 'iricat to *otrolis w . the cxi 4 ; *1 c on.it Ctioa of

^••b.vr t . t vie e.rp« . in*sts.

six v A : rx : r.: "t:

- 1 'ni’ioa, «.ch hre b< :• icio:..d in that tfy£ :•

-n i. » • offi'.! end vr'oa -1 vuosl to of &«.arich Hi a-ilcx -

'•‘•o’ ' i’ c&acor-ud concentr*Vio c -.‘Softl crtori.tentr,

’ CO itod by nn order •«, >■ Hit • ii ::ry 13 1 '-• direct*
} c* — • ic- fro- Scohardt would V,; vtr-'.r.\i before iny e:: cri-

• nfce - coulf oc c-irifcd out o euoh mar kufcjeou. : to

oidrr i- .c ' t - t . 31 nr 11 c 1 o%r'.ucc;: fc- -« erxricd cu* p.t 6ht»
coneeal c* to h’d to brT« Eirvlci' ' no;: 1 roytovi. * t rowre,

1 •• lie th- .- '-»l.‘crtior.s foi pci* in-.l r,\ to cr-rr*' out oxptri-
ccato iarolrir. '-\r.«n sutjee v* 8 reoclrtd to 'co ottrin-.d fro Hi her -
yet befor such rollertion coal: be exn.-i . : - critic; 1 otir.ion of the
chief dlr.lcti OT.'lcer of tfci S*'. Tx drblvr-t, co.'.ccrnln lta
tcshnic i : s vcti vre required tc pcco tray It. Co - lyln wit!* this
order r ", f reference to Scr v *tor exocrl-oats, w~otor
"I dc i • -00 la tel" rlrtit tc supoert t'o Lii7t--r*fc ir. cv.ry wry
to .1-= rrl r*hysicirr. of the V- ' ’c -33 -t l.le disposal to

erjerri tests.* (.-ro. >l)


-Srcsa (lit. HfG=l-r)


'JZ ^


: . io 'HKd tote Buffi ci-:..t *t :. ■■■ : •

Sea, - ;o. t, t erprored, the perforaeace o? ths Set 'Har ox-»eriucntc

pa c r : ir the Indletsent.


mi:: " :3*.

r VI' o -■*: sterilisation ejtperiaeats will >e derlt vtf ileevherc
i- f-ln v'a Ai-.t; rad It 1 b unneeetnrr" to re>3". then hero, except to
tb, artir.t necessrry to incuire the part, if ray, trken V Oatttwdt
the 1.

C- 7 Jul- 1?^ i* conference took ilr.ee hetveen El-atltr, Octhrrdt

S3.3,.i ,--hrer wloecks, end So-Bri r< efuohrev ^1-utcr , to discuss

the niceilluttlon of 3r. Clruhtr ‘ v • prosier*. thr t tho

Ausohwitt 0 xert tret ion Crep -ould to >1 .ccC rt hie diopoarl for exncri-
cer.ta on t v. m Peters nad sainrlo. a« lx w.a requested to Recover
ty no-’di. of fwerneotel experinent. r aothef of .tcrilixiu: arsons
without . dr ^ovlod-o. Durln* the course of t-e conference Hiraltr
or lie; t.'. ~ xcir 1 cttentlon of aU present "to the fact thr.t tho

l.i-olvc vp. Boot secret «d should *>o fiecu.oed only vith the
of-1C », in ch r. t and tfcrt the persons present rt the oap-rlnont. or

discussions h- to pled c secrecy.*

7ra* t in crifsne. it 1. rpprrent tfa* :e*r&t vps present rt the
inlti 1 • tf *Ich 1 punched pt le-st one ib-rse of the steriiisrtlon
nro r«. i V concentration coups n' fowled e a/ rvc nt

lenat 1 .sL" rn>rovrl to the oro *rr


tesiTO, lat/au. los: ?-s, Z 2 VG.io j^u-ici, sro ?tzd
r-* .. .Oise. , .cz r.'ozni.v" 3C!2 joa—a

Dotrll* - :o the origin of end procedure followed in t'-cso cx cri-

tecaasad elsewhere in this * » - *fll « - -oerte .

Our onl; concern is to cet-.rrino to wfc t extent, i: kh , < 6 faVndrnt

upVar too': vrt in th.e exserlnents.

I, thes, or.. -rises the defeat see -.s no: to hrve t:: z*g rctive

ni37


jo a*: *- Z—15-;—Srcss (Ir.:. Err .1 .r)

*A t

- 0 * —

part, i ir. the oalfanilealde cntcriue its rad ir. Other pre-rms.

It •:-» ;• • r ued thet hi elos t connection with Heinrich Hi: ler
ere tea . •>rcsuaptlo& tfcrt these expert tents were conducted with Geb-
hrr t's '-:novlci.« pad pjrsrorr 1, Be th* t ro it nay, no sufficient
evidence to that effect ha* teen presented, end r. rere preelection is
not e .ou i.: this crae to convict the defendant.

Attention hr 3 been -iver. to the brief *iled counsel for the
def ‘a : bV-rdt. ?or the cost p-rt it ia uaneoessrr/ to discus* the
thw.-leo o-r-.tr.Md ir. thi* brief, for the rorjior. that the i\r±a relirncc
cf : , '< t seen* to be thrt in hi* connection wi*. v the exierinonto

chrr it t*. Infictnent, 3r. Oebhrrdt acted ra a soldlor in the oxeeu-
tio- O 1 * c 'V -*rc ra rut’-orixed *uoerior. Vo can not aoc tho rp 11 co-
bill:” o' * doctrine of superior order* r» - defense to the charges
contc-l ■? l:» •- * Xndiefcnent. Such doctrine Vo never bco 1 . hold
up ■lic--bl. to 1 erso where the one to w>o tie order ic jlven ha*
fr 1 situ < r 'ecielon whether to r.eco>t t'o order or reject it. Such
vat t -iv.v t!on with reference to GebhorSt. TV rooorc ivOeoa it
nr.-.i'• 1 ;>l. i that he vp* not ordered to perforn the cxpcriconts,

but th t ho sou ht the opportunity to do * 0 . ?~rticularl. io thla true
vithi-rc’cror.ee to the sulfr.tilmide exporiioat*! Ochh^rdt, in effect,
too* the- rv V fron Grnvitc to de onr.trc.tc thrt certria eur lc -1
procedure-. c< voce ted by hlr. at the bedside of th- cor tally mounded
Kc'drlch r.t irr. u< in K ay of 19 were eeientificrlly end but ierlly
superior 0 ti c nethods of trertnent oro rosed b Dr. IJorell, Hitler'a
per sot 1 -Oicirn. Thr doctrln., therefore, ia r.ot ap licrble. 2 ut
(v *. i it the fret of tuck or Sore could torely be coioicered,

•aid T :rol Cn-mcil Ipw To. 10, rs ucllietin •mniebceit.

A lot'* nt presented in briefs of counsel rt leapt 5 to round it-

scIf •; o : ebPtrble oroooeition tv t L: broad interest of

Pll-vi *.i - u^an aufferin,:, r State C 1- ii Provide for lodicpl
can :*i. . • :o be carried out on prisoners couponed to Sent without

;:l-3o


o >•


T


-2Z-l>-b-Gr036 (In’-. ?-" rl r)


- -t, ev?a tbouri su:h €Xi>rL T.t- -ey lnvolrc t t ouffer-
i ; -.' for the experiment:-1 subject, v -'tev?r ir be the

rf t o St'tf with reference *-o its ov. citizen, it Is certt-ir.

;• rt c-ic'- lc islrtior. ary no* he extended to C3 to peiv.it the practice
2X3* nr.tic:--la of other countries -^o, held in the most reject
s- rr'tuie, rr» fubj-cted to expert-teats --it out their co ae-t rnd
raCtv f r Oft brut -1 rnd senseless conditions.

“c fin: f-.-t Jebhrrlt, lr. hi* offlel-1 c-p-city, «to responsible
for, ciis< cad rbetied, rnd took e consortia prrt in refiic -1 experi¬
ment n performed on aorv-3<rr.rn r.rtiourls r rinst their eo.scnt; in
tho courao of ••hich depths, nr.lain , of other into-nt tre-tnent
r-j suited to the experinentrl subject*. Io tv extent tv t these
ox.vri cats did not constitute V-r C r i oo they constitutor Criaea
r rl rt ; uwlty.


::.z s • r :s::t:al ozu?izxi? m i

Co • -our of the Indictner.t Oobhrrdt ia ch-r .rod with bein: n
• o’ tv. or heel setter. doelrrsd crl lari br* the Ju .rcnt »f tho
: a :’vrl ; ilitrr Trlbunrl, n-sicl;* the So. Tho evifence shows

t shVrft b<cr=e r nenber of -c SS *t le-nt ro orris r.o 1933
r-v volvtt-rilr roar iced In thrt or-r ‘ia-tioa until to end of the wrr.

o o ' coot inflnentirl ratters of the noAlcrl service of the
V "c -33 vr; crlrlnrl 7 lTplicrt?f in tho convlation of Vrr Crl .es
mo Cr’. 31 r.-ri-.st Euamlty n ehrr cd ur.cor Count a :*-o rod Three of
the In'ictacnt.


cc: ivaar

hiUtrir Tribunal I finds end rdjuf of -.he defendant E.-rl C-ebhcrdt
■suil-y under Counts T%«, Three red Jour of the Indicfcncnt.

SI CaS 31013

r.v. ■ - u.-nt 3 lone is ch-r?ed unf r Cocats Tv© roe Three of the

11139


y - - :-.-rS-15-5-Gross (lat. 2 *: i;r)

“ ccr: I

I.. ictr.oot with personal responsibility -or, end participation in

, lost Grs, end Salfnl#addo experinatta; the extermination of
tv', vc liar .-ole a; end the execution of to euthonaeia pro r ft.. Proof
l-o l ien adduced for the purpose of ehovia-: th^t he participated
in .'rc-csin •, bacterioloricel v.arf arc, mjc. blood con ulction
ex oer Locate.

r o r with reference to sulfaailft-ic'e experiaentR has been
' 1 • th. Prosecution rod hc.nco will not be considered further.

T tcr’r-. >st Slone studied nedicine vt Goettingen and received hie
Jcdlc 1 i r> * ir. 19?0. Pros lopU to 193 U he on-v^ed in orivete
irrctic . Ir. the Inter yerro he vs cur. onod to 3erlln whore, in
1 c " , . •or--rmix«d the Ger--r. Xc'ic 1 educational syste::. He also

uteat ir. the dentrrl of'ice of tho Gerurn P.od Cross and no
Dullness .jmv .■•r of the Oernrn Physicirn'e ^scocirtior., *Aich oosition
>.c bul' c*.til the end of Vcrld Vrr II. I 1933 he beeftio President
0 * f J r v.: of the Acndeny for Inter, u-tionrl Kcdieol -fucr.tlon. 7ron
l c 3r o- ^lont rcted ns denuty for Dr. Leonardo Conti vo wet lcrdor
0 * t'-.c C*c r- Physician's Association, Her o' the jfcda Office for
Public Ho lt' of the Prrty, end Lender of to Wtionnl Socialist
?‘ oici.nl nseocirtior.. Ir. 19^1 he bccr.ro n nenber of to Reich
;-a.- re* Council, rnd ir. I 9 U 3 v-e rpnointod Plenipotentiary for
0 ^c.r >c rcb, connect'd with th-. Rcserrc', Cor.-icsion for Protection
' Lolo'icrl vnrfrre.

lo olnrd *-.e 5A in 1931 and beer. 0 t o Chief Medical Officer of
* ‘ L. i • t> province of Keckleabur . I.n 19 ? 1 ' he vaa ro-.olr.ted a
j.Q-.i ,Ti c< i t pdrr, rnd in tic Sn ’*0 attained p rank equivalent
to Vr one of J-.nJor General. Ir. Ip’*? ho Mrs r.vrrdet ti e hi heat
cjrntloi of the Sr.ri Party.

* Pi i otentirry for ^rnce Hcse. rch, it vro his uty to detcrr.inc
•-it re vch problems should be stable: ... to cssl . such problea*
to nci stiots best fitt-d to invrsti rtc therv.


1’liliO


If -u ua Vy~c—dro a■ (lat. Ba;r'lcr)

Co v t I

JZ~ZT~- -Z-71K37S:

T I— osecution privet that 31oce ia cri Mna-lly responsible for

? rtici.iation in the freezing exnerineats p .a charged ia the Indict-
:*a t, Ia the sub-para-rrrph, which particularly ref era to freezing,
3iope is not spaed aeon.- the defend-nts charged with special responsi¬
bility for -he experioente. Jloreorcr, the record doea aot coatnin
evidence w ich ahowa beyond p reasonable doubt that 3loae bore eny
responsible prrt in the conduct of the freezing experiments.

=r-V3E3TTsi

• -c oviceao* ia inaufficient to dioilose any criain-1 responsibility
of the ce enfant in connection with t!u* nelarla experiments.

los: \.s :w ; r?j:zrrs:

.• ' - tee ia insufficient to (locloae ray critinel reaponaibl-
lit- o' *> defendant In connection with thcae experiaents.
r.:r r 0“ TU3I3CUL.2 PC LIS: Ihe basis for the Prosecution* a

Co? t ! ct the defendant in thie re -rf 1* to be found in e aerie a
o'* let* "» with reference to the tuberculosis cena.ce in the Beichs-
u *V-t'-«.lrad, which had been overrun by the Garden Belch and
settled by lta eltliene.

L vl i the year 19^1 the Gem an Government be^ra c pro area of
extT-i.i-.tioa of the Jewish population of the Zoetern oooupied
to-rltori - a. On 1 l>y I?'*? Srelser, the Gonna hilitrry Governor of
Belch a au "'-r the land, wrote Elacler efiviain; Mb th-.t ra to the 100,
000 Jews in the district, the "sped'I trertaent auoroved by Einrler
vaa about completed." The letter then continued:

I ask you for perdsalon to rescue the district inaedintely
eftc-r the ::ecsures taken a-einet the Jews froa o aencce which is
incrc-ain week by week, and use the existia.* and efficient special
co.na.-.coa for that purpose.

- -ve about 23 C.OOO people 6f Polish nationality ia ry district
wo "ere ir nosed to suffer froa tuberculosis. The number... .


UUil


19 -u ^TJf-ir-7 -One* (la:. 3ezd#r)

Court I

iafoctc* -dtl open tubercalosi* is estiu-ted rt aboc t *5,000. This
'*" <5r • p 1:<? in pn increaeirvly fri .htenia : neesnre to the infection

o' xer ;jb <>0 ee=e to th,- Vrrtheaa perfectly heclthy.e

:rr lf ouster of 11 known lerdin- nea, ceoeci-lly of the
jolice, Vre been Infected lrtely end rre not rveile.ole for the
v e °’ s .... ?fce ever inertesin- risks vero aleo reco :ni*ed end

- . ci t r - by the de*uty of the Hclch lender for Public He.-1th,

Co e P< o"eeaor Sr. 3lose.

:>ou in 3<r=ony prop* r it is not possible to trjco npjroprirte
drreoale step, r dnst this public olr uc, I think I could trice
rcrvia#i*Hiiy.... to hrve erses of open tuberculosis extenjinetod
r o- th.- Eolith race here in the V rthc.ru. Of couree, only o Pole
o’ oulc' be Ivnded over for such rn rctioa, -ho Is not o,*ly oufferin.7
fro.; o 5’. tuberculosls, but vb.oec incurs llitr i* proved rufi certified
b;* r tublir h*elth officer.

Considerin th.. urrency of this project I rsk for your r.pprovel in
priadol* - a soor. rs pcsslble. This would onnble ue to . rk© the
,>r ■ j ;vtio.:i Kith rll neecssrry precrutioaa now to _et t' e ectlon
.‘t t rolee suferin- fror open tubcrculosie under vry, vb.il©

- - -ctio r rinst the Jevo is ia its clooin atrje$."

■Hell Hi tier 1 ■

"Grascr"

I ter, Koine, the police lerdor on Orcisir'o strff, wrote

to .v/ol * 2 rmdt restrtin.? Orclser 1 groaosrl rnd ur , 1 a 3rrndt to

tter toKisrler's rttoitloa. Sr-ndt oro.^tl- -cknovledt-

: rdviela- So one th-t the o»c*l hrd bow referred

to 5 *‘ c lc - o' the Security Police for ooi.-lon, but tr : t the final

-'tia’o.. wpr-Jld rst with Hitler.

0 r - .e ioUs the Chief 0 f t e Security Police rendered hie

' “ 0r * c * -i rl ‘ r: "I erve no scrcples r dust h-via. the Protector-

* te "eaberc ^ad stateless persons of the Polish r*cc...

1HJ<?


v o rre


1 o _ 'at—.V-3Z-15-3-5rosB (In'-. 2nr Aer)
Care’. 2


ltct:c with open tuberculosis subnittcd to the epeoi:l trertnent
i* f; neaae of the propcsj-1 of Orulc-xier Oroiser... Phe individual
norsu: -i, thou-h, will first fcr.ve to oe discussed thoroughly vith
the Socutlry Police, in order to enrr"' out the execution with the t
lerat X/saitle nttrrction of attention." The ooiniona thus rendered
undoubtedly received the full approvrl of Ei-vlcr for on 27 * T une I 9 U 2
iutol* Jrrndt prssed on to Oreisor r letter frou Simpler or.trinla .1
the following decision:


1 M3


n"rd


'“oir -our-de Greiner!

"I h vo no objection to h-viu?; protectorate nooplo «nd
ct'tclcsa -orsona of olisfc origin who live within the territory
of the '.rthog-u »jxd -jo Infected with tuberculosis h-ndod ovor
for Biccir.i troituent is vou sugoit; is long -a tkolr diso-so

In incur’.blo«.I would liko to ro uoat, however, to dincu38

t^ : individu-1 cc-rorcs ir. 'Otiil with tho Securit'’ Police first,
ir. ordor to laturo ir.consoicucue ncconpllelsjcnt of the title...."

Slgnod

H. Kir.si or"

Tco Hirtilor lot tor wir i»c v T.cwlodgod b^ Groieor on 21 T 0 vonbor 19*2,
Greinor idrlalag Kin lor that In purauitco of tho pemiasion givon
kin to rpol7 "opcci»l tro».t::cnt" to tuborculir Polco ho hid o*do irrrnto-
oonts for in X-Sn/ ox-Mn-tion of *11 poeolo in tho torritorv, but thnt
new tint "a*ocirl troitscnt" hnd boon ipprovol, -lose, Denutv Chiof of
the rublic KOnltfc Offico of tka HSCi? «u r*itin; ob.lcctiona to itn
oxocntlen. a copy of cloao'i lot*, or to Groisor vis oncloood for
Piarler'o i.ifomtion.

•alono'o lottor to Groioor is dited 10 ovoebor 1942, It opona
b- rec-llin. various cc.ivorsitlono totvocn t! o vritor md Groioor cor>-
cor ling t o cr-nwl-n ngiir.Bt tucorculoals in the 7irtho£»u, md then
procoodo to co eider t!.o rot tor in dotr.il; the lcttor proceeding:

"Vith th-o acttloajnt of Gorn-nfl in all parts of the Gm w
onor:ouc draper fcno arisen for thee...'H-.it joes for the W-rtheg«u

ilso holds trio for tho other annexed territories.

Thereforo, co-net. in- Vale aust bo dono soon. One aiot
docidO the scat efficient w-~ in which this c°a bo dono. Thoro
pro three wvc to be t-'kon into consideration:

“ 1 . Special treit~or.t cf the seriously ill persons.

" 2 , i-o8t rigorous *sol=:icn of the seriously 111 porcons.

”3, Creation of i reservation for 11 13 patients.


nt.u.


15 *sg-a~Jr-l-—^-Leonard

Court ’


5 cr --' a -ol'.-.ing, attention rue. ba paid to different uoiuts

•

ci tlr* of a pr°cticul, political a-.d ps-'c'-ologic° r.°turc. Zcnzli-
eric.:. it ~ozt soborlr, t'-<j slmlost ^7 -oiild bo tie followin':
l.idod b*' the battalion, wc could roac : - or.tir: po-ulatior..

-•or~ftr. •. d rollsh, of tie 3*u duri j tic first half of 194?,

»o to f o I crwae, the treatment «ad isolation is to bo preparjd
' -4 c’rried out according to t.-e regulations of Tuberculosis belief,
The anroxi lately 35,COO Polos who ar incurahlo °nd infectious -fill
bo 8 specially t rented" , *11 other Polish 00 r a-up tiros will bo
subjected to n aouropriatc euro in or dor to c°v then for work
rad to Avoid their causing cont« ;ion.*
elouo t! on procoods, at ".ting that ho 1 a 0 nrdc ar-anjoaonto for cor. ien-
eer.oat »f the n r4icl umcoduro'', but su: osta that so no ssur*nco
should be procured th*t Hitler would *jrtc. to tho project.

The lottor t'-er. goes cn to it's

"I could idagino that the fuehrer, having so o tiuo -go stooped tho
progran in tho inoano asyluns, tight at thin :»-.ont consider a
"special treatment" of tho Incurably sich as unsuitable and Irres¬
ponsible •’to a uelltical point of view. ^0 regards tho SuthnnrslA
program it v-s a Question of ocoolo of .'onna nationalitv afflicted
with horoditarr diooaoos. i^ow it is r. Question of lnfoctod side
pooplo of • subjugated nation."

Slrno then voicoa tho opinion that if tho uro r"-. io put into execution
It cannot be kept cocrot and will bo aado tho basis for rrach ad torso

hrraful propa.:nd both at ho no and abroad. Ho mvT.-oata accordingly
that »foro tho pro:r-n is ccn-.cncod all uointc of vio-' * should again
be presented to Kitlor.

Continuing, Slono writes that if Hitler should forbid tho radical
proposal mi r ;c3tcd by Groisor, three other solutions wore ooen: (1) con-
riniti-.os and Incurables could be isolated with their relation;


(2) all inf ctio-.s cor.mirzpti-res night be strictly isolated in nursing
establio'.neats; (3) the consunotires right be rosottled in * particular

llli.5


19 TF-16—3-LconarA

v ourt I


•rea. if tho lnttor plan wore adopted the sick could roach tie
•coined territory on foot, »nd thus sa7o the costs of transportation.
^loao‘8 lottor finfill/ concludes:

’After a proper exnnlnr.tion of all those considerations and cir-
CUnsfeces the creation of ■ resolution, such as the reservations
for lepors, see ns to to the r»st practicable solution. Such a ro-
sorva.tion should b-- *.blo to be created in the s-' ortost tino by
noara of tho necessary oottlencnt. Within the reservation ono could
easily not up conditions for the strict isolation of tho strongly
contagious.

"Svon tho case of tho Goruan cor.surptivcs rtnrosenta an oxtronoly
, difficult problen for tho Gau. 3".t this c»nnot bo ovorcono, unions
tho prcblc..-. of tho Polish cornuvptivee is solved at tho sane ti'io."
Tho evidence a own t' at tho lot'.or fro:*. Groioor to Hiaalor, with
rlono's nu ;gnstiono onclonod, was acknowledged by Ki.n lor on 3 Tocor-bor
1942 wit-, tho following final decision:

"Dour Party Coaradc Groioor:

"I have rocoivod your lottor of 21 'Jovontor 1942. 1, too, bollovo

that it would bo bettor to take into consideration tho r.isgivingo
not forth b" Party ae bor Dr. 3looo. *a ny opinion it In iapocniblo
to proceed with tho side pornonr. in tho aa-nor intonded, oopoctally
cir.co, an you have informed ao, it will be possible to exploit
tho practical results of the tosto only in nix nonths.

*1 3u;goot you look for a suitable won to which tho Incurablo
consultIvos can bo sent, reside tho Incurables, other p-*tior.tc
with less severe eases of tuberculosis cculd kuito voll bo put
into this territory too. This action would also, of course, have
to bo oxploitcd with tho arpropriato forn of propaganda.

"roforo writing you this lottor I again thoroughly thought over
whether the original idea could net in none v ay bo carried out.
however, I ns convinced new that it is better to proceed the other


way.


19 ^-=-
Ceurt I


- e ProB^catior. naiatalas that t' is series of lettcrc « ichvo V-vo
reforrod * establishes the crisinnl participation of tho do fondant
31c 1C in t/.Q oxter in-tion of tubercular Poles. To c* -not follow tho

It l: probable t r * the proposal to isolate tuherc'ilar Polos,
rc 3"v.{jest-4 by Sion- and p- -rovc-d by Hinnler, was »t loist partially
carried out; although tbe r-cord discloses ’tut little with roforosco to
vfaftt actually transpired. It nay ho that In ti e courco of such n pmcron
Poles !y-v >avo died as tho result of hein.; unrooted re- their hones
and son: to ‘relation stations; hut tho r cord cc t«ins no direct
crodi'clo ovldor.co upon the subjoct.

31c.ce ere 1*1 nod fron the vltnosa stand Me lettor tv ‘reiser by saying
fch't It vr.a written in or’.or to prevent the oxtor lnation pro r*r. of
tutorculnr Polos fret: boiv; rat Into oxocution. CertV.nl”, hia lettor
indicator: on its face that ho epooaed tlx "special trontnont" au^ffoatod
fcv >roiacr.

To Cf not an:-, therefore, that the oxclanation offorod ic wholly
without nbntv.co. It at loac: raioos a rear.onnblo doubt in our nindn
ooncorritc tl c —•'ttor. -lone know ~ltlor *nd ML. lor. Ho woll know that
anv objections to "a-jocial troat-xr.t" basod or. noral or burwiitarian
rounds would -who but svll ia>act upon the nindr. of or. liho thono - r.si
locdora. Ho know, moreover, that before ^roisor'a proposal for nxtoralrv-
p.tion would be ab-ndoned a pl*r. which appoarod to bo hotter rust bo
ou v.cotod. If rievod tro- the standpoint of factual and paycholo: Ichl
considerations, it canot bo held that tho lettor-'-s not woll worded
when co-cidored as an atta^t to put an end to the plan originally
adopted, and to bring tho cubstitution of another pl»n not so drastic.

W bn to vo r ay have beer, its Turpose, tho record slows that in this
particular ti e lettor did lr. f»ct dir-rt Ki-'le- i ron Ms ori-lr.ul pro/Tic
and that as a result thereof the exter ir.-tion nlnn was abandoned.
“l-lw'AJlrlone is ebargod with criu nal responsibility in
concoction with the euthanasia pro -ra-t, hut ve ».r. of opinion th-t the


12L.‘.7


19 S» 5-Leo n-rd

Court I


evidence Is Insufficient to suotnin Sc Charge.

-- 1 -iO IOJI CA_ -ho Prosecution contends th-t tho cvldonco in

The o-.;o wst-biiohei alooo'ft guilt in connection with reao-rch concomlas
diff.r.nt for 3 of b-ctoriolo^icnl vnrfere. 31 o 0 vbo w-s Plcnipotestier”
for C >nccr >cac rch in tho P-cic’. P.cao'rch Council, -Anita that tho probloo
of c*-;c i. roaoarc'.. was -.. lied with the P.osoerch Cosalselon for Protection
--.inot hide cal Wf-.ro. Ho *d its further, th-t he w.»a nlacod in
ch-rjc of t i-otitute nc-r Poaon in which tho problems of biological
v-rf-rc wore to to inveatl j*tod, but *t~tes fchrt tho work being done nt
tho - oion lnotituto VftS interrupted in .rrch 194= by tho -dv-nco of tho
Hu: cion irr-,

^■. ia lottor f-ct Bconn tj be co-finiod r tho vidonco. In this
connuctlor. ochrcibcr at .carod -n wltr.uno boforo tho Intornntional
Kilitnry Iri*c\r.ul, Hio *cati:on-» ire - t or lac boon received in
oviionco b of ore t Is Tribunal. ?rc:' t* c t op t irony it nppovn th".t -'lone
viaitod Cc'TOibor *1 tho .illtnrv . oiled Jc"de-:', 3orlln during March
1945 -ad afc—.tod to hie tiat ho, 3le to, .M -bvdonod hir institute in
Poser, duo te tho -dv-r.ee of tho Suaoinnn, but before leaving h*i atte-iptod
to djotro hio inct-.ll-tiono ar ho feared th-t the 3us8i-.no night
dlnco”or th-t nrev-r-tiono >d boor. 'Jo in tho institute for oxucrinontt*
on ha ion boings.

Co*uiaal for tho Prosecution h-s hrou.ht to our .1udici-l notice -
fi’di.v; by t c -vorn-.tion-i :ilit-r- Tribunal in itn fudgtent whord in
it is found th t:

"In '"'ilr 1943 expori or.t^l v'rfc w-n bj.rur. in ornnr-tion for n
c-rjai,? of bacteriological warfare; Soviet prieo.icrc of war wore
used in the nodical cxncri onto, w ici*. r»re often th-n not proved
fr.tal.“

*00 "Trial of t he njor 7ar Cri-Jnnla' 1 . Yol.,I, p. 231.

It in submitted b“ tho Prosecution that Si* finding of the Inter¬
national iiit-r” Tribunal, when considered in connection with other


■-U3


CT -once ia c-'.o, rcV:lros this -rihnn.nl to find the defond-nt 3lono
Cilltr uadU-.- tho indictuer.t.

:: 3 su, .-cation is not ton-hle. It y.” veil ho that defendant --lo:io

prcnf.rlr. to oroeriramt xrcor Jsaaa hoists la connoctios v’.tfc Vetorio-
lo.;ic“l vnrfarv, hut tfca record f*ilc to disclose th^.t f»ct, or thf»t
fad orar * cti®lly cor.ductod caporlaoatr. Tho cfcur.o of tho Prosecution
■ra t* In ltoa 1 c -ot tmet^dnod.

POLTOAZ —>1311—”3; Tho Prosecution hr.r i:.t reduced evidence which
m .'foots t- t —lo.uo c cri-iin*ll- respond'.!- for nelvj«l orroorinonts

oo due tod hr Incchor ».t 2»45'fci, in V ich 2usdi*n uriconors of w .-r wore
ua<-d 3 cxoorlacatRl subjects, Ir. our viov tho evidence dooa no aoro
t.'-.a r-.Icc i* strong suspicion; it does net sustain tie ch^^o ho vend
* rcnaounblo dov.ht.

2-9J-.<LAjL§.J ?.2

••ilit-jy Trihun-l I fl :d.* vd judges the defendant hurt jJoao

not ^Uilt-r nc C lU u^or t.'w l-.dietacuc "ad treetr th-t he ho
rolonsod fro c-.atod-- uador tho indict art when this Trihin-l presently
*dj0U"n3.

T>~ ??T8IDST:

Judo> Cwfford will continue rondlng tho Judjuent.


UhL9


COURT I


CASE I


Afternoon Session
19 August 19U7


Pleaso insert pago lUdi9-A betweon
pngc-s 11119 and UJi$0.


CCWRT I


CASE I


Afternoon Session
19 August 19U7


Ploaso insert pago lUdi9-A between
poges UliU9 end 1U*50.


12 Attg 47 - A-1S-7- P.


Under Counts Two and Three of the Indictment 'X.c
defendant Rudolf Brandt Is charged with special
responsibility for, and participation in, Kigfc/Altitude,
Freezing, Malaria, Lost Gns, Sulfanilamide, 3onc, Muscle
end Korvo Regeneration and Bono Transplantation,
ocawator. Epidemic Jaundice, Sterilization, and Typhus
Experiments. H© is also charged under theso counts
with criminal responsibility for the murder of 112 Jews
for the purposo of completing a sl-iclotor. collection for
the Reich University of Strassbourg; for the murder and
II !U treat ment of tuberoular Poles; era for the
euthanasia program carrlod out by the German Reich.

Undor Count Four of the Indictment ho Is charged
uith membership In nn organization declared criminal
by tho Jud.jmont of the International Military Trltwnal.

The prosecution has abandonod tho charge of par¬
ticipation In tho 3one, Kusclo and Horve Regeneration
-nd Bone Transplantation Exporlnont; honoo, it will not
be conoldorod further.

The defendant Rudolf 3randt Jolnoa the Nazi Party-
In 1032. He was commissioned a Second Lieutenant lit
the SS In 1935. In approximately ton years ho roso


11449—A

kl  ^ jal


Court I

19 Aug 4^-A-17-i-i£y.-Ieoacrd


tc the rank of SS Colonel. He is one of the three defe nd a n ts in the
case "■ho is not a physician.

Ircc the cccaencoaent of his career in the Uati organization until
fcl* capture by the Allied Forces in 1945 he vas directly subordinate to
and closely associated with the lender of the SS, Heinrich Klaalor, and
he had full knowledge of his chief's personal and official interests and
activities.

To Kicsler, Rudolf Brandt vas first of ull an important and trusted
clerical assistant. The record shows him to have beer, an unusually
nroficiont stenographer. Shat it the road by vhich he finally arrived
at a position of considerable pover and authority as Personal Roferont
or. Kinder 1 1» personal staff, Hinisterial Councillor in the Kinlstry of
the Interior, and a ceeber of the Ahnenorbe. Acting for Hinder during
hie absences, Rudolf Brandt, in those positions, had a trooondous oppor¬
tunity to and did oxorcise personal Judgment ar.l discretion in nany
serious end importune natters.

HIGH ALTITUT* £XPhHLil.TS

Those oxperinects extended froa Harch to August 1942. Their de¬
tails aro deal', vith eioevnuro in this Judgaont. A portion of the evi¬
dence in this specification consists of correspondence between the
defendant Rudolf Srardb end various others in the Gorman ailltary ser¬
vice Who wore personally *rgagei in, or were closely connected vith,
the physical details of the er eriments performed. The correspondsncc
Just previously aentioned vas admitted in evidence, is veil authenti¬
cated, i»M even standing alone, without additional oral testimony - of
vhich there vas also plenty - is deeaed anply sufficient to disclose
beyond reasonable doubt that except for the sanction and diligent
cooperation of the defendant Rudolf Brandt, or soceone occupying his
position, the high altitude experiments aentioned in tho indictment
could not have been conducted.

Taken altogether, the evidence on this item discloses that during
the period between Aarch and August 1942 certain medical experiments


Court I

IS Aug 47—A-17-3-3eK-£ co nar i


were conducted at the Dachau Concentration Ca=p in Gerzary, for the
benefit of the German -^ir Jorce, to determine the limits of human
endurance »r-d existence at ext rarely high altitudes. Various hunan
beings, unwillingly, and entirely without their consent, were required
and cocpelled to, and did participate in the aforesaid experiments as
subjects thereof. The said non-consenting subjects were prisoners of
war, demon civilians and civilians froz Soman occupied territory,
whose exact citizenship, in =any oases, could not bo ascertained. Among
the experimental subjects there were numerous deaths, ostisated by wit-
cessos at 70 or 60, resulting directly froa cccpulsory participation
in tho experlsents. ixact data on the total fatalltiea cannot be stated,
but there is convincing evidence that during the lust day's operation
of tho high altitude experizents five participating and non-cor.oenting
subjects diod as the result thereof. Tho greater nucber of the exporl-
zental subjects suffered grave injury, torture and ill treatment.

KuvLZIKG LXSWHS7S

In this experiaent, or series of experiaents, Rudolf Brandt is
established as ar. intoraodiary and necossory aid botwoer. Heinrich
Hlazier, vho authorized the work to be done, and those who wore appointed
by him actually to porforc the ruthless taeic. Zvldonco is conclusive
that Rudolf Brandt at all tiaos knew exactly vhot experimental procoosoo
would be carried out. He knew the procedure followed was to select
from the inmates at Dacha* such huzan subjects as were considered nost
suitable for experiaental purposoe. He knew that no oonsent vos ever
deecai necessary free the persons uccn whoa the experiaents wore to bo
performed. He knew that aaoeg the experiaental subjects wore non-German
nationals, including civilians and nrisoners of war.

The exact number of deaths cannot be ascertained free the evidence,
but that fatalities occurred oaeng the experimental subjects has been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt.


12161


Court I

19 Aug 47-A«-17“3-inh-Lecnard

LCST (KUSIAHD) GAS ZXPaaiiOTS

On this specification, aa affidavit of the defendant Eudolf Brandt
vhich is confirmed by other evidence reeds substantially a6 follows:

"Towards the end of the year 1935 experiaents were conducted at
the Sochsenhausen Concentration Cecp on persons who were certainly not
all volunteers, in order to ascertain the efficacy of the different
treatnent of vourds inflicted by lost gas. Lost is a poisonous gas
which produces injurious effects on the epidurals. I think it is
generally known as Bustard gas. Therefore, exneriaer.ts were conducted
on innate* of concentration cusps. As far as I understand, the exoori-
nents consisted of inflicting wounds upon various parts of the bodies
of the experimental subjects and infecting then thereafter with Lost.
Various cethods of treatnent were applied in order to deteroino the
cost effective one...

"In the second half of 1942 Hirt (Er. Auguot Elrt) together with...

served In the Luftwaffe, initiated oxperinents on inaateo of the
^atswellor Concentration Cacp. The lnaatos for these as well no other
exporinento wore siaply chooen by Pohl's office, the Lcononic and
Adslnlstrativo KoinOffice (WKA). In order to be eaployed for such
purposes, the oxperiaents on huaan subjects with Lost gas had boon car¬
ried on during the years 1943 end 1944 in the Sachsenhausen Concentration
Caap as well as in the Hatzveilor Concentration Caop. The result was
that Bose of the inaates died."

In the course of the gas experiments above referred to, testimony
in the record discloses that a considerable aaount of correspondence
was carried on by persons concerned (except the experinental subjects
theaselvos), and it appears that soae, at least, of this was referred
to Rudolf Brandt for action, upon which he personally Intervened suffi¬
ciently to associate hiaself actively with the conduct of the work
being done. And so he oust be regarded as criminally responsible.


: .52


Court I

IS Aug 47-A~17-4-iHk-Leonard


STERILIZE 105 £X£53t5SSS

Rudolf Brandt is charged, as in the indictment sot forth, vith
special responsibility under the above heading, -he neons by which
sterilization experiments or processes were to be made or utilised in¬
cluded X-ray treetoent, surgery, and drugs.

So specific instance? of ary drug being actually used have been
clearly shown by oral testimony or exhibits herein subnitted in evidence.
In reference to the x-ray end surgery nethods of sterilization, however,
Rudolf Brandt is shown by the evidence to have taxer, a moving port in
the preparation of plans, and in their execution, sufficient to Justify
the tribunal in finding hie criminal connection therewith. An affidavit
executed by the defondant Rudolf Brandt reodo as followo:

■Hinder was extremely interested in the developaent of a cheap,
rapid sterilization method which could be used against enenies of Gor-
naay, such as the Russians, Poles, and Jews. One hoped therety not
only to defeat the enemy, but to exterminate hie. The capacity for work
of the sterilized persons could be exploited by Germany, while the danger
of propagation would be eliminated. This mass sterilization woo port
of HLmiler's racial theory; particular time and care were devoted to
these sterilization experiments."

Vo learn free the record that persons subjected to treatment wore
"young, well-built lnnates of concentration camps who were in the best
of health, and these ware roles, Russians, Trench, and prisoners of
war."

It goes without saying that the work done in conformity with the
plans of Himmler, substantially aided by the cooperation of Kuiolf
Brandt, brought maiming and suffering to great numbers of oeoplo.

TYPHUS BXPLPX2J.US

• •

Kedieal experiments ostensibly conducted to benefit German;.’ in tire
prevention of typhus fever were carried on in the lintzveiler Concentra¬
tion Camp beginning vith the year 19*2. She details of these experiments
have been dealt with elsewhere in this judgment.


Hm53


Coart I


15 ing 4V-^-l 7-4-1H2-.-L e o na r d


SSSEILIZATICH SXPLBLBiTS

Budolf Brandt is charged, as in the indictment act forth, with
special responsibility under the above heading. The neans by which
sterilisation experiments or processes were to be made or utilised in¬
cluded X-rey treatment, surgery, and drugs.

So specific instances of any drug being actually used have beer,
clearly shown by oral testimony or exhibits herein subcitted in evidence.
In reference to the x-ray and surgery methods of sterilisation, however,
Eudolf Brandt is shown by the evidence to have taken a noving part in
the preparation of plane, and in their execution, sufficient to Justify
the tribunal in finding hie crlnlnal connection therewith. An affidavit
executed by the defendant Rudolf Brandt reads as follows:

"Hinsler whs extrenely interested in the devolopaent of n cheap,
rapid sterilisation method which could be used against enemies of Gor-
sany, such os the Russians, Poles, and Jews. One hoped thereby not
only to defeat the enosy, but to exterminate him. The cooacity for work
of the sterilised persons cculd bo exploited by Germany, while the danger
of propagation would be eliainuted. This anss sterilisation was port
of Kioslsr's racial theory; particular tine and core were devoted to
these sterilisation experiments.*

Vo learn free the record that persons subjected to treatment woro
"young, well-built inaates of concentration ca-ops who were in the best
of health, and these wore roles, Russians, Jrer.ch, and Driaoners of
v»r. B

It goes without saying that the work done in conformity with the
plans of Himmler, substantially aided by the cooperation of Rudolf
Brandt, brought maiming and suffering to great cumbers of people.

T YPHUS BXfBBXiETS

kodlcal experiments ostensibly conducted to benefit German;.' In tho
prevention of typhus fever were carried on in tho Batzweiler Concentra¬
tion Cam? beginning with the year 1942. 7r.e details of these experiments
have been dealt with elsewhere In this Judgment.


121.53


Court I

15 An.; 47-A—17-5-Brl-.-Leonari


la the widened it is proven that not less than 50 experimental
aubjects died as a direct remit of their participation in these typhus
experiments. Persona of all nationalities vere used as subjects.

Regarding these enterprises, P-udolf Brandt, in his ova affidavit, adnits
that these experimental subjects did not volunteer but were conscripted
and compelled to serve without their consent being sought or given.

Inasmuch as information on the typhus experiments, both before and
after their performance, was furnished, as a natter of course, to Kinder
through Brandt, the defendant's full knowledge of thon is regarded as
definitely proven.

Here, again, the managing hand of the defe n da n t is shown, ^he
snooth operation of tnese experiments is demonstrated to have been con¬
tingent upon the diligence with W-.ich Eudolf Brandt arranged for the
oupply of quotas of suitable human experimental catorlul to the physi¬
cians at the scene of the experiment.

In view of these proven facts, the defendant Budolf Brandt oust bo
held and considered ns one of the defendants responsible for performance
of illegal medical experiments where deaths resulted to the non-consent¬
ing humor, subjects.

SCSLSSCli COLLECT IOH

In response to a request by Budolf Brandt, on 9 Jobruary 1942 tho
defendant Sicvcrs, business manager of the Ahner.orbo, submitted to him
certain data on the alleged desirability of securing a Jewish skeleton
collection for the Batch University of Strasbourg, -ho report furnished
to the defer.lar.t Brandt contained among other things tho following:

"By procuring tho skulls of the Jewish Bolshevik Commissars, who
personified a repulsive yet characteristic humanity, ”0 have the oppor¬
tunity of obtaining tangible scientific evidence. The actual obtaining
and collecting of these skulls without difficulty could be best accom¬
plished by a directive issued to the Vehrmacht in the future to immedi¬
ately turn ever alive all Jewish Bolshevik Commissars to the field police.

"n February 27, 1942, Sadolf Brandt informed defendant Sievers that

UiiSlx


Court I

IS Aug 47-A-17-S-IR>I-Leor.£rd


Eicnler vould support the enterprise and would place everything necessary'
et his disposal; end that Sieve should re-sort again in connection with
the undertaking.

Tastinony and exhibits placed before this Court are abundantly suf¬
ficient to show that the plan cautioned was actually put into operation;
that not less than 86 people were surdered for the sole purpose of
obtaining their skclotons. .<uch soro could be said in reference to
this revolting topic but it would add nothing to the Judgaent. The
fact that Rudolf Brandt showed an initial intorect and collaborated in
the undertaking is enough to requiro a finding that he is guilty of
nurdor in connection with the progroa.

MALARIA, SEAVATZR, AID ZPILx-iIC JABWDICZ SXSERX&STS,

aid the ckaeoz o? tkz jos: as aid kistrzatxzkt of pcles

It ap'.oors to be well established that Kicalor sponsored, supported,
furthered, or initiated each of theso onterprisoo. Toubtloss Brandt
know what was going on, and perhaps he helped in the progroc. The evi¬
dence is not sufficient, hovovor, to Justify such a finding.

Tho Tribunal finds that the defendant Rudolf Brandt was an acces¬
sory to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting part in, wan knowingly
connected with plans and enterprises involving, and was u neebor of *r.
organisation or group conr.ectod with, tho eocsisoicn of ccdlcal expori-
nents on non-Gersmn nationals, without their consent, in tho courso of
which oxpcrlnents nurdero, brutalities, cruelties, tortures, otrocitioc,
and other inhusane acts wore cosnittcd; and the nurdcr of no loss thor.

86 non-Gorcan Jews for a skeleton collection. To tho oxtont that those
crises were not War Crises they wero Grices against Kucanlty.

MZKBLRSHI? IS GRLwAL C2SASIZAII0S

Under Count Jour of the indictment Rudolf Brandt is charged with
being a sector of an organisation declared criminal by the Judgment of
the International Military Tribunal, nanely, the SS. The evidence chows
that Rudolf Branit becane a acuber of tho SS in 1953, end remained in
this organisation until the er.i cf the war. Ac a =c=bcr of the SS he

13L55


Court I

19 Ang 47—A—17—7--13;—Leonard


vas criminally implicated in the commission of War Crire6 and Crimes
against Humanity, as charged under Counts Two and Three of the indictment.

An extremely persuasive and interesting brief on behalf of the
defendant KudoIf Brandt, filed by his attorney, has receive! careful
attention by this Tribunal. Therein it is urged that Hudolf 3randt's
position under Heinrich Himmler was one of such subordination, his
personal character so essentially mild, and he was so dominated by his
chief, that the full significance of the crimes in which he became
engulfod cene to him with a abode only when he vent to trial. This
plea is offered in mitigation of appalling offenses in which the defen¬
dant Brandt Is eaid to hare played only an unassuming role.

If it bo thought for even a u. ent that the port played by
Hudolf Brandt vns relatively unimportant when compared with the onornity
of tho charges proved by the evidence, lot it bo said that every Himmler
must have his Brandt, else the plans of u master criminal would never
be put into execution.

Tho Tribunal, therefore, cannot accept the thosio.

CCSCLUC7IS

Kilitury Tribunal I finds and odjudgos that '.he defendant Rudolf
Brandt is guilty under Counts Two, Throe, and Pcur of the indicteont.

THE KHSITEliT: Tho Tribunal will now be in roceos for a few
so meats,

tA recer.s was token.)


22LS6


-o ug-- --17-l-V>lov (Int. F-rUr'

Court '-o. I.

rtrr ->77;rr>7- : f- cc c - r -f -:f«n 4 - n t -tr y^vv .

The fend»nt is ch-rr 3 - 4 und?r Courts T'.ro -nd Three of the
>. let rent «'*h social resoonaibllity fer, red n-rticioHicn In,
frerirg, r-l-ri-, culfrelincide, tyohus, noisen, eoideric j-undice,
rr ‘ incer.tfi-ry herb, exw riror.ts. Ch-rgea xtrt -rie concerning certnin
ether -edic*l exoerirents, but they h-vc been ■‘beeped by the Prosecu¬
tion.

Vrugowsky Joined the rSE*? in 1930 -nd the SS in 1931. »e
ulti- t ly r-sc to the r-nk of Senior Colonel in the .:-ff n-3S.

Ir. 1933 ’rugoraky beore* - =c-.bcr of th. Staff of the SS
’ die 1 met, -a h/gicniat. »t the beginning of 1939, he founded
tV “ypHne B«ctr riologic-1 Testing St-tion of the SS in Berlin, those
numosc *-s to co-h-t 'ni de-Ha in the S' r-rrisnn trorrs of tho ,S»ffrr.-
. *r 19jj0 t v .c at-tlon w-s -r.. 4 r ! the "'•Yri.-c Institute

of the r -ffCr.-S T ." ’ rur 'akv b-c*- !ta Chief -nd -t the a~c tire
Chief of tV* Office for Hyrionc ir. i.e *cdlc-l Service of tho »-ffen-
, uodf r Oenzhor..

'n hla du-1 ore-city "rugorsky w-a . rarer-blo to Gcn-kon in
•’ q«r-tionfl corc-.rring cri.'rrie control *nd hr^Una in the *-ffon-3S,
hut s '-hi* r of the Hy^ierK Institute, w-a nilit-iy ourorior -nd con-
-•r.J'r f-f tht Inatituto ~, 4 He <-ffil’-trd institutions with newer to
issue ord-ra.

Iho ?J?dic-l Service of the X-fen-SS ws r^or--nizcd on 3 3eo-
-:ir 1913- Itru^cwaky nd the Hyrierr Tnatitute were tr*nsforrcd frc-.
tr 4 r Vnzkcn -r.d bcc-o directly subordinated to Cr-witz -s K ichs-rtt
S -nd °olice. By this tr-nsf- r ’’nj^owsky bec-n- ^hi- f Hygienist under
r—itz. Lot rer-ir.ed Chl»f of th Hygiene Institut .

TT™'*- »«n oytr-i r~pr-n.-<—

Tof dot ila corccmirp the v-ccir.e ■xr'.-rirenlr conducted -t
'-Jchorr-ld Concentr-tion c-cr h-vr * r:l-ted r-’s-'rher: in this .Tudg-
• t -nd hence the drt-ils need -o further ■’Isoussi'-r..

5 - tainted o U t ir. th* e-se -g-irst S-r.ilo S er there Ir evld^r.c'


1^57


19 ug-A->©-19-?-’lcy (Int. Errl r'
Coart -'O. I.


ir the rcr 1 V'“t on 2° T ocegb cr 1°11 - conference rss held in Berlin
-bterdrd by ''ripowsky 't which the decision »-s rc-ch'd to b:.-rin co¬
s' -rrh tests ~t -ucher.w'ld to doterrine the cf^icicy of e-»g-yolk, *nd
other, r-ccir .'3 <-s protection -g'-irst tyrhus. ‘s = result of the c on-
fere r.c' ouch -r. exnericert’l st-ticn w-s established *-nchenr=ld
*nd« r the direction of Dr. Din?, with the defend-nt Hover, -ctir.e -3
his deputy.

Except for - fBr tests conducted e=rly in 19W, =11 experi-
rer.ts re re c Tried cut in Block — so c-llod clinic’ bloik of the-
st'tlon. Ir. the «uturr. of 19U3 ' v^ceir.-' production d-J?rta»ant w»s
oatsbliohfld in Block 5^ n>d this -Iso c*sv under the supervision of
Dr. Dir.g-Sohuler.

It would burden this Judp-.r.t unnocess rlly te n-rr-t* In do-
t«il tb* vnrioua tests -nd exoerirents c-rrlod out by DLVQ »t Puchenw-la
*« * result of the decisions re-ched -t hirher levels. *11 of thc.s con-
forre-' to " = ~re or '«ss aniforr n-ttom, with ccrt-in yr-nos of in-"t- s
bolr.p inocul“ted ■cith v-ccines, other pm*ms (known • a ccotr-l groups)
te!r? given no i-rrunir-tion, '•nd fin-lly both groups being rrtifici=lly
infected with * virulent vires, -n- 4 th* resu’ts no tod -iron the exoeri-
rcnt-1 subjects.

V lc-m frea the Ding r i the *uthor.ticity -nd reliability
of which h-s b^er. discussed “t lcr.vth in oth'r portions rf the .Judgment,
the rrtheds eerloyed md the results obt-ired in -t le-st sore of the
xre riser.ts.

For 'XTole: Typhus v-ccin=ticr. r-*tori'l Jbse'rch Scries I”,
hich bep-n on 6 J-nu-ry 1512, 135 inc-tes were v-coir.rt.d with Voipl,
cx-H- ren—Glide Bolster, string Korr-1, or Behring Strcnp,.vccincsj
l r r rsor.s «cr used for control, r. J V-xch 1°!:2 »11 test subjects,
ircludinir control persons, rer* rti r ici =lly infect'd with virulent
-iros of rickttsi'-prwr?"|ri famished by the Robert Koch Institute.

-r de-thr occurred; three lr. the control rrcuh -rd two -acre the v*e-
Mr.-ted subjects.

12^8


IV _>-_i 9 - 3 _v-l 3 y (ir.t. P*hr)

“curt Tc. I.

In typhus vaccine, rese -rea scrimp I T ", frer 15 August to
)■ Serterbcr 111 :?, UO rerscns were v-ccin-tcrf with two different v-c-
oir.osj 1? persons wore used fer control. Subsequently -li were -rt-
IflCi-137 infected with virulent virus; four deaths "oong the control
persons occurred.

I'rr entries ir. the di'ry concerning "Tjnhus v-ccir.e exoeri-
■ect-1 series VII" re >d -s fellows:

"ZS K-T 5i3 - 1? Jane 191»3: C-riyinc of typhus
vcointior. for i nix«tlan with the following
7-cci:.e: l) 29 persons with v-ccir* "»sid",

2 ) 20 persona with vreeine "*sid »dsorb-t",

3) 2 C persona with v-ccino "<ei*l" of the in¬
stitute for spotted Tcvi-r re.* 4 virus reac-rch of

t\r auprera conr-nd. Any (OFH) Crrecw (Ever)...
til expo rise nt -1 r* ’^na cot very serious typhus.

- -7-Sot. L3: Ch-rt *nd c-se history conploted,

Tito cxwriaer.t-1 series w^s concluded. £3 i!c"ths
(1? with "'sid") (13 with "'aid Jdsort>«t") (9
with ’•"oi^i") (a control) 9 Go-t« Charts red
c ’so histories dolivexed t~ ?'rlin. Dr. n in SS-
Sturefc*nr fur h re r."

"ocecmlne tynhus v-ccino «x-*:rirer.t-l series VITT" begun or.
3 Vrrch 19li.' the follow-.! er.tr,* *rs in the rii-ry:

by rr -- *ir-coma, Prof,

fsso (f.W-rat ’ret) the v-ccino "KcDonh*>rcn n (Irscr.-
'-irino-V-ccire) Produced fron rouse liver by the
r-tionel aenn institute in Kocenh* 2 tn w^s tooted
for Its coar-tibilitr or. huaens. 20 persons were
r-coin*’ted for in-amirs-lion by Ir.tr ruscul^r injec¬
tion ...’0 ns - re ccntcppl-Vd for control -nd
corr-riser.. L of the 3 n perrons I?r linin-Ud
before t-e st-rt r>f t u *~ -rt;flci -1 injection, b.-


ru.59


-- 'int. P^^r'

r *irt r .

C^-S o % intendttcnt sickness..ihc yearning
cxoerlasnt-l persons re re- Infected on 16 *rril
UL by subcutaneous Injection of 1/20 sc typhus
sick fresh blood...The fcllcring foil sick:

- 17 oereons icrrxniced; 9 nediur, g seriously;
b' o persons control, 2 -odius, 7 seriously...

2 Juno U:: TV exu: rirer.t-1 series w-s con¬
cluded. 13 June !±: "h-rt -nd cs* history
cocoleted -r.d sent bo irlin. 6 d?-ths (3
Eopcuh-gcn) (3 control), Dine."

"Typhus v-coir.o cr ri:£nt-l scilcs IX” beg-n on 17 July I'/liU.
TXnty rersono were Ivzunixed with tho v-c=ine ’Toic-r", produced by
the dPrvrtcent fer typhus "ni virus rece~rch cx* the Hygiene Institute
rf the v-ff*n-SSj - n 4 for oom rison, nether group of 20 porro-u- rre
ire S'i zed rtth v-eclne " cfgl" produc'd frer lice by the 'nr Suorae
~ n-r.d («P) < n "p-co... Still -r.otSv.-r preur of 20 rv rs"r.s were used
for the control prour. On 6 ©ntenbor Hl*i the 60 expertrwr.t-1 persona
rare infected with fresh blo~d "sick with typhus" which w'3 inlrctcd
•lit tV rper «rr. »s - result *11 xperincr.t“l r-. scoot bcc~nc sickj
cor- s’ riously. The n-rr-tien of this xrorirent-1 scries closes with
tV cryrtic report: "h No-, hli: >-rt rrt cr«r history couolct'd, 2)i
V-ths («; »Tci ? i') (19 Control), Dr. "ohulcr."

Those er.tri:? -re but fer * tV - ny which re h-%e t.-ken -t
r-nJcs froc the Ding di»ry, de-ling with the soniid rxurdon of defonst-
loss victles in the nr - of K-zi -^dic-1 science . V.-ny core could be
set forth if tire -r.d 3C-ce nerritted. -'r. -*n»lysio cf the Ding Oi«y
Msol'-s -i th-t nr less V.-r. 7 29 concer.tr ti-r. C'cr in-'tea re re rr rl-
-'•-te 4 on -1th trek-., -t le s IT. oj '»r die *. f nd this tell cf
Hc-th t’Vts r.o -cc~unt o'* ti e -er. lr. 4 rise o* ?r-res of so-cllGd
"r'•S3-po’* Arsons who re re -i-lHci-lly infected rtth tyrVta for tV
so.-- -urncs- cf h-vir.p -t -r. cvr-rc~dy -ur-'.v f fresh blood "sick

-let typhus", to d-' osed t in fact t : rxs-ri-er.tel subjects.


in (Infc. frder)

--:rt T.


Ther* i a sow evidence to tv effect th-t th-' ctso lr.'-V.s
ca^e -s subjects in the first series submitted to bainp used -s xvri-
-nt'l subjects - ft'- r being told thrt the cxrx rd-nents fr h"rel*sa
-nd th-t Edition"1 food would bt river, to volunteers. Put tiv*s-
victims not infirr'd th-t they would be »rtifioi»lly infect'd
ith - highly virulent vims nor th-t tfry right die -3 - result.

C. rt-inly no one would seriously suggest th-t under the eircurst-r.ee 3
these -er. gw their lep -1 consent to -ct -a subjects. u docs not
-rdin-rlly consent to be the soeci -1 subject «f - r.urd'r, -nd if one
did, such consent would not -bsolv his sl-yer.

L*vr, »!/n news of wb-t »-s fc-ttocnlnjg in Block 1.6 bse-cc
goner-1 ly known in th* c-=n It w-s no longer possible tc delude the
iisa-tes into offering th-nsolvcs -a rictirs. ihorcuoon, thr sh-bby
rrwtens' of •Mkinc volunteers w-s dropped -nd t.c oxr- rinent-1 subjects
were t-k'n -rbitr-rily fror. * list of inc-Us pr. o'r-d by the c-rs> 'dnin
istr-tlor..

Other exv:rironts to -Iso c-rried out in Bl'ck b6 of Ruchcn-
vld to test typhoid, r.-r--tyohold » -nd °, -tv* v 11 wr fevrr.

As in th» tyrhus* ox^erironts, nan-consentin' hur-n sub loots
r'tr us'd, including not only Grn--n cri-in-1 prisoners but 'Iso Pol's,
’ussl *rs «nd Pwnebaon, both civilians "nd prisoners «f w-r.


1^61


19 ..'irna t 17— 20-1—1 : e :sin

Court 1


In '-11 the typhr -a-p.rln^r.ts h resulted to sany 8xporincntsl
subjects. „s to esc!-, of these expsrtior.ts the ovidonco is cvonrhaldns
t:v.t tliey v -re carried out by Dir--, unfer the orders or authority of thu
defendant : hu^otrsby,

who:: acrrirr®*

• •

On 11 SeptoAer 19L : , In , and a cert in illv-nr.,

carriod out an erperlnor.t tilth aosnditln nitrato projootilos in the
S-.ohonshausen Concentration Ctisz. Details of tho .ucparlnont arc hilly
explained by a ‘'Too Secret-’ ra~crt of t*i- sordid affair in a lottor
writton by the defendant rugc d:y to inolo deal Institute,

Berlin. The lott r folic 3:

"Subject: Ib^arlaents with .coni-in nitrato Projectiles
To tho Crirdnologloal Inatituto
attn: Dr. TL .. r,
o r 1 i r.

"In the prw;r.co of DS-Ctur.ux'.nnfuo'.ir r Dr. DUC-,

Dr. ILv:.::; an* tho undorsi-ned, oxperlaenfes with
.'.cord tin nitrato projootilos uero con-iictod on 11
Soptorbur 19ali on 5 persons who had boon oonlomod to
death. Tho -.roj.ctilos in question .;j fl of a T.oJ m
caliber, fill 3d with crystclizod poison. The orporinontal
oubjjeta, in r. lying position, v.iro oach -hot in tho upper
part of th. lift thi 7.3 tilths of fro cf than rare
cl ■ .nly V t'r*- . v .1 ~ rd3, no iff’et of tho

poison was to j tbs rvu' so t o expo-daentdl subj ots
were therefore wcsi/‘3 '.

••The ontmneo of the prr jectil; id n-.t she- any peculiarities.
Evidently, the r.rterfa f olarios of on. rf tho subjects was
injured. li iit strecu; of bleed issued free tho wound. "ut
tho bloodier stopped after a short tire. The loss of blood
was ostinated no bavin,’ bean at tho aat 3/:. of a liter, and
eonseqttinii;- was on no aocront fatal.

UL62


IS -.U ust 17-20—:—.'.—. .3-1 toehan.

Cc*:rt 'o. 1

•’Tba synptcis of ths c av’gm ed tkreo shewed :. surprising
similarity. At first x oeculiardtios cppap.red. ..ft.-r 20-25
rdnutos a renter 'Station an' a slip;-* ptyalisn set ir., but
stopped a;.In. After 10 to h5 minutes a stronger salivation
set ir.. Tho poisoned persons swallowed r:poatedl;', but Later
tho flow of saliva boosso so strong tint it could net over,
bo overoo o by 3. allowing. fonry saliva flovrod Aron their
nouth3. Thon choking ar. J , vcrA.i r.~ set in.

"Aft or 56 nintttos tho pulco of t*o :f thee could no loader
bo felt. V-'-o third hod a pulso rato cf 76. After 55 rdnutos
his blood pros sura was 90/60. Ths sounds wore oxtranoly low.

reliction of blood ;ros3uro was ovidont.

"During tho first hour of tho axporlvjr.t the pupils did n:t
show any change. .Star 78 rdnutos tho pupils of all throo
allowed a renttun dilation together with a retarded Heist
reaction. Simultaneously, nxlmun ro3piration with hoavy
breathing irJvOatiors sot in. “ixis subsided after a £<j>:
yir.-it.j3. The pupile ©entrr.ctod again and their reaction
Improvod. ..ft r >5 dnutos tho Jtgllr.r and nckillos tenton
rjfl xj3 of tho poJ nod subjects waro negative. Tho obdasdnol
refl-aces r.f v.-o cf the- r>ro -leo nogntivo. Tho u~ or abdominal
refloxos of tho third ra - .ill positive, -hiio tho louor wore
negative. ..ft jr approxi: at civ S*D ninutos, one of tho subjects
again started bry- irv -tl;.*, tdds -as acconpr.nlod by an
increasin; notor wrest. tho heavy broattdii changed into
a flat, ccc-elc ratod ros-, irr.ticr., accompanied by extreme- nausea.
Qno cf tho ;oi3or.ed persons tried in vain to vordt. To do so
ha Intro iuoed four fingers of his hand up to the knuckles into
his throat, but novrrtholes 3 ooul- net vomit. His fnoo t.tip
flushed.


Hh63


is .vagus t - 7 -,:- 3 Qhen

Cc*urt 7c. 1

“The other t.~ rtporlnar.tol subjects hid olraa^* earl;* shT.tr.
a polo face. The other synptous . re t car.-, “he rater arrest
Ira* eased 30 rmch that f .;■ persons flun; theiscivos up, then
hnm, rolled their eye 3 ar.d mde . aan l ncl esa rations ulth their
tends nr. ! :.;ra. ladly * . 1 '-niton subsided, tho pupilaa
dilated to tho .-nxinan, end tho condemned lay uationloss.

Ikssoter spasns and urlnatioi 1 obsorvod in ono cos 3 .

Death occurred 121, 123 nr.! 129 .dmites nfter ontry of tho
projectile.

hiurraryt iloe fillod 1 th toly 33 :og.

of cord tin rdtrvto in solid forr. ted, in sjdto of only

inslenti ' 1 : • jurios, r. deadly effoot after t :*s.

rotsordns shovrod 20 to 25 .drrutos after injury. Tho min

•

rv.otions t. iro: onlivr.tion, alteration of the pupila, negative

tandem reflenoo; rotor unroot an-l octree nausoa.

ICaoanJK, 3;>Locturor
Oberfuohror and Offico Chiof. 1

Tho defendant attsorts io root this charge with tho dofonso that
tho subjects used ir. this arpori-'wnt • iro persons t.o ted boor,
ccndanaod to death ~r.i ttet ho, ’n oral:/, ted boon appointed as thoir
1 - :;nl oxacutionar.

Cr.e r.ood but rood the letter intro lined in ovidance to r.rrivo
at t’.vo conclusion that tho '/ofor.as has no validity. This tan not a luga!

jcution carrlod out in conference uith tte laws r,

fc*.:t a crininal . a died ri ‘it -rln rounds iroro inflicted on

prisoners with tho solo and ir. vij of dot mir-inf tho effectiveness
of pcisaned bullets as aeons of taking life. The haplcsr viotins of
this dastardly torture wero liussian prisoners of .r.r, entitled to tho
rrct otior. afforded by the laws of civilised nations. ..c has been
ir. substance, in this juyr-’ni: “Ml under certain specific co: . ’it ions
the rulos cf lar.- warfare -r.y rose- rise the v-lidity cf mrition by
, it r any oirru:-.stances countenance tap infliction


niifiii


1? August o-L-:a»5an

Ocurt 1


cf doath by .uii: 4r.- ■ toarture,

" ' .. ~ 1EE - : :


That yrugocsky rendered —si .tonco to r 2 v«nrdt in the sulfnnilani lo
oxpexlnents at “avonsbruck is lainly shorn by tha record* ! ruse , sky
cut hi3 laboratory or.4 co-^orkcrs at C-obhardt's disposal, o furnished
the cultures for the inf actions. It -.ms or. tho su -ostion of
iusqwaky*8 office that -rood shavings and ground <-lns3 -rero plaood in
tlja -.rounds of the subjects co that battlj-fi.jld -.rounds could be no re
closely si: minted.

gas ans’i sorrxr. ss*

Toward the end of lfh2a oonfi-ra.ee was hold ir. tho : llitary

hodical Acadooy, “erlin, to discuss tivs effects of -;aa cedaan sorun

on Hounded persons. .Wring tho corfcronco several cases -.rare reported

in ..hich rounded soldiers -..-ho had rocoivod gas r.jdonr. sorun Injections

in large quantities suddenly died uithout apparent reason* Irogcn ok;.',

:ho participated in the confer -ttco, _ liras sod tho possibility that

porhr.pe tha dec. tho : boon v .o io tho ;>honol contont of tho corn. As

• «

a st.r rd colvin tUo probloc n-ugewsky or dr.g jchulsr,

his subordinate, to take -rt in a euthanasia HI Hr." -,4 th phenol and
to report on the raault3 in detail*

In pursuance of t’v order Hvan Dr, jlr *nd tho dnfondant Haven
killed so-io of tho concentration oanp inmtos t Puchorsnld -.4th
nh'-nol injections and r ln-; ri.crtod He fIndia :a to his superior
cfficar, ' rugenraky, .3 required by the rdor.

, :

As to theca itxu? the “rifcurd is cf tho vies that tho ovidonee
is insufficient t: sustain the charges.

It his hocr. proved beyond a reasonable l:u v t that tha dofandant
pnly $8 -- ryinoipal in, accessory to, ordered, dotted, took a
ernsantinr port in or.:' -.0 in _r eonr.cstad :ith plans ani jntor-


risos involvin' - Heal


- Lonals, tdth >ut


, ich *rp rirv nts nor tars, 1

Uh6$


19 August ee'.mr.

Court TTc. 1


crudities, tor : a r:n: ler irhunsn acts rare cccnitt

To tfca actant that -.hose crises .-are not aar crimes they *.7?rc Grlnes
against ’imanity.

CCUtC FOCI* Under Count four the in&ctaant tha defendant is charged
ith b-jir.7 a nabor of nr. orjanisatlon declared criiral by the
International * ill tray Tribunal, nsr-cly, the 3S.

The ovidenca groves t'.sit ' rugo'rc'-' Joined tha T3EA? in 1?30 and
voluntarily baasne r. na.bor of the offer.-:* 3 in 1931. "2 regained in
theso organizations throu taut the ~r. As a ~a bar of the affen-GS
he ttzs p-roc nail” inplicatod ir. tho co emission of *r.r cri-ioa cnl
cri.es against huaanity> as iscassod ir. this Judgnont.

; 0 :: 0 i ;| 3 1 0 11

till tar.* -rilunri I finds anJ adjudges that tha defendant

9 0 00

Joac T./ok 7 , is guilt] , ants i*.ro, Throo, ir of

tho Indict a mt.


Tho defendant Topucndicb 1* charged under Counts Two and T.xeoo of
the Indictcxmt ri -A: porsond responsibility for, and participation in.
Hi:-.*-. Altitude, SroesLx , lalarlc, *>alf'.nila-4do, Sercxtor, fpideede

• '00 0

jaundice, Sterilization, Typhus, n i i3or., oxp.rlnvnts. Ho in charged
ur.dor Count Four rith being a ausber of an organization doclnrod
orltriml by tho JQdfpent of tho In tax-rational ’llitary Tribunal.

The chargos rith refer once to High Altitude and bison :r c-rincnts
havo been aban'onad by the h-osccution r.' l.-nco rill not bo considerad
forthor.

FcypondicSc studied uj Heine *• several Coirvm universities fron

1911 to 19 'S, cr. ‘ rased o state o:r ination in bocffdjor of the

iattor y :ar. !* Joined tie T3X.: en 1 arch 1932 and tho JS on 1 July

follcin . He rose to th’r rank cf lieutenant Colonel in the and to
♦

tho rank of lonior Colonel ir. tho off .’K*Ho as also a no bar of
a *:nzi 3C Bys i dLa n a .ss-da tier.. In Au ust 1935 ho uas appointed as n
I'riciac ir. tho nir. ’aco ar.i 3eltli; :.t . ffice in r rlir., -.a*. boo ana

m66


13 -umist 7- .-.“T-d-x- *cehar.

Court "c. 1

Chief Vhysicisn of --‘1 office lr. 151. D hold tho la ".tar -ppcdnfe:ont
until the Fall of 19Ux.

Fror. 1 Septsiior 193? until aar.otir-a ir. 19! 1 Popper. ‘id: tt.g or.
active -tuty ir. the nr-jy os a sur'oor.. Lurir. tho latter year he rocu:-od
M.3 iitica -ith tho Face and ettlcrant Office in Berlin. 3etr,*eon 1939
and 19 U3 he 7-erfcrr.cd sc:-.o duties as a -.^.bor of tho staff of tho Reich
Physician S5 end idica. Dr, Gsswitx, he ‘dr. care of apodal uwignaents.
In tha fall cf 1913 .'cp-jendd: rns ~de Chief rT tho 7 -r 3 or.nl

9

(Si nhich position ha r until tho end of tho Var.

7TT2IT Hr-’’. ’ . T’.s

T!v> ovidonco ia th.rt 7 c . .r.'ich yir.jd hno..'lei~o of th.a froozins

©perinonts oor-hictad by tlaschcr at ' r.c’.nu, as tho result of a cotv-

• •

•e

foranco hill bat^eon '.anchor, r fr-it*, cr.7 RoppsndicSc on 13 January
19U3, fer tho .urpcao ei* iiscussin certain phases of tho research.

T'.u> ; 7 idonee tooa not prova beyond a ronaonablo doubt that Pop onllck
«a 3 srlinaily conn ,ctod -./ith thaao ax. orinonts,

::j-jrL. 2x' ?x.;:rs

Tho Prca jcutior. contends tint ToppcndicJc ic crLdnally responsible
for tho ralnrin axparlnonts conduct ad by Dr. Schillina at Daoliau. Dr.
ilootnor vns uv asol in tho Ylnria a-.porinonts an a subordinate of
SohUlinp* 7ijvai*c« Diary, tfhich ia in i , contains a notation

'q m 9

on 23 r ■. -itu , Poppondick, an£ ,

conferees, -Aich had probably boona.?nnsod by rbppcndd: throa days
prOTioudy by tot rhoaa. ho conferanoo is not disclosed

, ra i 3 ! '.->re lr. the 'Irjry that on 31

•hr 1 ? 1 ~ 'rv.itz sanctioned hlootnor’s collaboration -ith c’-dllir.-.

Toppontid: tostifijd as a vitr-jas ir. his c m behalf that ho had
hoard tint chi-iir. ur.s carrying cn 37 add investigations at Dachau
oottocWirg imunity from rgvlarir.. Fa st .tod furth r that his hnc.d.'lgo
of the nature of the invostiyati-ns - rthor. 7ho record does

not centradet his testiiv'ry.


1U67


V) ittgtai L7-2:-7-:.-.7D*re3’?£ir,

CCUrt 1'rOm 1


The Tribunal finds that the evidence decs not disclose beyond a
reasonable ifcubt that Poppondidc *./as crirdnally connected v&th tho
.v^lariaexpcrirvsnts.

samrn^EE z:? T~:vst

Fbppondic!: attended the Third 'he tin; of Consultin- 3ur-;eons at
the "ilitar-/ ' 'e deal ;.cadsoy, r arlir., and ho rd iooturos by abhor dt
an ' FiachorconcorniR. the sulfbnilnnida oxpariryjnts, which have boen
-'iscusaed elaea/haro ir. this Jad-ient. Tadar d-to of 7 Toptoriar l?l |2
he sinad c cortificsto tc r. two cop; of a report ccnccmin3

*

» i !o 03 hich :-c.* boen conductod at Tavonabr.ick,

ado by C-obhardt to ’ravits. Gra'.."itz fcr.rarded tho report, or a
certified copy thereof, to ! 2 birlor«

”o are of tho opinion that Toppeniick had kno.rlod^o of tho
ori ir.al nature of tho acporh.ar.ts cor. hictod by 3obhardt and riaohor
at Ravonabruck, but tho dofo.-.dnr.t»3 cridnal connection nifch an;* auoh
oxp-'xir.onts Ir-s rot boon roved by the ovidonco.

;r.x.7T» sc. »r :rrzx

The jvi '.enco teoc net df.ooloao beyond a reasonable doubt that
indidc was cri .ir.ully ir.plicatod in those axpcri.:• r.ta.

ncic nr as*

Tho -vidunco rlooa n' t diod'.so beyond a roa-.onablo doubt that
endiok ~ cocrijdnall;* j_u;lic'.tod in thosa rep risionts.

7i'i!Jz..no:s c r~:

'^ppondich jus o’.d-f - sLci r. c " tho Vein Taco end Tattlenent
Offie j« 7V. Ax ' l ent of t: International .llitary :ribuml found that
this office -.--ns 'active in carr;iv out schanoe for r -cnr.nizr.tior. of
' ccupiod territories a coo r tin- to thamcial j.rinciplee of tho V.unt
Tarty end were involved in the jp rt'.ticr. of Jorrs ar.:l other foreirn
•.icnals, J e the Trial of tS. j h.;:r ir Srii-dnals, Yol.l,p.27P«


l^i55


19 August 47-.-v-SvS-21—1-hcchr.n
Court. 1.

Pestlfyir. before this Tribunal, Popocndicu st Sc
far. - fee Nazi rr.cl l policy was two—fold In aspect;
o..e policy :oir._ positive, th; other, negative, in
c arr.ctor. She positive policy included many ..r.t Sera,
or.c beiar the encouragement of Ser-en;* families to n-odv.ee
m*c children. Thi negative policy concerned the atorlliz-
ti-.n and cnterclr.rtior. of non-^ryens, as wall o:. r
measures to reduce the r.or.-.-.vy*o ul:-tlor.. .-.ccov-i.^, to
Poppondich 1 a testimony r.e wes not co..corned with the
execution c t atlvo, b : ml] with osltivo concurea.

By letter -atad 2^ hay l£41 tonwltz wrote to ni.;..ler
cav.cornin. r. conference nelu on 27 h~.y l>il -t which Dr.
Clnuborg wr.o present and discussed his “new co tv. of. of ster¬
ilization of inferior wo non without an opera tlo.i. 11

Pappcndloh b 1st ccr dr ted Juno 1041, wnlch reforroi
te c previous elephono oonvera-tlon with Orrwitz, -rote
.lodvolf Brrr.it stating thrt he w'S enclosing "ttho list
of v.iyslcl no who are prepared to perform the trov.t.aont of
Stas ' Sy* rs roquostc- oy EiBflOcr. She list refer.-: , to
la cvldontl the same as was contnino in c letter fro*.
Srcuitx 'o Himmler, dat id 30 Kay 1941, which stated: "In
j fOllovia, , I submit r. list of c?oclalloto i. c. v.r.- of
«:c tr tmer.t of sterility L: wo on according to tic
tfeo:. of Pwfcssov Cleub.r-.*

It is shown tc* tne evidence thrt Oleuberg Inter
carried out sterilization experiments or. JowesrOo ;.t
..uschv.itz. 51 cl lav experiments wore carried out lr. o her
■to . .centre tio.i cress by So doctors wno ware su'eor. i."4 te
to Srawitr. It is evident that ropper.dich hnev of these
sterilisation e:o3rlnents, althou^r. it i3 not chow. th.z r.c
vr.s criminally connected with them.


13 ..u uat 47-A—PK-gl—S-He eh an
Court i.


It is not clear from the evidence that Popp or,dicl: was
e,I mindly cor. ected with, or had knowledge of, t..c nature
of t e typhus experiments st Buchenwald, or the type of
subjects upon which they were conducted.

EXESDIASff 30 M3 ZXPZHEXEUTS:

There is 3ore evidence in the record the effect that
after incendiar experiments ver? couplet 3uchenwaJ&>

re-ports of the experiments were forwarded to Pop; cndic: and
::iu_owaky. It le evident that t.rough the reports Poppendick
ained knowledge of the nature of the experiments, 'xit the
rocord f■ ils to snow criminal responsibility of tm defendant
in connection therewith.

PHLSGMOHE EXPERIMENTS:

Tho evidence clearly proves Pop ondlck'o tnoi/lod'jo of
those experiment., • :t falls to show tho defe 'c crlminc
connect lor. toe rewitr..

POLL’frib ZXPSIXUaiTB:

Bie rocord does not show Fop.endlck's kr.owledjO of or
connection with these experiments.

;<zaixzz zxPZRi.iira:

The prosocutlor. contends tho s tho evidence shove
Pop cndick 1 s criminal responsibility ir. connection lAt.i a
series of experiments 0 cted at Buchenwald by Dr. Vornetj
Ur ..lsn physiolen * no claimed to he: discovered a method
Of our Ins homosexuality by trams 1 n fiction of rrtlflod
glcnd.

Under date 15 July lj4-k Pop-Dandi ck wrote 'to Dp. Sing at
concentrr 1 ion c r Suchenvalf , _ e follows:

“3y r-.- uestof the Relchsfuehrer 5c the Danish doctor
35 :* ...• .Dan... u lute Or. Vn.rnet has - n given QJ> ov : *•:>


;o cc..tinue -.is -.ormor.e r^searc. with the 3c, culr-vly

t.u development of his artificial - i;*na. Inc .. ic-u .e. rer

S3 anticipates certain results ibo: toe treatment of ixj.uo-

JhiTO


i: Ac us t 47—A-P54-21—3-Keeben


OCUl'


i.


corrals wicr. Yarcet's r rtif icial glr.rd. The cechr.lcr-1
reparations have oo.e to such r. point that experin-stB
or. h-iacn bs lng 8 cor. :c started within r. reasonable op. ce


"A:-. S3 Stcndorte.. uehrer Dr. Lolling lnforncd :ee, the
concentration ccnn "elnar-Suohenwal' has been directed to
c':e r.veliable 5 prisoners for 33 ©turabennfuehrer Verne t'o
e;reriaents. Ttese prisoners will be ande available to
53 Sturmbannfuehrer Varr.ot by the canp physician r.v cny


tiao.

■S3 Sturnbcnnruehror Varnct intends to _;o to ixchcnwald
B.iovtly In or-er to sako cert in necessary preliminary test3
or. the so prisoners. In case there will be spec—.1 laboratory
t ots, you ore ;c .nested to csal3t Vornet within -ha scope of
your possibilities.

"Particulars on Vernet*s reoerrer. voru sent today to the
oner. physician of tne V e lme r- 3u oho .weld for nlo info mr.t Ion.'

Tnere is evidonce that durir. the sun..er of 1044 Dr.

..ot conducted tho cxperlnento referred to in Poppon&iokU
letter. However, the nationality or -ho -prisoners uaed for
U.a errxjrlcr.ts Is not Brown, nor has It been proven beyond
r. er.sonable doubt tlv t the experiment v/eve .r.v,-f 1 ov ca used
.oath, or Injury to Lie experimental objects.

!7o have _lvev. carefrl consider? .io.. to the ovl..ence con-
cciv.In th ohorges mde by tne Prosecution a- lr.3t -he

dcL.t Poppendlck. Certlml* the evidence rnlccr r.

Icier, that he was Involved In the erpeviiimti..

- , no -ice of toes and cf their oonaotiuencoa. He

nev r lao fit t they were bein£ carried on by the 33 of which h-


- era rea ined caber.

but tr.-s lrib_ cl, however, ccr.no- convict" • .or.

Hit 71


13 August 47-^-PK-21-4-Meehan.
Court 1.


-us; icion; evidence b.-yond e rersor.&ble doubt is necessary.

3» evidence is insufficient to sustain guilt unf.cr Counts
Two wid Three of the Indictment.

JISHIP Hi A CHIkIK/iL ORGaKIZaTIOK:

The defendant Poppendick 13 charged with membership
In r.r. organization declare criminal by the Judgment of the
International Military Tribunal, namely, the S3. Poppcndlck
Joined the 3s in July 1332. Ho remained in the 33 voluntarily
throughout tne war, with actual knowledge of the fact that
that organization was being used for tue commission of acta
now declare, criminal by Control Council Law Ho. 10. He
nusfc, Cher: fore, be found guilty under Count *our of the
Indictment.

Vita r-f ronce to the rvturc of punishment v/hlcn ohould
be 1- ooed under such circumstances the International military
Tribu.ini has -.ade the following rcco endetionJ

“ 1 . T 2 u - so for as possible tiroughout t.';o four ronoe of
cccuprtlon in Germany the classifierclo..o, s’lictlo.-s, and
cr.cltlea be standardized. Uniformity of treatment so far
r -rr.ctical Ghoulil bs r. ocelc princi ple. This does not
of course, .aan hr.t discretion in sontcnclng should not
c vested in the court; but tn* discretion should be within
fixed limits appropriate to tto c.lmo.

"2. be-' Mo. 10 ... lea- ?s n :hment entirely in tho
f.i sore t Ion of the trial tourt ev. to the extent of Inflicting
the ue; th penalty.

n 7r.o Denazifiestion lew of 5 larch 1945, however, passed
for vprin, Creator Hesse, end "ui11emberg-Gadch, rovldos
loflnite sentences for punishment in each ty e oh off use.

I ; Tribunal reco - ends that ir. .0 cast should puniokhimt
is occl under law Mo. 1C upon any aeab vs or .. ..-.nation

or voup declared by the Tribunal to be criminal e::~ucd the

Uh72


1C jjrjust 47-A-PK-21-5->.sehan.
Court 1.


unishuant fixed 'ey Sic Denazification Law. Ho person
should be punished under botn lews.*

See Trirl of tie .-ejor s>r Criminals,

Yol. 1, o. 257.

In wel_hing the pun lament, i. any, wilch should bo
;etod out to tne defender.t for his ^ullt by reason X the
charge contained in Count Four of tie Indlctcent, this
Tribunal will give such consideration to the rcco...icndntlons
of tie Internetional Military ?r bunal as nay under the
uroulBOG sooa aeet and proper.

conclu s ion

Ullltnry Tribunal I finds tic da fondant Kelnut Foppendick
not guilty under Count a Two ^r. Three cf thv Indlotsiont; urd
fir.de r.nd ndjudgoa the defendant Holaut Popper.dlch guilty
as charged in the Fourth Count of the Indie tcant.

Judge S8*orlrti will continuo rending the Judgnont.

JUDGE 3EBRINGI


The dofendent Sievors la ohri'god under Cour.to Two
r.rd Tnroe of tru Indict cent with special responsibility
for, and participation In, High Altitude, Freezing,

Kalarla, Lost Gas, Seawater, Euido.-alc Jaundice, and Gpotted
Fever experiaunts; ana with extermination cf Jews to coriplcto
r. skeleton collection. Under Count Four of the Indict cent he
is charged with being a mo- ber of an organization declared
original by the Judgment of the Intornr.tlon Xllitr.ry Tritunal;
r.rncly, the 5^.

The Prosecution has abandoned tr._ charge of participation
1.. the iridenic Jaundice experiments, rnd hence, th-D charge
rill .:ot considered further.


oicvers is on of the ttre. aef srr.en ta who are ot
hc’sicians. he Joined zte KSDa? In 19£ and renewed Us

Uir73


i: Au ust 47—A-P24-21-S-Keer.ar.
Court Kg. 1


• ”=hi . the Kazi Tart/ in 1333. H e joined -.u* 5~ at t .e

: 1535 or. Cne Bu = _.estIon o:* Kinder. In this organisation

.. attained the rank of e 8 tan la rten fuehrer (Colonel).

Frou 1 July 1-35 until toe wav ended Sievers vc .s r. oenber
of Kiruiler's personal a teff and Reich Business Kan. _cr ff
the .-inonerbe society. .-.ccordin to a statute of 1 January
153L, the purpose of the Abnenerbe was to sup.'drt scientific
rosor.rch concerning the culture r.r. nerita^e of too k«ordic
race. The Board of Directors was cozposcd of kinder, rs
president. Dr. Mxost, as Curator, and Slevers, as too Business
Krhagor. Slevers was responsible for toe business organlz-
tlon ond administration end the budget of tne Ahncr.ov’oo.

T.;o -lace of business was Berlin. Slcvcrs supported and
part id "tef in too nodical experiments wr.lcn arc tho subject
of tie indie to ent, primarily thro h the Institute of
uHitary Scientific Roscorcn which was established by order
o. Kir Iqv, dated 7 July 1942 ard was adsir.istratlvoly
attached to the «nnenerbe.

On 1 January 1042 Hlaslor ordorod the oatr.bliohacnt of
ontoaalogloal institute; ir. March 1942 the instltoto Dr.
Fancier In Dachau; end lr. the first BOnth of too ycav 1042,
tho institute Dr. Klrt at Strasbourg. Those subsociuontly
joevao part of toe Institute for Kllitrry aclcn ;lfic Fvocoarch.

Slevers was, for all practical purposes, toe r.ctin c hood
of toe «hnenerbe. In this capacity h was sUbordin tod to
y.L\ ler and regularly reported to him or. the affairs of tnls
Sodoty. Tiia top secret correspo.-doncc of Hi *. l:r concerning
toe A-Uienerbe *#ss sent to 51-_v.rs. Inc charter of too
.-noncvbe defines Siovers* duties as folio-s:

■The Roich business rrf.av.-v ..indies the businocs
- f ivs of the community, he is i . char 5 of the :U 6 lnosa
0 r 3 r.nl ration era -kin Inst rat ion. is resoonslMo -‘or tho

UkTh


1C* au'.ust 47-A-PK-21-7—Meehan*

Court :.'c. 1.


Cravlr.£ up of tit 'oilgst and for the administration of the

treasury.■

Slevers was responsible for the entire edninictmtive
pro:lens of the secretary's office, bo kkeopln; r.r.u treasury.
Bocldcs that he Iso had to manage the «hn encrbe-Pubil g hlng
House. In June 1343 Professor Dr. Kentzel, wlso r.a»h£ other
things wt-3 Chief of the eusir.es? Xnr.r ir.£ --^vicory Cdu..o11
of the Reich Research Council, ,oint..d Slevcrc r.c -is
deputy. By this act clovers did not become r. jobber of the
Hoi cl’ Research Council tut held only an honorary position.

In a letter to the defendant Rudolf 3randt, dated C8
January 1343 Slo/oro doflr.oo his position as ?.clch
juolneas Monster of the Ahnenerbo as follows:

■My duty oar-ly consists In smoothing the way -‘or
t.io roaearoh non rad seeing that -ha tasks ordered by Uhu
nc 1 chofuchrer-S3 nr carried out in the qulokost possible
. On one thing I oortalr.ly cm form an opinion; Chat lo*
o.ic Mho ic doing the quickest Job.”

Siev vs received orders directly from Kin. lor or.
nttcro of rooerreh psaltpmnts for t. ; » /dinenorbe and
ho repo rt jd d 1 roctl• to Hi -: lor o n b uch c xpe rl?. nt 3.

Sicvirs devoted hi- ef.'ort to obtrlr.ing tne fur.de, materials
equl n 3ded by the reserve, workers, Cho rials

obtained b; clover includes ooncontrrtlon ca:.p .. ’used

::rerin„nt-l subjects. Than the orrrerioc. ndor «ay,

clovers made certain toot tn_ - -or _• being perform 3d in a
r.atlsfaotory manner. In this connection, Slovtvs hoc o so: rlly
exorcised his own Independent Judgement and -o fc. lllorizo
-lusolf with toe details of such assignments.

-IC-:: ALTITUDE ESPERISJe.5:

“he details of these expo rims nt= ere iiscioseu 1. otnor
ortlons of this Judgment. Slavers' rcfivitiua - . t.. hi^h

m75


1' August *17-A-P’i-2i-S-JCeefa8n.

Court :'-c. 1.

ititude experiments are revealed clearly by d-.c .vi.cnce.
Rascher lr. c letter to Hlaaler dated 5 April 1042 states
c.s follows:

■35-Obcrsturabar.nfuehrer Sievera took a vzholc da;* off to
•/ntch soe. of the Interesting standard experiments aC. may
have given you a brief re-crt... I .-a very much indebted
to Obereturabennfuchror Sievors as ho hes sho \ia r very
active interest in cy uerk In every respect."

ole vert e dal t tel tnat no report ad to Hliaalcr about
his visit to Dacnr-. On the basis of the reports of
Slcvirs nra Raschcr, ninaler authorized Raschor to continue
t..c high altitude cxrxrla^r.ta 1 .. Dac.v u, in tho course of
Which the ovldenc^ shows that 130 to 200 lnnr.tcs \:oro
o:pcrlEor.tcd upon; that 70 to 80 of tr.cn alod. Hnochor
bcccjna associated vltr. tno .^hnoRcrbc In Karon 1942 end
during th; or.tico tine covered by the period Of the hl&h
rltitudo irpcrln.nt8 Ra6cner was attached to C2ia .dinenerbo
and ocrfomoc’ the high altitude oxocrisonta with Its aoolstance
0:; 20 July 1.42, when the final rerort on oltltudo

cnpcrloonta vrs subsisted io Elmlor, Raschcr's name r.pponrud
or. tile lotfccrhca.. of th: ^hnenorbe Institute for Military
Scientific Research r- snowr. by the cov^r letter, and tho
ir.closud report bore th. stnt-n.nt that tho errperiraento had
been carried out.


1 „ ;.7-r.-AJ-22-l-CrfSS-: vole-r

•j rw. ^ —


j con,unction with th. .v.s-rci and instruct! n Association 'Has
., n, .n -rhc a - v-v rs naa act -1 -.nowl-d"-- of ’.he cr im i na l aspects of
the Beecher uxporl&mts. he was notified that Drcnri t-.r ..a:
to U. used. He liii-solf inspected th. xpci-L- n.s. He biasulf inspected
. Slews udaltted • told hin that aaveml

lied .s result of aiu. high altitude oxperisonts.

under those facts -levers is specially’ cr.nrj.osbl- with- the
crininal .specs of ti.se experiments.

ncszzw lessi *

so fore t... r.ijh .It.tide -xportsenas h .d actually be. r. cocoleted
sinr cxpjriatntc were ordcre r ad at Dachau. Hicy

wore conducted frc= act 1 C 12 to in. early pr.rt cf 19Ji3 b> -olaloehnor,
Finkc, r.tv! itaache:, 11 oi wr .01 vr ro officers in the -udical Services
of th Luft-if'o. Details cf tfu* .*tin^ experiments have bo n
ivun alaoirr.-ro in inis Judgaent.

In I y l?u3 • cher was transferred to thy *a2Ton-3S na tfcon
precc.dcd lone o conduct frocain- oxp.ri-.ntc in D'.chau until i.y
1 S/i 5. taachor advised the defendant uudclf Brandt t.iat .oles and
.uis3i no had boon used n eubj.cte.

TI-.o wits cos -e . t_st.fi _d * t defendant Silvers visited the
oxpericontal station quit aoUy dunnwr the friwslaj Xp&rlu nts.

dc too if led fi.rt.ur that m Syptenber l-.'t2 roceiv-d orders to

take the .. -rts _,d lu»..j »: 5 xp-n ~af_l svbj.ctc killoi in thu
-jcpcrLaonis tc irefessor ir» in cxrosrcir -*cr furt -_r scientific
study. t..nt t - trav-l nrrsni : r *• tr. • -t y Stovers;

and that the Ahne.no rbc Sccity id expenses for t».e -ranafor of
• : 8. Qae c: thu 5 oxperittcdttcl subjects

aiiiaun.

• ; 1 - . r - - ic ccrroVomtud in lnrre s-.rt by the iffid vita
t. defund 11:2 Rudolf randt md .ckcr-ftvjsuna, by th- tuStia ay


of th witness s Is a, -icfanlerskj, nd 'ie*c.\, and by thu docuowntary

Uii77


«> »•«


Au hi -aJ—22-2--t: 3S- /Jcr

ourt ’


acv in ah. record. In feu. SiJTcr'e clary, vert xc nu^rous
nc.s of Sib vers' activities in the aid o: Haseber. 1 February
15:J Sio •era acted ..'orts in obtainm, a: .mua, i^lu^nw, and
ehcsicals fer Rescuer's -xp risanvs. Cn t:.. 6u. end 21st rf January
19H. -i. 4 v«rs noted u j preblcs c: location. -vtsefcor reported vo Silvers
periodic ally ooacermn the atac s dot- -Is o: t •- :r--zin oxpv-ra-
aiats.

It is plain fr c t_ « record t: it tnv xvlationsui;. of Sieve-rs and
.\asc. er in in. pirloiuaneb o 1 irrozir.- axp-n-.wnss required Covers
tc xJco ti.u preliminary a r angi a m s icr toe periorainc-- of the
cxperlaonts, to fhmlinriib fclnaelf w.tn too progress of the exp-rl-
*.r.ts by personal inspection, to furnish noceseary equipment and
■tutorial, includln hir-in bcin;' us».d darin- tn- freezing ^xporliunts
tc receive end nalco p meres s report; ccncu.mng « , ad to handli

it ter f evaluati n and publication of such reports, "asicoll] ,
such aetiviti.s constituted a perforu-nco of hie duties as defined
by iiiavers in hio letter of 28 u.n-ary 19ii3 >a -udolf irandt in which
ne 5’ .ted L. Iv he SSKOtT.jd the w y for rusoarch work^n; and sir to it
h t hosier's orders »or carried out.

lin-.r thuso fee’s .~i. rs ir. chargeablu with Ch- crttinrl cti-
vitioo in these exper^ n s.

je’JAAIA 21-.X IS-

Details ol these oxp.ri- nts r ivtn -Is^whoru in this Judgment.
These oxperiaante wer. perforced t Dich u oy -chillin. and Flootoer.
The e'-idoncu shews th t -± v-rc -d knowledge of the nature and
purpose cf these criidnal n- r r:s.s and supported thus in .-.is official
. jsition. .

I CT *a£ TJI'fflIIS:

Ir.-sc ocp«rliiente ._r>. c<:.d.ctod in r.t ••at; .o.i-r {Jrnc.ntr tion


131*78


15 Att
Court


7 -.-nJ-22-2


.-Wt.r --ho s iparvisiau cl rrofessor -irt tn- vr.ivrsity cf
Strasfccur . -he Af.nonertx- ~:ci«-ty, and the defendant Slavers supaorted
hi a r.Search or. bc'v-li of the Si. The arran?er«.nas for -ho paynent
-f the resC-re subsic s of the ..hnanorbo - -3 cade by Silvers. The
defendant Sljvtra p-.rticipited in these e-::p- rinents ty actively
collai-oratins with t . dc. ndants *arl randt end Ridolf 'randt, and
and his rinc int, r.r. ia&er. T. j record shows

h-.t Siev.-rs w 3 .n correspcndenc*. w.th .. least is eftrly os

January 1 U, and that fc« estnbllshad coat cfc fc-tween HfcuLcr and HI
In i letter of 11 u-ntoabsr 19. ! ^ to C-luocks, Siovor* rrou that


Uk n-cess ry conditions existed .n JisttrtiUr "for carrying out our
oiltosy scientific reaoarch work." he requested ;iu,cks issue

the necessary authcri*..tiin for Mrt. Jimcr -r.d -.issolback to enter

il.r, .tad that aroviaic:; for Ukiir board and nccaaodaticn.

*h- letter ilao s studs

’Tr.e eXpcri.ae.its which arc U by porforr.ed on prisoners
arc •- be carried cut in four rcesza of an klreidy existing
a-dical barrack. cnlj sli.-ht cniyus in thu constructi.n
o:* bulidinro are required, in particular the install tion
hood ifclch can be produced with littl sate rial.

In accordance with attached plan cl the ccnstraction
aanr. cn-nt at ••r oil.r, I r qu»st that n.c-ssary orders
bo issued tc 3--.1 t carry out tn. reconstruction.

All the expenses ar.sinr out of our activity at
Matswenlor will cooivd by this office.’

In a -.tco rand jo cn 3 “oVUJbur 19h2 tc the defendant Rudolf Brandt,

Sievers c oplainta ..out certain difficulties which had arisen in

LI r the lack nl cooperation free the cafip officials.

h. stv-ed par icelary outr n* d ty the fact ti.at tho cart, officials

were asking tint tho cxpcrlaunt.nl priflonurw be paid for. * oortion

cf the aecorand.ua follows:

" >.on * think of our zilit-ary research work
c ^Iccu-d at -he Concentration Caop j.ckan,

I met praise and call sp-cial attention
to \h_ - enorocs and understand in- cas in
which rr work as furthered ti«_re and to
tho cooperation -re ~r- fiver.. . :.y.r.-.s f r
prir ners -s .-Vvr disCuss-d. - sc—is
:.i a; at . tsv-.ilur they re try inf to sake
such coney as -'cssial- vut of t..is c tier.


13i70


i c a ?-*.-kJ-22-k- -TCSB- losler
Cf^-T* I


•*'- :-c not co7':c.. v x.r3o jxi-jrzssTr^,
z. Better aZ Let, for tre snie f s -_i fixed
scientific icm, o. to t.- zi yrct-cll r.clp
to tn. it Vi: >rc nod by nd thc.t, to tie

o :=nr. ecplo _n _ . r lu -ncr cncy.

'mmt v r-a-.-ct-d to t\. . h-lp in : c« tr-.dcly oshion
in otttin; j one i c sorry cood:-.ions nt ^atxueilcr. Ik- dafcngr.ftt
;a£ol* Emndt mpliid t-c ti*o -xcor-nexa "n 3 ^occnbor 1>52, -nd told
-iv.urc jzz r~ ft-. d ..-.d rcc-'clon tc ap-cl ic re hi cor.cc, nL-.: theca
t: : icultlce, -kd Jut civ/ wo ld b. r-red'.td

« tcetin n; c* t>*. r.w;rj .11 -s t.. .t . .rexirat. ly 22 <’’

in...'t-.3 of ?. 8=1 a, Pel.oh, Cscc i _rjd j .: ier. afttiensli ty n. r ,xj trl-
•»atbd x* r. by Mrt nd : la collate " t-rs*, .i>l ti nt :. vcxim- ly 3-
«V~ "•».© cf t; . et .-i_i:t-l out? cto ToJuntc.reJ. During t..-.
catirj por-.jd • these .sp.rlAmts tort • xr vvoci'.Ud vith the

Atv-narN. Becii,

Ir. j.orl. * l .• t nd r -v-riecd ’h.vir !• .rvo L-rr.

tft Loot •xjtriicais on report -nt tl<d ;ro?aatd .>■ utient of

;.-ir«air. c\ s.d c?- In. r rtvfl uter‘:jd - f-cs .. j

Inoti* .t f^ *\ 1 li -~J Sciaoti': .8, rtt, jepu-t r.t H ei the

Ab..n.rr-., It* e.d ot tin or.nb.ur cal tituui. LL-hv,

•• • •> • • *: inj » -o dub to Lort -as arc c-nt .o. £i,v;rf

.-.r-. -yi .a of trio r-yert. Ul 31 - re.. siW

-r -'.c. ft c 7'coav;n - f ihn r .;crx oivia* .nr. brood “<w«u5 .n tl\>
‘L^d el c -rlo -1 rfcm, .*ic _rr ir.fc-.x^d 2 .—.rdt beat '.trt ! ?
ti~ii -r.c :*•. Ms - ;<• i.ic la rr-uv^l by bicv-sr'a

lctr^r L «*oIf Inadfe rr. .1 “pnl Lari xanit edited th-.t

to. -rord n -f hu ru.-tr fd: u cl .or tr.-t xv-rL:ents hod beir.

cord'Oet-.-b r. .viz. o b- .n l.

'ie vrt t.ct.ii.a hot or. 23 J r.’i rj 15 3 x.t to -ntnroilar
conccatmtlcn cm nnc e x it- : -'.h :! , roer sxtr.rricioc c-neomln?

rt’s lea . • . n

■- .-3 ia. lu'I-jd .. telftL. .-j ..„'r;vr. t : *r.i .rornit • sdfc3 eta


51i*80


SleVers testified that


Lost


- r.-.s rxfwl. On tl.e visit


ci 2p -an-v-a-/ 1913, Silvers -'■ t-n persons *»k had cn subjjcted
-- i* st exterijc.ats zed s .tehee -irt c.aan-Tc the ta.id_-.es ca one of
t. i.raone. iiu-xrt testified t,\st in -arch 1?13 he eked -irt
better -a; c: the experimental 5ubj etc had suffered .-: m iron Uio
•-xperixunta tar r-c told by Hart that tvo tf tie. experimental subjects
had di_-d die tc OU;er C USeS.

it ic eviuent t*.at Siavcrc : s crirunr-U;" cca.ioct.a vith these

ocporlcunta.

3i- k ...Z?. ^rRKTIlTC:

TncS' jcptrlncnte er. c-r.ductod at fro.. 2uly through

Sr.7Urhor i-U. Eot-ilr o Uxac oTpjriacr.ta arc -xpl:*ined els.. 1 e> -
the *h-d-r.. at.

* r - f jneti;.-. c: tru . u : .n . thj pjrfc-a.tr.ee c! e. r* A r

.xp r—er.ts cc.due ted :t fl.ci: * • dy trrou h -uptcrb.r 19M, rr.s

pr-.j/iy ir. crrt.eetion with the funuehir* of r?*ch rrJ u,aijcwnt for the
-.:. on.aento. Silver- thus* r..cca :jt' an n «. to or. hebilf

of Ahntr.cr:c. as : result of Sc,.-Oedjr'c r.o .-t'« -lanltr
ijcr;. h urv.-.tt for -..-a.ssit:. to o,,rfona tf..ce. ate ex-.urla-nis on
- a ir. etciau, H;atler direct. tn i July 10; l that t!.. -xoeriientK
.e rde ca jypslts and trjx C . -. oorao.ic -ith other r.clii qualities
- su Jccta. ~ r .t%*iscd by hleali r'e cf.'ice -1

: -*•/ utdcrlsaticr. for -xperi.i.r.os aa the .ajci.cr st..tion *t
i -cV.u ,

Cn 27-i. a; Jur. 19U;, .sohor ar- r.place*! \, .lo-.t-ier 3 head
: •. r..r..—. . for - ctlflc -CCerCS ». iiciau.

5- v-rs, .... 2etn of j ly, v_.at tc -d.au . c :n! .rr-o litd rloct-
•a r -* -h Xor^a-rb. --duty ..-.a . _■ jcdiat cirlboccx, who .*s to

-r ora tft -xpcrtm.r.tjs, c-r.c-: .rcc-ticr. l th u sea rater

—’-a, tv-ii- bilit;- c. -rrrkin-- sp.ce : . : ■ rs

r.tc vc.-a i_. apace «*. .-ioatcor's L.urrtc^nt ar.d t tho

111:31


1 •.


- • - 2- -*r r3- alcr

3mr*. I


: - • .

Cn V-. 2 ta ci vulj 1' , -_i.Vi.rt: neck . :t.o report to

»:- r _-.2 cc-icemi . :--.ailr .. :._r ccuf-trervco .t Let-:. ti nrera vrroc
*- x r».-cu *_1 autjucts oc i.: ccc.-i_<<i ted c:, H our' 1 research

n, : -t the A hn e ncr ^o *x.ulc upply 1 bor tory, that Or.
rlc.-tn-.r *r.lu -jlvt ria tsristanco, h-lo cna -tdvic. t? the tuft-
. . Bloiana perfomus the c«xr 2 i*.r;ta. fii v.rs els.o vtAtod the number
-nt_ 'Si-{.-rent cf .K personnel te lu oq£Lcycd, ati .it in. t: it tnc
rerk *ould cover -cr-od o' thro- r.uks • oc} '.ri noted 23 .July 1«»U
* ‘ C ‘ J ~ ~ r . ! .. • peroon* VOTC

.vaUabl., -wd *a r— cc - ndoi -i r-c-i/ed tin r-.c-j ary --rdur
iron leal r. In unclusi^n, .xpr.si-J nxr hr;*, tirt *he

:r r.- aijite -r. cr. lie i do '~ald Turrit c. successful co.id nt f
c iX.-crls-.iita --U-: -«• rUd _nt 'ckn.- U:-r._nt bo cock to os-vUr
-a a p-.rtAcI \n. in t* - •; >»r _r.t: .

ir. -Ho uot t. ay il.vvr* . k :t ho r..id . ( »*c.-..n -hu above
- 1 p -r»: r.-.d coni err d i : i lbo-.cK l I . » B tha utt-r
l .Jic-ten, o love re k.v.* ». -»• c :.c.. r t.mo - i ; . U .*_.n vnre tc bo

Jlurtn r\; ki.c-rl.-Jn , r .l cr. o-.rtici ot.d .n -ua ..-.ur

x-_r -r.-i .

:-35» ;j-

Iv!.*.:L.e -w-Bcrx -l.- ui .s .rc^rSo.r.;5 1 : c ;.tm-d -la .where
-n titt* vocUennt. -lomrn f-.rUci;*tod in the crislral typhus _zp-;i-
- Rt • eocxmeuef cy *.: r. n -cr.cur.tr *- •. * o- r. -«t,r it .b^v Hl r

9 tr . r e Cw^s'jy 'rrn xTunts ui corc.t^ctl n - _ c . *^r.

-rfacnt-cl sufcj-'- '.r., .. ,r_r tivo uddoas tXioioom to

» much tion irlth Its

.

r. - us: 1 .J, — =c. _r r. ror.; ‘r -~l r .Mr


lli.u2


1 C All -2

O'/ort I


r -.n.ru nta ::o= ichiri-.c t-. .m, . .r, re r.s. * .1 ii-v c -s

♦6 ECifc u-.i i! Vie a . oa red CCMWtr&tica c_-.._ SJAtOS for hid : r- jp-.:..
:.xit is sr. isto - le' tor e; 3 U -cjieaer 1-/13 frc_i Sievurs tc --apea
in w ico i' lie: t.-j* he will be ?isd tc ;ssis_ 4 or.u ha* he is
cccrdin..2y cc.itact.ins; the rcer Ecnrc'- to xmo -ne "dtsieed pei-sor.:el u
l'iced it i’en'.e d;rr cal. af r cult o T ..leverc' e'fcrtc, a hundred
n^utoa 6r a-:i <-d lr r. .vustr.r, - -< •• tcr-iiler for ‘•lapen'c *i::Feri-

• erperiaontation, because of

tneir ;.i if d .ii c . .id.tor.. *■ uecor.d rou of om hundred «.a
*.j. n ando .vu liable. f.aae of tr.es c wrr irod y in «n as ex.criaental
aubj«cta.

‘••at t. • - vuiu- w re csrrl.T' out :n v. Ahninorl JxporLapiital
atit.jii in Nutcwcllor, is proved by excerpts froi r.:onthly ro ports of
the carp doctor in t* .-«• :1 *r. • ccurr .

non~Ocr ^Ui exporinuv-.1 cub.' ct , ruct result c.‘ treatment

to *r ch ir.rj lore rub.' ctid.

t .'L' a L - r^LXJISt

..viden.fi --.d bean .ntroducod d.. in'-* tot cc no of the trial to
: h«weferifunt: to tost th< -•f r ic"cy of blc*o cc slant ; ',-oly-
al r tj cond.ct«d or. -.ichiu Uf Vy roach or. in 3lo«:rs' Diary
rh -.o ti.. ti.. ct rnJ:tnt hni .trxvlei c of lctiM.tlos coi.cornlir .ho
tvdtic’i oi‘ rly.- l. j-a *. M h l- nt h a support tc the conduct

r: the ,r.ts.

:s:r e:ll.:c c:u c::o..

3Ultra -.5 cc r-.d niur h* >13c r-rr -it:, participation ir. the

U • '-2 ' *B :r : : - L v - ikjl;t:n collection

: r C c.rb -r. . rrity • * :r -.


1 -io3


r» August ^7-A—' *-?3-l-jrc. s (hauler)
:c*-rt 1


r-nron. i's x ' racuest by tfc* deiea * -t Rudolf Branrt, Sievers
ufcxi"V>d c: e'i :“bnary i'C': a ep.-rt y -r. hirt of the Uiuv i 1 -

sity cf Strasbourg ?n the desiratiUty cl assuring a Jewish Skeleton
collection. In this report, Hirt &nvocat?d ovirvght murder of "Jewish
Uolahavlk Cctndaaars” fcr the nrccuracer.t of aush a collection. On 27
February 17-2 \rdclf 7rant infers 4 Sicvjrs tfcv. Hirnler would support
« /*: rx a d wc ry at hit disposal.

'frandt ask^: oicvora u i/fo:- Kirt accorii rly and tt rep rt again
on tie subject, Co 2 Poverber 1C«.2 wiev^rs racu acted Brandt to maze
the necessary erranr fronts with the Reich Lain Security Office for
providing 150 Jowirh inentea frt uschwltc to carry cut this nlan.

On C hoveeMr Tindt inf creed Adolf Etch -Ann, the Chi-if of Offi’u
17-3-4 (Jewish Affairs) of tl:- Reich i'-aifl Sje*»rlty OfCico to put
everything ct Hirt 1 * dtopo&al ihich no nocecaaiy for the cor.pl tIon
of 1 1 .< skoletcn collection.

Fruc Slcvtr ; i’ lettr to 1 '.cbma-a of 21 Juno 1?«J, i. is apparent
that 3C Havptaturufucrr-r Baser, a coll bora tor of the Ahnonnrbo Socioty
cirri <'d ou; the rolidnwry .tori fir 'J*. ns a Jv of ts u skeleton

collection in the Auachwitc Oc.nctntrntion Cai p on T cwo, 30
"worsen, Pelt*-, nd h Asiatics. The corpses oi' thu victims wuro
sent in throe shljasnta to the Anatomical Institute of Hirt in tho
Strasbourg t dviraity.

the Ailiai Armioc :icro

early in Saptcnbor 19d ; Sieve*a dispatched to Rudolf Frandt the
following teletype auastge.

"Subject: Ccllc-tion cf c* fish Skeletons
"In -C'fortitj »il' the rnx^unl <-f - February
1?42 i* i:. ..'man, of 23 F«.fci-_ary lvAi...

3S-Gt iriavf-i nr Professor Hirt planned the
.-.iti-rt . oii.ee. .if A-wi o. -

to the extern cf the sclent:f - *:r' ca-inated


thrvnteniV to overran -hrarbourg


llii *4;


19 hinst r—23-<-CrcssiEarnerJ

Ccurt 1


- r.rowitr, chi reparation of t.- s-eletonc is
net y*t CC'C .-C :c. ' in. asks with reject to
the tine needed for 80 sped sens, a-d n case
tr-j ends': .n ,^ ef Strrarcurp hue to be reckoned
*ith, .on to proceed with the cell ction situat'd
in the dinsc-:ti*;-rcen of th -natecical institute.

} • is .’.ble to carry out thn nficoration aid thu3
r«nd* r til sc irrecognizable. The, ‘mowr, -art
of the ontiro or would have b*cn partly
done in vain, * .t would be a gr* at scientific
loss for tl-ls anicie collection, b.icnu.*»o hcrlnlt
casts covM c~ bo -*le aft- rw.rda. Tho skeleton
eoU«*cti ”i vi such is not cousoicicun. Viscera
could be do:l\r.d • -ennants ci cor ocs, apparent¬
ly left in t;.o anv»oe:.ca? i statute by cl ■> French,

An'* or do rod to :t emitted. J»cisicn on tv.
following vo orals in r cu'.stod:

1) CdUcti on nan •. nrcservod.

?.) >llu*.xrn is to be parti. iicsolvoc.

'} Z t. -o r-ollectio-. is t-: r.. dissolved.

Sicv.-rs”

The . u xr -ua vid the diarocting r -or-o of

' Institute, *< by the French act-er.t: r After the lii. r^ticn
atrarbo Tk , oi t u *! pria story of chess inliherate turners
v!i.ch s -.;as a party.

Il'v.irs . n. fTcr. the first r c-nt he r -civid hirt* s ro;>ort
’f F«--.rr T f ._ that r.-' _r _ur :<-r vas ylsn • d for th» itc cure-icnt

: thi orel. t n. c U ontijn. : iverth- le ss -actively collaborated in
"* project, ..t * o ;lcy- of Ahn-<ter;c to oakc tfc< prepare—

~ -°*'le~ T a conej-.tr:tUn crusp sc lure. -i‘.r, »nd provide!


Luo5


in August 17-/.-S--2>3-Cros3 (*a=l r)
Co; rt 1


:' ti trantf-r rf .h. victims frcn Ausc.aaits to '.'atswciler. 3Iu safe
-.rra-vcr? r.tc thuc Lr : coliccti_n b» iosurcyad.

•>ibVors« -uilt under this 3oucific£t’.cn is shown without question*
Siev* r ■ o 'fors t>o purported defenses to the charges « gainst
•In: (I) 7 t . wt d pursuant to superior orders; (2) That hr was e
r.-rh r of e itdst&oco novoaent.

The first rfsfcn&tf is -.irolly without ;i rit. Thdro io nothing to
show that in t:.c co fission of these ghastly -n:. s Silvers acted

• ntin ly pursur.et to orders. True, th<basic poltci.s or projects
which he ca rl-rf t rough w- re- de-; ' d u; • n by his sup- riors, but
Jn the ..x-.ct ticn of the details "•L rs had an unlinit-.d p©w r

of discr tier.. The I-fondant says that in his u sition ho could not
have xvfueod an aasijpiawnt. Ih* fact r-oains that the. record she as th j
cas. of sev ml acn who did, nr.d vho havo lived to toll about it.

Sieverr* second satt-r cf delonce ia uquPily untune. U- In
support of the. jf nso Siuvcrs offered evi* moo by which J.t he pud to
prove that ro early oa 1933 hu bocase n bJeb-.r of nocr*.t resistance
,u:ii w-co -ett d It 'v.r’.hr-r- th - .fi . a, and to asstr-

rinatu “itl r ni H«.rl r; tJat os a 1 « a ding : - .-J - r of th*. iroup,

I v rs obtain d v. - «p-oin?r.'x»t as K».iuh Business I’niu^r of tho
Ahf. ntrbt sc th t he could bo close to Hintltr o'-d observe his
•nvffltnts; that if this position ho bec&nc oncochod in ft revolting
cr a*s, ?h sub -t .It r of t:is i-d‘ctu- 1 ; th -1 J. retained
.*• 9ns in- as .• r-r n advice T is -x-sistanoc. li-aior to p.-.in vital
inforcatic r; . we. 11 :-'.tcn t.u ay -f thi overt ro>i of the 'asi
■AV'rs.ct, th- liborati n of thu h< 1-1-ss peoples coring under
it: dorlnatico.

Assuc g all t t: nrs to bo true, - cannot s-t r ow they
*

-y • ur.d as a f-r Si. vers. The fact rtic.air.fi that .v.ur i-ro

. c'-ri* . A ; -th .-xpcmCrn -f *h * :n.r c rain.«t ccimtlnss

• ,cusan~3 rf wrote ;t c:-.cefAnti . car.; *c.o had net tho


11466


August r.>-23-Af<Jross(Raml-x)
Cass 1


•lir-test ^«na of resistance. 3i- • rs directed tn.' program by which

these cnrd*-.ra > sro cccrdtted.

• •

It cert'i'll;* ;= -iot th< lan that a rsaista-ice vort-r can
corru-t no cr‘. rid loast of ill, against tha vary people },„ La
bveposed tc ': ; srctwctiog
IZF&Sa-I? IT ~?J2 T’AL CP.CASI ATIC:.’:

DrvJftr Court Pour of th- In lie t-. ant, olfram SUv. rs is charged
ltl. b.iry p. r.-.-. v c-r of an or^n!?a-._oa do-dared criminal by th< Judg-
& nt of the Intw.-.tional Jilitar. ri' -n&l, -ncaly, the £3. The
Evidence chows that ~©lfres Sicvrs bacanc s renter of tbo SS in
>35 find r*nftli«<t a x arbor of that organisation to tr - end of tho w-.r.

*s n ccci-T of tU SS ho woo criminally implicated in the c omission
of ‘"ir SKjb-.j and CrLaea arninot Huaanity, as ch»rg*id und-r Counto
TV? and Three of tr.. Iibirtant.

C.JLS.PJ*?.£JL££

"ilivary Tribunal I fin ns end ai.Hid'*ao eaa doiundent "oifran
a undar Count* 7n r«w «?,d ?our of th« Indtctoont.

F-C^I :

The acfcrj't.^t ho:. Ic ch t?> d with -~i?l r .opens IK lily for,

-nd partioipr.ti n io typhus and tpidomic Jaundice exjv'rimbr.tB.

Tl.c Inttor rharjo h«*s been ao»'.dc<rv.d by tbs Fi '-ion.

Evidence "io off red corpora'' - “owe 1 s_ criminal participation
!n calf rlr or -rimntr at Dachau, %lt!.o*:?h he woo not naoed in tho
indictment m o c of thi c f ndants jrrtioularly charged with cr'm-
n-1 rvopcos b lity in connection with italtria xp-riaents. Cuostiona
t r- sontr.d by t ir ait; aticn will fb discussed later.

Tl def-‘ dc’t -c io a physician of lr.rgo o-~* ricncc, for
— ny y*-tr? r coeniscd as an x~ rt In tropical diseases. "... studied
-dicino -t v r-itins of 3-rlin inf r.rLnu, .'fid was admitted

U prseti - , :■ .1 f 1921. Aft r nr.- - es interne in sev ral

1Ui07


••


1 ? Au?ii t :-VS - ?-5--Iress (P-ad-r)

Court 1

-eiic’il h~ -sccirni a. .roinfca t on tr.e staff o‘ the

r - -rt 1 j :: I stiiuto :n Eeriin, ’-r ai served on the -taff of
- islLerfc " iv-rsit? o»- for th»oe o'-gagei in t:.n private

practice c: riicl-o r. : «i<tel b*rg. In 192S ho *cr,t to Chir^,
vhoro he re i-c Until 193*-, o cvpy'jj; important posit.:-.s \a r.cdical
aiviaor to T . e C'i .ooo Goveiixuot.Jo 193b he returned to 'J-r-r-iny end
heca-o herr* of the Cepi-Uvni for ”-;yica>. Medicine at tr.«- Robert
Koch Institute in ?erJin Lite In «..rust l r 39 :.e .roir.ei the Lifixpffe
«i*h the in it ni -irr- Lieutanant in tV Wal Corps. I.» tn.it
service ho *»-a c rdosioned r figad;cr S-rsi-IL ii the Racer.e and
continued >•» active duty until the tr 4 oi th» Po ».-f Cc.iocV-
Witt ti U yp-Leai .« "rop-cal. 'dedicioo to t> o'i f of the J'edr.ca?.
3e;-«B oi .'t- i. it ?rcu i ?ll, <:c a-« At Co:i-nJ.t«.ib in to® ruef

r f defendant Kaailcjur .ro tos oeiicd :.cvi*cr t>. r ~. Conti In .-aatiori
pertaining to tr: ilcni iiew- j * V. - the • *.v ;:omj d-jvc d practically
all ol rle i j-o to hlr diii'j .'multoot to thu ChioJ if tl-e
’odioal Service -f the la-ft-iffo. F.V.p/co, ;«J after 1 .'on-ary 194i,
th»> i«r>s:«a t ler.roeer.

’ .•-.. O/. ! ’? I: : n_ :

Vedl^u 1 nijir anal in cj nonetion Kith, vdtrit * -to carried
-a at Dnohv c..--u. tr.»t>n c-p V F.ri.«v !?«/. •nf.l the end of
tV - nr. Vr.sn e* sneants >.*•■% cc.iii.cted uxetr Tr. lieu® Schilling
for the ;.ur o .f .Tcrvi"-".* a cethod of ertebiinhi-v; infinity against
nniaria, Pul the .'u.tc cf t.o e^eriasirta rebahly as r.ary r.o
l,t/D3 inmates of -fcc c.ncentrdion ct_-p -? uooi is 3ub.;«.eti. of
l. r e>-.-rir«rr.;. v ery ny cf thrsc percent ire n^tisneln of coumries
other than -r- c - '-' 1C fi*i *-t volanteer ‘or t. c exjeriaeata. 3y
credible evi' i est iii^.Vd th'.t ■ yrrxu.'tely 30 of th.c oxperi-

• »•*!ttl sub :t: died as 2 direct r- - It of ti.o ox;’■riaents and that
=ony • .-re a.r:utf^d /rea causer olrt- tly Honing free the experiments.


1? artist 47-A-ff«>t-Gr38sCRa=aer)
Court 1


1 di'ir 'O'—~ >r -.a n'tionals.

'ith r-firc-.-e .,im'? :&rticipation u i! ese exp-rlae»it3 the
r* : : '-ns J.c following: The defenOv.t iose h^d boon acquainted

ith -chi'-- * r r.u>«r cf years, having b m !in successor in a
position -*co eli by Schilli'ig in the *-ccert fcoch Institute. I'naer
ditc 3 F-bru'ir 1941 , Rose ritiog to Schllli tg, then in Italy.,
referred tc : lctt'-r received fr : chilli*;, in which, the latter
r-nuested '•nrlarl/ spleens" ( Spleens t>- t ,'rr.-. the bodi'-s of
persons fted died fres aalaria ). Rojo in roply cs,:ed for
i'lforr/tlo*' cone r 1 - t.'e exact nature ei t c teriel desired.
Schilling *rc tc A A-ril 1942 free, --nchau to hose *• Pcrlin, stating
that he had •ccci^ited a porsen intrac^t-ne usly with Sperecoidos
frer the »liv- ry glands of a far. lo anr ..cles which Rose had sent
hie. Thn lettor co'<ti<

To r t io onc.'-id inoccul'ticn I ri.88 the

Scnreooidea ix Uriel bccnuco I do net

pease .a t c "Serein Rose" in the e»*ophelcn

yot. I you :culr1 find It { rxiblo to to d c la

thn next *ya a few n’lophelos

infected with "Str'in Rom* (with the lest

csfei': e -1 two out cf t<iO Lto*c wore


lUrf?


15 A.. U7-v.-AJ-2ii.l-Cact_n-
Cs.ri I Case 1


infect .d) - ro_ld leva the possibility to
cc .tir.a-. taicoxp- rineut and - would
naturally re -tr t..ankful to ycu for t. is
new tu per - of =. work.

* icsquito r-..im- and the _-xperisents
toc-. d c-txf.tatorily and i ac *=crkin, new
on 2 lx tertiary strains . 5

*-•>« latter bears the ..ar.chm.tten ondorss^nt, "finis. cd u 17 «pril

l\2. L. . HO 1 7/1:,' which evidor.ee clearly rcveils that *-ese had

- -l»cd with Sehillin '» r q>« it for so to rial.

hehtiling a-ain wrote, -xso Iron ^achau -alaria Station 5 July

191.3, thnnkiru- itoao for his letter ana *U.e c 0 ns. 5 nr. 0 nt ol -aroparvus

er s. iho letter continues:

“•ivo per cent of thee brought on v.tcr
••mr.t dewn and wero t.crefcre unfit for

development; tho rest ot then hatched

alccst ICO ocr cent.

"‘honks to ja jt solicitude, achieved
a a in; the completion of =y breed.

11 1 * 0 spite this fact 1 accent with tr«-at
pleasure your offor to send no your
axcess of 3 . now did you dispatch
this ccnoiTient: :ho r suit could not
have been any better!

•rl.as- tell : rauleir. Lan»t, -ibo a paruntly
tak'j err of her breed with rr .ater skill
and tuttvr success than the prisoner
“t, any thank trouble.

"a.* air. .ay •incero »• nks to youl a

‘he “’prls-nor .euuurt" otntion.d in the l»t r was doubtless the

witness su st - , she t stifled fa n al concurniit-

tn. ar.laria o/p.rlaur.to. *-csc wrote Sciiillin 27 July 19U in nrawtr

to the Latter'a letter of 5 Vl A 191*3, a .tine be woo p^.d the ship-

ae-nt of e. s rrivtd in rood ord r ix*d had prov.ju useful. . also

•; -ve he information the*. another =nipc_nt of -.nopholus «- r would


u\. ' all cf 15 2 .tcac r.s TeCer-t at thu "Cold Coni mr.ee.'

. in ..urrivr.' nm* he arc -vlzl-_c;r*r deliver ..is lv-:ter>. on tr
-r zinc ezp.rirunts -r,.ch had tnr.cn L.Ce t Ctcr.au. esc kstifl d


19 Av . 7-A-*J-Zh-2-OaE-4
urt I -fii 1


• ..•.t i' :-r the conler&ncu nc talked with clzlo^-.ner, too --old r.iffl
t C rryir.- eat o£ V yoiclocical exp-riaents on hucan bainee
reposed -: ?n .iin a troandous oRsal burden, addin tout he hopod
never weld rccuiro another ord-r to conduct such weporjaonts.

It is isooosibL. to loll-ivc that durln th* yc»rs 19W ind 19h3
. -obo m a un .fir of malaria axperirents cn ! uutn beir.jp which wc-r t
pro?russin- at Dachau ^nd«.r .chlilin , cr to civdit <>s«- w*-h innocence
ci knowledge that th. i-iiria r.starch was net c«n.'u..d solely to
v eematiorj desired for th- -nrpofo of lttunitin; ti* persona
vaccina tvd. Cr. tit. contrary it is clear that Koso soil
twM bci» 3 wer- Is.in, u a A in tfc. concentration cos as subjects for
-.'lie .1 tftperi nnt.ti n.

henrur, no td.iudicati ~n winner o 1 ratlt or innocence rrill bt

t - a. for ;ri. Inal participation in .h^c. Locporinftnta,
for the fcllo<rln reason. In pr-parin' counts two and tr.roy oi its
.r.oietaent ti>- . roe-'.ution ,l.ct d to frae- its ploadu*- in such a
.,ruv.r ? e crarfc II daicadn .ts with t.. -.cm scion f 'r crista
■A - L: ilnat •ai.nit;, -n r . lly, vl .t the its tie*. to naac

in eh auH-rir wrapt. d. lin;-. -1th aedicil -xperic.nta cnly those
defendants , -rticularly c. :-vd with r sronaibillty for -'.eh particular


ilea.


I . tot - > :ii ■. particulars

.:xi r s, ix. c w,.cv, *. dvcLar .tion to t!._ j^..n r.tc apon d.ich they
Mrs .;.r.ia>l to r - . pn. u 1 ir d fdnSes, that only au-h ixr-

sons «r are eta lly - iod r.u d.ci .. t.d uspaxlBwits r«oul<l ta
- « u-/r. to dofuiid .'.-.in;'*. opecific it.as. Ir.clac 1 .1 i:. tho

1 = t ’! -.-Ji s 1 -cs- ..£.:,l.n?: r v-ciiically c.r.rt d with r.s:or.-

;:r n-L»ri.i ^xptriaonts th*. niSfc .1 does not i poir.

*. r: . r -ilo b- r. j'.s •-!. cifair -o tfu, wvf^nd-nt tc find .. a


if l aa c«‘'..re!w .lto


19 -- 1.7-*-Aj-2/-3-CMia

Ce»rfc I C'S'- 1


r ri 5 m _ ac.-n that the vid-new acrl-c.d by v... *roaccuti n

a ia^da tea th -> -dually or..*r: d igainst Soso,

“o tr._nk it hod probative nine -a .-col of tfc act cj -os-'s know-
varw v xp-.ru;-station u?cr. c neentntion canp irar.tcs.

TTPK’JS fcZrERBE -.151

Ihcau experifioaw *tru carrl-dout at 3 .ch.n. aid and ..'atzwdldcr
C.ncont. ition Co-pa, -v-r a period extend!:* frets 15u2 to 191*5, in in
attaint to preeui*'. - protective typUu vr.ee.no.

IB the copcrlflbiital block at Suchwwald, with Dr. Lin? in ohargo,
in-* tea of ;h- c=mp won. Infected with typhus fer the purpose of
irocurlJic • continuing su. ply of fr-sh blood t:.kon irac person::
mifforlop froa typtauo. Other innatos, aame pr-viouoly ianuai nd
ao<ao not, were infected with tophus to d-sent--rite the efficacy o!

recoin • rail particular* of th-at ueporioento sm b.^n given
jlaevhoro in h. judnaent.

Thrao visited yuchonwuld In coopany with Cdld-ixisUr of the
• ct-. :t Kock institute ir. the oprin of 191*2- At this tlao Dr. Dim;,
vria absent, sufforlsr free V'bua -.3 th- r nalt cf tn accident* 1
lniecti.’n r^cuiv.«d t>..:l x^oot.m is j(-erlr>Qntl fil lets. .oso

inspected ..Xforlf»n .1 tlec rh*.r-- h- raw tiny rorsona saffurine

rot i. thu tnrdr and lcok-d at tho clinical

raoas with cover® - t in t -control case* end.

lif -tor c a i nsan- » os-- v c ./tt-.d.-

The itaf tary. md r t a 1 - - - - ' l ?-»

r -\ jTr i Tl - v uc* of • rcc.r.-s »‘or lxaiunisefcloa, st. t.c that 2o persona
rare inoe-ilacod i h * coir, free i cienat, sath a note "--ils

- Liable by .refessor ore, who r -. -d it froa

*

•tor-rofeosor fti fr ••rest."’ Hoso denied tort he

ar aetrt vaccin. to -ruyowsky or wins for
c--ky, fr«a - rlin under date I* -ay 1=12 wrote nest as fellows:

’ ~ll[92


19 A 17--.-r.J-2. 1 - -Crain;
- virt I - sv i


4 - ar rrcfvsaor:


--w'.ch ihyaiciar. -1 .nd .'-lice :w *
c ns-.nt.- '.o the .xcc’_ti *r. of . x?crixu.;ts
to tost typhus vaccines. tl ; fort

.2k you fo’l.t -- hsvt, the vice:nos.

•The or oT qu.cticn -hich you ruined, is
to whothur t i u louse cm be inf-;tod by =
v-ire mated typ.MS . iticr.t , -.ill also be
dc-.lt vith. In principle, this also has
bt n appro-. ,d. -f-tx nr , hovcve:, still
see- (lif.'ic-ltL, s .t tiv aoir-at about the
practxvtl „t. cat ion, cine. ^ have ;t
;.r.:«n- oc f cUttlei for r—dm- lice

"Your tup.-sti u lout Olesent Las ecr.
pass a cn to th» bspurtasnt of

. lied ei It .ill b- :ivan
c *»ider;ticr. in iuc ccars-. n

/rcB a note on th< Ltw, it ap ears that Hose eaa absent froc.
Berlin and ns not expect./: tc re turn mill ••»«*.. T.;e !• ttar, how-vor
r.lwrs ; r.vicua :..v ct -cth Host and to ;m. so.- -sti. ns mdc by

ladical experitt^nta on bu*an bom^s. Rose
.n off jet ooa.tt.0 that he 2nd for.'.rdod thu -ucfiaror-t v.ccin- tc be
tested at .chcawald.

At a -vut.n. of v r^s^ltin ifcyo-.clans of the jcJuvucht held In
•'-v l !J Dir.; r- oe r ,crt <n rf.ich he d-ccribad the typhus eXj.or.-
Bants he ted been purfoAla it ' .-“.hen.' Id* ...sc hoard tbs report
at th. tcutln- aacf then .net then, b.r.ct-d ntxenply t-i fthi aetji ds
: by Ding in conduct n- th expoilxcnta. as toy ^11 b- ixn -ined
r: is rrlcst r. ud c. iSidorcblo discussio- iaon> those r-.sont.

binf Diary sh: * t t, uuhs-quent to this a.’mr .xperiaents
» i- it * he Insulation of U doJ . oso.
>.e ..try sadur d-*. of c - rch i^Wi xhich refers to ' tr.phus V ccinu
-ecrxria.-r.- 1 5en.es VII, • -p.;rc - i llors:

.*■ -S‘.ed by Z lor.el ... e. Of tha cir-coror,

rrc*. -ooe (Cnrat ..rst) th. vaccine

a..-, -a* (Ipaen-*urino- accine) pr.>-

i .-. fxm t.-ur liv r by ’he national scran
institute .'cp-.nnn -r. x t-sted for its
c cpv.ibil: ty cr. --.uaens. r*- rx r .re

vaccinated i r . izi .izat cr. by .ntr ususc-.rir
injection...10 persons -re cc-wzplatud for
c.ntrcl 4 cc.?-_riscr.. U cl 3^ parsons
*cr. il :.niatt-d before vno st rt of the


1? .»•>!' -2J;-5-C-c.r.

C.- rt I '..lac i


"-rtitle 1=1 bee us. j inter 6v.-at

’ '. - xper

r infected on lo a ri 1 Lit iy subcetenuous

Induct! r. c; 1/20 co spotted fever sick /rash
blood... . 1] ... fell sick: i) 17 persona

c scrloutlyj b) 9 persona
c. 're 1, -ii-j, ? seriously...2 Jun U*;

.ku cxp&rl.: . .1 series -is concluded. 13 Jun
“k : 0i:.rt ana c :c history' ccaplcted _nd sent
to tcrlin. o deaths (3 .xo^nharen) ( control).

Dr. Lin* ."

%on n nttKoo stand • so Vi 1% chftllan od tho crr-.ct-

r.wsa of this eo^ry in the -in- lisry one flatly denied that ha had

sent c Copenhagen ru sky or -.w for as. it Buchcnwnld.

?hu nrootcaticn a>t tnia chsilr by o^forinr in evidence letter

frnt ftosc to tott'owak. <bud 2 Bcc-ebcr 1?JJ in which hot stated tiirt

h'* :, ‘ d “* hla « nuober c: son Us cf '. n jrt urine virus typhus

v c °ir. * rarnred fra aico l .vera, tfclcfi, in snlsal experiment*, has

be... much more c f.ctivt t, n thu vaccine or.acred from th, lunpa of

nic-. The Uto.r continued:

’o d cido idiethcr tr.la first r.te aurin.
vaccine al: aid be uaad for protective
raceIncti o of mean b. in*.a against lice
ty:>hu3 it would t. deairabl to know .1 this
••r.ccine should in year ana wiry's .xr^ri-
r^n*.al arwv exont at BueUanld in eff-ct
sLt :1 r to that oX tb< clas c v rus v cc...,s.

" 0 ^1 y ° b - -bl to hate such an -xp-ri-
lontal seri-o carried ut? -nfortunately
‘could not r -

ridorlng the alow.-.-os of .-octal coca :ati ns
x rfculc fc-. grateful for n .r •/<...■ ...

-. e let .r shows on .= i :ct tsrt it ns forwarded ’y Mrupowoky
“ i! - > : ' * -• * ■ 21 •ebra*'ry I9h«.

7n -r^cs -xtainafci :: -then -ns. 3 confrontau with t.t_ l.t-er i»*
lza “»thoratip # and that he •. Mlc u .? a^criaente be
3rrlw * c .t ! y ..rir-ojck. ?rvd Dior -t Buckusdd.

c n tribe ted ctively n. materially Lo Uj_
x;. r-xnw t .che.T Idol arl> a vars froa the


lii9h


13 .-ngust - i 7-.v-.-u:-24-l
J0U5.7 I CA5J I

The evidence also sho^s ;rn; Hose actively collator-.te¬
la t..- Typhus cx. ei*: ones carried out by Haagen at ihj ;.atz-
•'eilcr Cor.centratlon Camp for the benefit of the Luftwaffe.

/rcc the cxhl its In the record it appears tha: Ro3e
"Jid Ha.-. ;«r. co rres. on led during the month of June I3* i ‘* concorn-
m tno -roductlor. of a vaccine for typhus. Under date 5 June
Haagan -'rote to r. 03 - .amplifying n telephone conversation
bet Vo an the t-o md roferrin to .a letter from i certain Olroud
'1 tr. ref-.rencos to a v cc^na */hlck had been used on rabjito.

fev lay 8 later .lose replied, thanking him for hi a letters
of -i and 5 Juno .and for ■ the prompt oxocutlon of ay request. "
The record make’s it plain sfc .t by use of tfc-i phrase "tho
promo execution cf ay request,” -'as meant a requoot aado
by Aoau to the Chief of the .eilcal Service oi the ’’ohr.v.c’ *
for an order to produeo typhus vaccine to bu used by tho
armed forces in the o .stern -rca.

Under the date •. October Haagon again roio

do so oo:; oerni.-u his ol xs for vaccine production; mahln
r-.iorence in Che letter to & report cade by Rose on cho
Ipsor. vaccine. Kaa_en at-.ted that he had already reported
to R03e or. the results of ex erlaer.ts m n tn human tolngs,
r.d exprea e- hlo regret th-.t to tho date of the lett.r
he had oo on unable to 'p.rxcrm infection experiments on the
vaec.r. tod parsons." 86 also . thr.t he had requested

t. o .-Jn.e r.berbs to provide suitable persons :or vaccination
t .ad receive, no u.c-'or; n : he -’as then vaccinating
: -ter nun an bain.s and v ul- report results later. *^e
conclude-_ expressin Co vish .ni nied for sxperi iont.il
objects uy-or. ••r.cm to test v.-.ccir. toons, xr.d ju .rested th . :

'r.or. euojects -ere procure.., p .r llci --sts should be ade
between the vaccine referred to ir. tie letter, a:.: the I a-a
tests.


1^95


1, ust 47-dr.n-2r.-3nz.ir. :

xu.=r : CAiJ i


t'ninx t _• only reasonable inference "hi or. c r. be
dr.-vn :'rc= this letter it: that Baagen ’'ns proposing to tesi
: u oi . icacy ci t. vaccinations which he had completed, which
could only be acc cplished oy infecting the vaccinated
subjects with an >.v rulont p -thojenic virus.

In a lector -Titien by .lose and dated "in the field,

2 - ooptor.bw-r 15^, 0 directed to the lehr: n_: forks --t ..nrbuijg
L u..., nose states that ho is enclosing a oaorandum rog-.rdlng .
reports oy 3r. Ipaon on his experience m the production of
typhus V'.ccino. Copy of the report which .aoes enclosed la in
evidence, .lose stttm. therein that ho hr.d praooaod, <vnd
I,son h.u pronlscd, that a nicber of I. con's liver vaooino
a jo.. lea s.-.ould o sont to .Iocj with theobjoct of tooting lto
rotuctivo offic xy on hu&in beings whoso livos wero in
spool 1 '.ar. ;or. Co us of thia report wore for^trdod by
.iose to several lnstlt tlona, includin'* that proslded over
by H .gen.


'lJx56


i Q -r -a-.--—- r-C^-l-Cfnin^
Tou-t I


I 1®'5. ICC prisoners v tf re trn*'orred to S/tzveiler, of

i;d during the Jcuraey. “to rer.rinccr vt-re In ouch
poor !;* - • t Ere-ren found then worthless for his experiments

•vs " u »t e additional healthy prisoners t rough Dr. Eirt, who
v-V r ::r of the Ahnenorbe.

2«M tcot to Enegen 13 Deceeber l? 1 *?. * ria-; anon,- other things,
"I r.- u. : t ir. procuring persons for vpecin: tion in your cxprrl-

ctnt, you’ r aucst c corresponding nun cor of p croons for vnccia tior.
with Copenhiv in vr.ccinc. This has the ei rrntt o . os also r.u eared
in the Buchonwrld exocrinents, that the t* at of vrrious vrccines
simultaneously gives r clearer idea of tholr value then the- tcet of
one vaedaa rlone".

-h ro is uuch othrn evidence connect in., P.ooo with the series of
exx/i itc conducted by Enarco but we shall not burden the Jui^aont
forth. It ”111 be sufficient to sry that the ovidence proves
cowJl»-t“er that Sose wrs directly connoctcd with the criminal ex-
n-ri \at* conducted by Err gen.

C -p tl,*«s -t the outset of the erocrisent-'l orogrrn lrunohed in

ih co-r- • tion caaps Rooc nny hrro voice;' kobo vi orouo oppooi-

tloc. I t' o end, however, he overctac *fvt scruples he '.ted rnd

k no win 1- took an active rnd consent!/. *art In the pro rna. He

attr-•)*. to Justify his actions on the n-ouni thrt r Str.to nry

vrii l o • experiments to oe carried out on Jrrsons condemned to

de* th out r: rrd to the fact that such j-rsoas may refuse to

*o;s -t “0 -it theesrlves rs expcrir.catr£ subjects. This defense
•

entli-cl- inc.-p the -Joint of the dominant issue. As w Q have pointed
our in the_cr.se of Otbhrrdt: Vhrtev.r nay be the condition of the
1-v vit'. reference to rtecictl experiments concueted by or through c
St ■- no its own citizens, such a thin, -/ill not be sanctioned in
int rn ttoncl Ifw vh C n practiced uooa citizens or sub acts of on
occttJiat" vrritory.


1U*?7


13 —u., u» t^-2B-25-3-Cr~i ng
?ourt I


»*- hr ; iucul ec every prcsucption in frvor of the def ndant but
-is posit o . 1 cits substence in the free of the overwhelming evidence
f rir. t •! . Hi on coneciousnees of turpitude is clearly disclosed
by th> Bt-f r:t rrie by hio pt the close of a vii.-orous crosB-exo-iina-
tlon, it f t ’ollo--dn4 langurge:

’I: •• i rjj’*’. to =e thrt such experinentg hed e'rlier been crxrlcd
out, -Itho-t '• I brsicplly objected to these cx-'crijents. I his institu¬
tion >. be * • t UP in Gerreny red wr.s -pprovoev by the Strta and
coveroa by t •* Strte. xt thrt coner.t I wrs in n Position which per-
hros corro*r«o a to a lrwyer who is, perhaps, r. br.oicr 1 opponent of
execution ov e th sentence. On occrsloa vhon he is dtnlin 'dth
leedln ; :iarc of the ,;ovcrneont, or with lcJ*yors durin.; niblic
cor. ressso or tier tints, ho will do evorvthin in his power to nrlntpln
his opinion or. tie subject and have it put into cffoct. If, however,
he does net succeed, he sti»ys in his profosoioa rad in his environ¬
ment in spitu of this. Under elrcuaatrocos ho ary perhrjo oven bo
forced to .r.-o'.ounce such n depth sentence hirself, plthou, h he lo
':r sic sXl o . ouent of that set-up. "

I- rri jun-1 .’indc thrt the dcf'ndrnt Hobo wrs a prlnciprl in,
•ccoepo • to, r-c.-red, shotted, took e co 'sen tin peut in, mo wr.o
jnao: : -i • .<vr-« an 1 itvolv.- cevldtfl uJ.?or»cn;» wn

r.or.-" - - • cr.-lr without their consent, in the course of which

-urio/ , 1 '.i s, cruelties, torturos, r.trocities one other in-

hunm* vo rocrittod. To the extent that these crimes were not

v r cri - - •- r< crises gainst huwnitr.

ccrciusi-.r

l.iiLt . 1 I finds end adjudges f ; defendant Gerhrrt Hose

-llty u.i • Counts 2%*o «nd Three of tre Ir.’ictzcr.t.

THT r7JS:2Z Tt The Tribunal will now bo in recess for a few .cements.
(- recess v PS tpken.)


ri.93


1? Aurwt 1 T^2/^i-t^uHl^9ep

Coart .1

“ ..B3MX: Persons is the COUTtrodn T-ill be sooted.

Tho Tribunal is again in session.

THE ~ I III MI: The Tribunal has determined that tho ro3t of the
Judgment -ill be read this ovaninp. The session :.ill continue -until
tho rending of the Mdgnont is ccrplatod. The sentences 'fill be
ialivered torcrre:.- rcrnLr.;. ;.t IOjOC of clod: tenorrenr sorning tho
Tribunal -.dll reconvene in order to sontonoo the defendants.

JUTGT SaSSEC*: Tho Tribunal nevr cores to tho cases B77F, ! »”BMPG
and “TZ/TZ.

• • •

The defendants. Puff, .Tonbar;;, and Bolts aro charged under Counts

Tt» and Throe of tho Indictment r.lth special responsibility for, and

participation ir., Ki h .Ititudo Bxpcrl.jonts.

Th® defendant "cits Is also ohorgod under Counts T.ro and Thrao
• 1th special responsibility for, and participation,in, Proozing
Ixporinonts.

To tho extent that tho ovidoneo ir. tho record rolatos to tho high
altitude oxpcrir^r.ts, t!» cases of tho t’.iroo dofondanta ' ill bo con-
-idorod together.

Defendant Puff specialisod in t ho field of aviation notUcino fron

the c:.Tnlotior. of his :lical education at Berlin and Bonn in 1932, In

January 193U ho ms assigned to tho Coroan jcporlnontol Institute for
• •

Aviation, a civilian agency, in order to establish a Department for
Illation 'h-iicino. Later he booarie Chief of tho Department.

Defendant Pori err; Joined the Z3DAP in hay 1933. Fron April 1936
until 1933 he interned a3 ar. assistant physician at a Berlin Hospital,

'r. 1 J-nuiry 1933 he joined tho staff cf tie Goman izperinantal
Institute for ..nation as an associate assistant to the 'efondattt huff.

'•> r ■ mined as a subordinate to Puff until the and of the rrar.

defendant olta for nary years Pi a specialist in x-ray rrork.

In ;:;q year 1935 he received an assigment us lecturer in tho field of
aviation n= Heine at the University of unich. At the s uae :ina he
instituted a snail arorinantal depart:sat r t the Fhyslolo.Tioal Institute


22u99


1? August £■ f^-Lesser

Court 'to. 1


of the University of urdch, felt: lectured at the University until 19li5j

-t the sane Una ho -i ' research work at the institute.

In the now of !?!£. the cxperL-acntal dspart-ier.t a t the

physiol.’~i cal Institute, University of Munich, m 3 taken over by the

iufvraffo and rsnaced the “Institute for Aviation h'odicine in !!unich."

•

felts ms corsdssioned director of thi3 institute by Idirpke, then Chief
cf the radical Inspoctcrato of tho Luftwaffe. Ir. his capacity as
iiroctor of this institute, 'dtz ms subordinated to Luftgau No. VII
in IMnlch for disciplinary purposes. In scientific natters he was
subordinated directly to Anthony, Chief of tho reportaent for ..viation
hedicino in the Offieo of the .edioal Inspoctcrato of the Luffcv<*affo.

kb:: .-xtitudb r?rir;.^:i

The ovidonoo is ©vor/holnlnp an-' not contra iicted that sxporlnonts

Involving tho offoct of low air pressure on living humr. boinys wero

conducted at Dachau fron f» letter part binary throu h :Hy 19^2.

Ino>no of those arperiiwnts rrroat nurfcers cf humn subjects wero killed

under tho nost brutal and ssnseloss conditions. certain Dr. Sijpund

P-SC'r , Luftwaffe officer, was tho prino never in the axperinonts which

resulted in tiv doatlis of tho subjects. Tho i rosecution nain loins that

•aff, Sord) ir ;, and olt* ware crirAnaiLy implicated ir. those .ucperlaonts.

T'.ia :iilt of tho lefendant eltz is said to arise by roaoon of
• • • •

tlso fact that, acccrdlr.- to tho roseoution»3 theory, " dte, .as tho

irdwint figure proponed the ersporlnints, arran *od for their conduct at

Lacbau, -and brought the parti-is Ruff, hc-hor- ar.d Hascher toyothor,

~-a SUilg cf Raff rnd Ronberg is charged by reason of the fact that they

r -ro sc.id to have collaborated *.dth “ ) aso-:cr ir. the car. :, ict of tho axperi-

:nts. The* cviior.co cr. details of the att r ap oars to bo as follows:

In tho late su:war of 19il, soon aft r ih. • Institut 3 'Rita .at

' hitch ms taken over by the Luftwaffe, : if of the radical

• •

--/ices cf tho T -ft xffo, approved, in .rincipla, a research assi-praant
- r ”i;Its in connection with the prohla: of roscue of aviators at high
altitudes. This roquired the use of hanan oxporir.entai subjects. ' eltz

11500


19 .-..r>-26 k -T~3—;-c-: r

3crrt 1


on^aaTOrod tc secure volunteer subjects fer .be research fror various
source*; tovev r, ho was unsuccessful ir. his ifforts.

Haschor, one o.' Ein=ler»3 rinor satellites, ns at the tl:c cn
assistant at tho Institute. Ho, Rascher, sv. jested tho possibility of
securlr.j Staler *3 corsont to conducting the wep iriaccto at Daohca.

;dts raised upon the rri action, an.' thsrsoffcar mrf.ngon=nta to that
ondwero oaislotadj ‘a::lor ivin; Ms ocnaor.t for orporiiiaats to be

©cniiatod on concantration eaup iirrtos con.'. sud to er.V.:, but < >'-ly

*

upon aapro.s condition, that Has char bo included as «no cf tho
collaborotors lr. the rocoruh.

Roach or uae net cn .icj.ert in aviation > 1:1:-.., Huff tas tho
lovttr. ran aolantist ir. - , 0 &XV& US* ?rlncd.J*l

assistant* -Its filfc that boforo te cculd .rocool rith his research
thoeo non should bo yorsuadod tc oooo into tho underiddn . Ho -'isitod
Ruff in horldn an.' <rqxLaino-l tho proposition. reeft'r uff and
Roaborz c* w to '.unicl'., v.oro a confersr.co x s hold with bits and
’iscuss tho tochnioal nature of tho prepoood axparlr.onto*
..occrdlrt. to tho tostii»ny of olts, , nd ' •• - , tho ba * io
oonoi-taxation tfiioh fctpMlod then to acrootc th uco of concentration
oenp iwatoa ns subjoots .>c tho fact that tho inv.t.m worn to bo
criir.ils mntatsiod tc docvtfc vho troro to roooivo sono forc cf dcffioncy
in tho orant they oorvivod tho asp rt toots# : aschor, "ho «M* aotivo in
tho conforor.ee, assured tho fefondwta that this 'Iso *.ns or.o of tho
conditions under .diich Eirrlor had nuttorisad tho uso cf carp inrr.t^
ns jrir.jnt'i subjnoto.

*

uba -r.vo Ms Tprovsl tc tho in i -rtAcn cf -xrorr tents at Tachnu and
issued an order that a aebila Ion pressure charter vlAoh -ns then ir.

-,v>r. • •;-ciur, '>rlin,

nxld bo trasfenrod

sooond .t.otin- wisteld at Daohau, attended by Huff, he bore,

•cits, Kaschar and tho Cr;* Cav.nndor, to cate «» necessary ^rongenanta


11501


19 iu^ust ■>26 * 2?-l.-Io-.scr

Court Y-c. 1


Cr t'-D co-duct of the Baporir^nts. rhe -mobile la-oroecuro chsdbor vas
then bf*cv I.t to r ic'-iu, cr.d on 12 robrua^r 191:2 the fir^t oorios of
cflcserintRtls were instituted.

Itz tkls Rascheris superior; :c.--b ,rc ^as subordinate to JhifTi

Haseher and Icobor" • :ro ir. •-rocr.il c‘ *r“3 of the soniict of the

cBcperinente# There is no evidence to show that * sits nu

present a t any of those o:<p.rl ..-.to. m.'.' visited >.chau one tey

♦

during the ottrly .art of tho « 9 «tee rt but t rooftw ranainetl in
“erlir. and roceivod inf: ration corecrrir.. tho pr:gross of tho

experiments only threu W ,

There is ovlrtbnco froa .rfish it . reasonably bo f« un at at
th-i cutset of tf. > procraa personal fr.'.otion ’V/olopcd bet’-’o. r. oltr, and
hie subordinate Basohor. Iho tostli ory sf * .It* is that or. several
occasions ha asked ’.ischer for reports or. t’.. or? toss of thi oxpjrlwmta
and uaoh ti o Raecfcar toll "alts that nothin,’ hid bo-n str.rtod xdth
roforonoo to the roeor.rc . -illy r olt* ordjrod ' a roportj

vAorjupon ^oseh-r sh . ad his supirior a tala ran fret 'irlor •.:hich
sV to’, ir. uhstaroo, th-.t tho oxpozir r.tn V ha oor. tictod by ”i3C v /»r
•ro to bo treated as top s.icrot nttor r.n* that r ports waro to bo
'•Ivor, to none oth-sr Vrn 1 -1 r. “aoauso of this situation ’alts had
r tr farrod - . oo^rand to tho DVI branch at looliau#

Eifandnnt Ror-bors atr.tod that .‘;jco o:n rimwits had bo:. sto; pod seer,
aft or their lr.eopticn by tho ‘jutrr.t ' f ish- '.ir ' ini.'try, boenuso
of friction bat x.n Itz and P-nch u*, r. * t\it ho axf-riiionts sro
r v . ' rly -.ft r : r* raforrod out of olta's Institute.

file tho ovidonco Is c-:*/i::cin ly -lain f't cits p.irti eip.it ad
in the initial arrr.r. TS.T.ts for V- ip-.-ri: Jits and brou-ht all parties
tr other, .it ir not sc clear t it illoc l.axperi-"-snts .* re j limed or

rh t ~.r u n der Oltc*s cornand, or that towr
t-iat xcrirlr,:r.ts .tier. iiocher :i t.t coniict in tho future wrald be
illegal crir±ral*


n>o2


15 :.u iust 26 &■ 27-5~iess:~

Co-art 'k>, 1


Thors aopor.r3 tc hr-V3 tecs tro distinct -roups cf prisoners U3ed
ir. t =• a-h tricantal series. One was a gnu? of 10 to 15 imr.tos known
in tho cor. L-,n patients" cr 'pamnont experfcontal subject a".

Vest, i: at .11, cf thesa were Her.nr. rr.tior.Tla *.fco -rora cor.fir.od in
t’.ic car; .is cri ir.nl prisonsrs. ' -sc v.n ro heusoi torotL r tad ~oro
1-fod and ransom' ly ccntontod. JJona iff ffod loath or

injury as a result. tho exp ri. . nta, - -l: :r roup consisted of
150 to 2 C 0 subjects pi clod at rondos *. fre:: -h: cn p and usod in the
•y/jriaonto dthout their ptr.dscion. ' c no 70 or 30 cf t’-.o3o vruro
kiliod itrlr.- f. oo-irso cf the oxpori ants,

Tho dafor.dmts Tuff and Ho ierc -aintain that trro ssparato nr.i
distinct oxporinsntal scrios uero carriod on :t Dachau; or.o conducted
b 7 than with tho uso cf tho "exhibition subjects", relating to tho
probla s rt rosouo at ld;:h altitudes, in .rhich re ir.juri.os occurred;
the other conduct ad by 'nsoher on tho largo ^reup of ron-voluntoora
picked fre:: thj benp at rcnlcn, to -ost tho Units of Duran onMranco
at extra ’.oly W.:h altitudes, ir. ddeh oxporlior.tal subjects in largo
nr bars uaro Sdllod.

Tho Prosecution sub:Its that nr. such fin ; distinction my bo 'Irawn
b straw n tho otparinonts cold to Ir.vo tosn coipfcictod by luff and Tohbw*g,
on tho ono hand, and Rascharon t’u oihor, or ir. th. nri.-onars who
vero usod is tho subjects f*jso or, .-ri-...;tr.j that o i> >rc — and
Ruff as his ou-jri r — . r * . l". *:nr;h :r frr “.11 axpori-

nonts in which deaths to tho 'ax An subjects resulted.

Ir. support of this sriairicn f.i • ’r r; : i tho relocation cite
tho fact that wascliar .-.s al-.T/ s r.scr.t her. :-.c'i>cr~ ras on^god in
-rk at tho altitude c'.'- “cr; that cr. at lc«3t thr o occasions rianborp
-s at tho c-r-'i r '.~r. ’oaths eccurrod tc tho sc-c'.Hod laschor
-eject', y t l et. ! to centime tho experiments. They point likewise
tc tho fact that, in r. socrot preliminary ropert vide by “.anchor to
.2 ;ior which, tolls cf deaths, oschor mention3 tho nano cf RoAorg as


11503


IS -Uguat u?-..-..n-26 •: 27-6—Lessor
Court :io« 1


b -ir.- -. cslir.torr-.cr ir. f.v roaoarch. ?irally they point to tho feet
oh . ., after tho xr rircr.ts uoro conclude!, c cor;'; rms rocc .jr.dad
by °'3c;',cr ar.-l Jiov.rs for tno nr arit ross, toccu-o cf the verb
icr.o by Mr. at Dachau*

Ihu Issue r. the u as tier. .* , :c uilt r ircic cores of i'.issa
defondants is cljr »; ; wouli bo Ions than fair iro ' o net to cor.codo

this feot. It cannot bo daniad tbrt thero is *nch ir. the. rociri to
cror.to at leant a -r.vo 3uc?ici?n tint tho dofcmiar.ts Jtnff an! Pc:*org
,;oro lnnlic .tod lr. criidnal irricrL.nr.t3 at nchnu. Hovovor, virtually
ell of tho uvtdohco .ditch points in this liroctior. is circu.istnr.tial
in its nature* On tho other hand, it aar-not bo rains si! that thore is
. certain consistency, a certain lojic, ir. tho ;tory told b/ tho
defendants* ..r.! sor: of tho s .or;.- is ©orraboratod ir. si rlficar.t
particulars by evi ionco fferod by tho :relocation*

7ho vnlno of circus-tar.tin! ovic’jnco .impends upon tho ccnclu3ivo
nature and tendency of tho circnatancoa roliud on to establish any
controverted foot. Vh. dreu 'tnneos :ai t .. t only bo consistor.t
’.ith -ajilt, but they -wst b i inc inn oanco* uoh ovldonoo

is ir.-m.'ficiont ?.s.-.v:dr all to bs tr.- rhich th' ividonco tonds

to prov., ss j thor r.... a 1 ypof - -r. or innocence ray still bo

truuj for it is V . cvial wlusior. * .-very oth.-r reasonable hypo-

thosi; but f audit lea a .* ucs .?r . clrcu :sta:;ooa idth tho f croo

* -roof, r , ra a c urt dll he tarrantod in fir/ir.r; a

.•_ef jr...nt "uil'.; cr. c:rr tor ial vS. ’.ace l r. , tho avi or.oo .ust
ah - such a ueU-eemoato ’ ' r-v.-r. c.air. ' circir stances as to

toedudo all other re vis •-■‘..scs '.art that t. rxdl of tho

r

•

ion. In ti final anclyna j th

vi JDCU is - x -dr-.t to satisfy beyond c rooaoittblo dou- t tho

far * n ir. a ossionco of those rho, urc’ r thrdr solan oaths,

as officers, must ausuia t J "•


1150L


19 ..u^ust 1 7J-25 L 27~7-Lodsqt

Court ::o. i


Cn this particular specification it- is the conviction cf the
^lirunal that the defeniwts Ruff, P.xixrrg end Veits, mist ho found
not ,-uilty.

?aiBzr:r- rrn-?x:i!TS:

In a Edition l c the hi :vcltitudo oxpori.-wr.t3, tho defendant
" oltz is charjod vdthfroesinj experiments like-.rise conducted at
taehau for tho bonefit of tho nor—n Luftwaffe. Those be’in at tho canp
r.t tho conclusion of tho high-altitude experiments cn.l rrero • performed
by jfolslcohntr, rinko, and .'aschsr, all o ' whon w-ro officers in tho
nodical cervices of tho Luftwaffe. :Scn-~ >rran national? rroro killod in
thoso oxporl: mints.

T.'o think it oulto -robntlo tlct ol'.r. had knovlodgo of thoso
coporinonta, but , o7idonco U not sufficient to provo that ho


participated in thorn.


c o c l u s i o :«


’llitary Tribunal I finds and adjudges that tho dofondant
liocfri od luff is not guilty under either Counts ?>ro or Thr.« of tho
Indictment j and Urocts that ho bo r .leased from custody undor tho
Indiotnont when tils Tribunal mrosontly adjournsj and

riliter-/ Tribuntl I finds and adJud"os tSvat tho dofondant Kane
clf.^anj Ite-born la not -uilty undor either Counts ?wo or Thrco of tho
Indictaontj and directs that ho bo released from custody under tho
Indictnont rrhon this Tribunal >rc3ontiy adjourns j and

••ilitcry Tribunal 1 finds and a judges that tho mofondant r^ rc
August “oltz ic not uilly undor either Counts T c cr Throo of tho
Indictnontj ar.J irccts that lie » bo raleasod frers custody under tho
Indiotnont when this Tribunal prosontly adjourns.


Judro Cra—ford mill continue tho roadin^ of tho


Juu^pont,


JUTGE CRL-TFCHtDl BRACT., .


11505


i


19 u usv-i.- r-2E-i-riMcuc
Court I


■Should rott, Belchsfuehrer, decide to Choose this way in the interest
of the ?. 1 6sarr*tlOB of lebor, then Heichsleiter Bouhle-r -oulc ho
pren red to lc.ee ell phyelciens end other personnel needed for this
wcr '<c e.t -our fisposr 1. Likewise he recuesteo as to infom you, ohrt
then ’ oul- have to order the apparatus so urgently needed with the
TO'teot c iesd.

Hell Hitlerl

Tours

Viktor 3reck"

3rr£*. ; all Tied fron the witness stand th-t at the tie>o ho wrote
thla latte; • <■ Lt t r>’ confidence that ay would via the wor.

3~ c' 'a 1 -tc: vre answered by Hinder cn 11 AU.ust l?h 2 , la the
real/ hi: 1 v irected th*t otcrilixr tior. by se-as of x-rryo he tried
in 1« .t oic concentration cac? in r scries of expcrii-cato, and
that r-c * > 1 . ca at hie disposal expert physicians to conduct the
opera:is to.

Blr/Jcoabury, Sra.ck'c ds-iuty, rolled to Hi.i lor 1 s letter and ctatod
that 3r: ck V been transferred to an SS -ivislon but th t ;a, ->lcnk«n-
bur;, ns prmrnir.t deputy v-oulc B isn«< 1 -toly l“/o *.'.< accessary

nensnros c *. .{«t ir. touch with the ohiofo of tho main offices of the
concent.- ‘.ion c-nps. B

a ?cii- J. -- tectified before the tribunal that 'dtilo confinod In

Ausc --its cc tc -.ration carp he was c-rchoc' to 3irkenau r.\<• forcibly

sub; “I.- :o sc ert x-ray exoosurt ant* '0 erstr.-ted later in order
•h't * -t of the x-ray could 3e studied.

a “rt-.cL* -alcian of Jewish descent -ho v&n confined at Ausch-lti

fro v = l r U 3 o January 19*5, testified that no r AUsckwitx

wn? 3ir'- c u where people v<r* sterilised by SS doctors. About
100 u:le ?ol -i w>o hrd been sterilise:- rt 3irken.ru were cttcr.ded by
the 'itnes - _’ter the operations. Latxv t Is — oup were c*etrnted by
the c—-i -ih.-3cirns.


n>o6


»_»- -r

e o<jrt I

>. rcCQv: co-trisn other evidence froz which it is aenifeatly
t t sterilisation ty aeras of s-rr;'s vr.s r.ttecptec on groups
o'- V -so-r. .. o vere painfully injured thereby; end thrt Cr.strr.tion
follow- t r-rry procedures.

2 -.* c.*« - w. lr. the organization o' fv sterilisation ; >ro rra ~ith
full tew'lct . thrt it would be put into execution, 1 b conclusively
hno’<a r; the r cord.

2Ur-l.'.-.SI i 7 032AI.;

?he euthrar.si.- proofs, which vr.s put into effoct by r secret
decree of 7itier on the dry that Oerarar invrdod Poland, hra.boon
dlecuee* longth in the Jud- tn t In c-ru- - rinstX.-.-l 5rr-ndt.

3r-cl: Ooutuato thrt he vac >slcrll:> o:rx>r.od to this uro ,rra rad
th *' t » °" occ-cion, he agisted certain of his Jesrish friends to
etc »e fro it= consequences. 3 u t be th-t ra it nay, the evidence
•a t •- tever seneisente Brndc nr* hove atcrtrlnrd toward
1 navi furl Jrsb r» of the rrce, he v rc perfectly villins to rad did
ret r■ » ortrnt ndsinietrrtor ia furth* rin the cuthanulr

?ro x * • - • -* il hrd --otten under v-r, he -wrote letters to v.-rioun
public o ‘ict.-le, t-xolelnins to then ho- to k c> the a-.ttcr scoret
er.d :o - 11 -;- f public sfr.tisent v.rtaat th,- pro rrn.

" ’ :uc tcovr * Srrck'a o~n st-t—rnts. «s r witness on the

etrjv ’« : iri i.d thrt while rt first o ii; not undorstr.ul tho
full i >o-t o' the pro.-r«s, he decided, after r talk with 3ouMer,

0011 xr - ; tJ 1:1 cnrrr/in.: out the nsel xuzat -nfi to execute 3ouhltr r ■
ord^r-.

H 1 . rtici : rtoc lr. the initial cretln: = c.-lled for tho purpose of
.Jlr.ctx . .. i:-eject in operation. Ea wrs present rt soctin.s of
ho cr . rt:., rs -ell ps rt p.dcinistrr.tire discussions. He often
• a representative, frecueatly urhin,- decisions which

;"llod fo • - r exercise of personal Juc-^aent cad r vide latitude of
fiserttionq.


U507


13 AU.-jst. .- ^r -0^~-yiap>qch
Court X

Brec'c -c lttoc- t'* t such were hie activities in the profrca, thpt
orp =i Sit -oil -c cose to the conclusion th-.t he vrs the influensi
tirl can in euthanasia,

•'* iovltl r> de ut>* he addressed r seetin^. • t 1 .'unieh, where he
cxolalnnd t'u jor-wce of Hitler's decree -nd ccnticncd the dr ft of
t lev •p-.lch - a beini* prop'red to give collate 1< islative smetity
to eutSvn-'.l - l»v, incidentally, which wrs aov?r in fact cn-cted.
Ht represented fouhler in *nril of I9U1 i n - scctin rttended by
Tati Jut or ea' n-osecutors. Ee testified t; »t th© Illnistry of Justice
hrd be cone co-ii'orrljlr ecbnrrc.ssed be crust of the euthanasia >ro ran,
end that he rn Present at the soctin,* for fsa pur x>00 of loiorting
Inforecti on concernin' the salutary features 0,' euthanasia to those
who w t r. present.

Brrcle ;r.ve t tribunal considerable infonw.tioa roucernintf the
ecthod of extarsinrtlon by euthanasia: stptiny thrt the pro ran wo so
tfcsl.jned • to reader the process inconspicuous and painless. In
SsceriMr 1 * 0 January l<?bc SracJc, Bouhltr, Conti ant some other
’-'octors wrr yxc t rt th» adainistratlon of euthr.ifttir to four
ixnrris-.ct 1 au.\* ctr. Tht victics were led into r L ;cc chrabor which
h*' ban '-11: to reansbla a shower roos. Th patients were so-tod
on bine t. 1. loinonouo ,-?» v*-s i«t into t o c'vober. « fow i.orcents
lrtcr 1 »-i ’• 'cccrat drowsy and finally lrpocfi into r. de:f sleep,

 -“ut .? '..0*dn they were beinc executed. C: t>t basis of *. i a

• xe cut ion " 1:1 r ceided that only carbon aonoxli'c wan to bo used
'or ieillin. •. n 'rti.nts." According to 3 r-eh these xrsena were not
J«v 6 oec-u • -ouhl*r hnd explained to hin *t l.ilrnthropic ection
cf euthrajAin-should be extended only to Gcrams."

" he licence is olein that the euthrnrsir pro .ran explained by the
-tfcndeit, gradually nerved into th« "Action lU J 13; which, briefly
: *.e:od, recounted to an extercineticn of concentration cacn inaates

:y aethods _nt* n trades used In euthesasie.. One of the price cotivos

• 11508 ’


-9 -»’-i x-.
Coas-t I


teiiac- t>.e uro-TMJ vrs to rlininrte "useless eaters" froa the 3 «cne,
in order to conserve food, hospital f rciliti-s, doctors -ad nurses
for the so?* important use of the Goman arsec. forces. L ? wiy
nationals of countries other thrn Gersray voro killed.

3r; c:* s direct connsction vith rad prrtlciprtion in the execution of
cita atei- is conclusively proven V- the evidence in the record.

::: ’ •' : « csinm 03sr2SATio“:

u/ " - our of the Indlctnent the defenf.-.nt Brack is charged
''if- hr in * archer of tfco organization decl-red criminal by the Judg-
-.:-r I t*rnrtion»l I.’iii trry Tribunal, nsaoly, • 88. She

eridr e n o-t thrt 3rnck beerne n aeober of tVu S3 ir. 19.“9 end
volcnt ril* rerrinod in thrt orgrsitetian until the end of the ver.

As r. ts\: o the S3 ho vr. B cr ini nr 11 - iaplierted in the con.isoion
for - arl. a. «n crises r.;rir.et huunlfcy, m ch'rged under Counts
rvc r. th;vo of tr« Indictcnt.

CGIXIVSI

::illcr x:- Tribunal I finds rnd od Judges fro dofcr.dont Viktor Brock
’ ua ‘*= r Counts rv 0 , Three ond BoOr of the Indictuoat.


5Z T£:3-?3ZY3Z'3

.icf ;it Beckvr-7rcysen: ic ch.-rgcd uni or Counts T--o r.i Throe

G: * : la ictocat with person responsibility :or, and participation

1'., hi —JtL itucc, Breezing, Sulf.-nilnnido, So-vrtcr, 3?i; c*ic J P undl'ee
"* -in '-Hrincnts.

on hr a t rndoned nil c -rges oxcept as to hi -altitude,
rroozin*-, 3; 'V ter end Typhus exoeriacato, r>nr hence only these vill

-'"ccualrcsrC.

’ • t Stckcr-Breyacsg Joined the ~rsi Prrty in 1933. In
v r fted into the Luftv-ffo. Ia 19^3 ho vrs pro-noted to
-h r Jr o.' St. fcarrzt in the luftVRffs.

?M0 l 9~ x until Xry loUL the defendant vea on rssistrnt

‘onsultnnt to ^nthoay. Chief of the Hcferrt for ^ri-tion JJoiicine, *


19 -X VS'., £-5*-2S-5-?inabuck
Court 2


3erUn. M* department dealt with *11 questions concerning aviation
neficia- • uc reported to the Chief of the Hodical Service of the
Xuft -r’c. Vben Schroeder became Chief o' the i.edicrl Service cf
the Luftv fe on 1 Jrr.uary 19^. the defend .-at becroe the consultant
for aviation hedieine in Schroeder 1 s offico.

HUH jmU 2JH2 ZXFZBKSnSi

mi shorn elsewhere in the Jud^jent, hi.;h altitude cX'icrlaents for
the benefit of the Luftwaffe were contacted at Drchru Concentration
C-n>, on :o>-Saraen nationals, beglnnln,, in februrry or Ilrrch 19^2.

• h.enc :n triarats had been approved, in principle, rt least, by
Sloike, C’ i< * o' the Hedicrl Services of t I'M Luftwaffe. a mobile
lo *-i - r— Chester which bed been in the poseossion of the Bcpprt-
o- nt o _vi tion hedicinc, Berlin, v- s tranaforfod to Dachau for uoe_
in f-o extevisante. Concentration cr-ri Inmates were Jcillod while
belt subjected to experiments conducted in t'ui chaster*

C'Jriii ; tine the experiments woro conducted, defendr.it Beeker-
Freyoen . w-- r n asaistent consultant to A.it-ony, Chitf of the Scferet
for .. i tion hedielne, Berlin. All low-ircssuro chrebors ownod by
the Im'tvnffe were under the general control of thrt office.

It io suh;itted by the Prosecution th-t t’-e record o'O'fs thrt
3rCkexv-u rcysear was a principal in, roccaeory to, nided, ratted,
took r. conse'.ting part in, rnd vrs connected vitfc p lan s -nt enter¬
prises involving the commission of these exierinontc.

T'le evl nee upon this chrrge is not deeaod sufficient to preponder-
rtc ri.st r reesonr.ble doubt as to the c'ofcaCmt 1 s guilty participa¬
tion i . the ex;eri=ents here involved,

"HilZt"* "h-hhllZ^TS:

It i* clri-ed thrt in June 19^2, 3ecJceiwre?sen6 informed
-*ro c.rtln of his official files thrt r. nesting to consider experi¬
ments ;o Irresti jte the treatment of persons who hrd been severely


11510


r : ‘lr: or 'rosea —ould >r h»W ia Inrabers tie followin ; October
(r ’ c rra» zo « g tfc« "Cold Con.rress). It is contended that the
directive •••ieh set the experiaent into notion vrs issued from the
of"ice o-‘ Deprrtcent for Aviation iledicine, thrt t'o funds sad
oc-cl-Tvitt ‘rovr supplied hy that office, rad that Seeker-- reyeeag had
no--led -c o-’ the exocrlrcr.ta, and that he r.dxitted such knowledge.

-1 to .11 this, the proof is clc»r that 3c dee :w.?rey oeng wio actively
e lore: i ownlxlng red v e s presont rt the eo-crlled "Cold Congress."
3uc, or; : n the evidence dlecloees is acedod to establish that he had
pn« later In or connection vith t c enpericents thcRSelves, or that
he hr* rj\- controlling relr.tloaekl' to thtir Initial esta'cllshaent.

ttseds 3L. -z:~::s:

-' "Tidcnce la Insufficient to disclose any crleinrl responsibility
o' t. e tofo .dent 3ecker-?rcysen,: ic connection vith th» typhus experir
seats.

ad.. '_:d zu riisrrs:

r- 'lr.co«sed the see v.-tcr cr:cri=onts in that portion of our
J v ~at •• *.c‘- defls with the erse o' Co dofaadrnt Schrooclcr. As «rs
>o'i‘e<* out tV-rt, two cot nods of n-icin r,o• vetcr driaka'ole were pvnil-
^1- to t. luftvrffe. One, the so-c-llcd Sc'-rofor aethod, Jvd boen
: 1 c* i:~ r ;oted pnd roprrentlv produced to table s<“ water; the other,

<‘o o~e Ur 3<rkr process, which ch*n od t:-e trstc of the sir. water
tut iot reduce the salt content,

3tc*:-r-’t eysea- ro Chief Coasultrnt for _vi: tion i.edlclue in the
office of Scfroeder arranged for »* conference to ho tele' in l.ty 19 ^U
to tiacucs f e testing of these two art 'ods. At the conference the
def- retorted or. vrrious clinical ex'eriaents which had been conduct—

"• certain von Slrrny to test d:o 3crkc process. Se C'B6 to the
conclusion that the expericents hrd not been conducted enter sufficient-
i? realistic conditions of sea distress to arke the finding* conclusive.

-- result of the conference it vrs decided that new experiments


11511


1 ® «-usi-.»:-:Z-?5*7 rinrbuek

Court X

should be conducted.

Ve leers from the report of the neetin which ie la evifence that
t'-o 3oricc of exnerlacnts were to he conducted. The first, * caxinun
period Of six days during vhich OOc tocj of subjects "oul receive
■e* •• : proceesed vith the Sorter. method; e second vou?, ordinary

c'ri jJci.; *•'ter; a third croup no wrtcr r t nil; and the forth troup,

■CC’ t s would he available in the emergency scr di«troa« teits
than used. 3urin - the duration of the esrjeriaent rll persons were to
.*• c:iv' oil” ib emergency aer diot such a.s provided for jorcens in
difitre-.o t sea.

In a i Itlor. to the 5-day experiment it was dotercinr' that a 12-dry
' ■ ‘ • ''ould he run. The report on t: is cerles reads a.o follows:

n ? 'ova urlshed with sea water an. 3e tea.tit, and rt diet aleo
6 0 r VC ” acr rations.

t in-, of experiments: 12 d»ys

"3* c ooinlon of the Chief of the Hot leal Service permanent

lih -1 o health, that is, the de:V* of the experiment -1 subjects
’*• - : r, ectvd, as erxrlucnt-l subjects such persons c ould be

u « ill be put at the dlsposrl by “cichafuehrer So. 1 ’

i -tt:..- ir tod 7 June lgUh SchrocCer racuostcd tho 2 e ichsfuehror SS
to llox hie to use concentration cr*;j inm-tos for the sea. wr tcr ex-
■jcri.sents. Ihe lottor etrted, ar.on other f incs, the following:

".ib the experiments on human bein s coul’ thus far aly bo carried out
-cr r Joriod of four days, and as or-cticpl demands rcouire e renedy
for those •/ o are in distress at sea u> to 12 drys, esyro-jrlrtc experi¬
ments nro necessrry.

"Hcr.iroi are ^4C healthy test subjects, who must be r.voilnble for U
’f cl. vocin. «r it is known from previous o=-perinvntc, thnt necessrry
- -<»r toriee exist in the concentr-tion c»n Dcchau, this cn-ra vould ha
vr-r TOitable_■

" rn on thr stand as a witness the defendant Seckciwreyirag admitted


11512


ig _u us Z~2 >3— : i srbuck

Court I


thr.t k* .. ;>rct the substrnce of th. letter -or Schroeder a dictation
pad si. an'.ere.

7-u-, ••* evjrl «cno w ledge ox* the nature o- t! r 3erlco Process rad
th* -c t c If used over prolonged periods it -ould c-uni suffer¬
ing .v da-tk, ~ec}Cor-~rey8e3 counsellor md conferred wit' Me
C’-W* co-.c-T*iu the necessity for expei-iasuta ••' ercir. the ;n-occsc
‘O il -ec-‘. c'. grve advice u>or. t'” oxrct procedure to *be used
in * • - 12 -dry exp^ riacr.tr 1 aerie . S frrnec the letter

to li 1 r roruoetln: the use of concent vr.tio*. era? inartei -t 2rehru
for ory.ri . xt*l subjects. Ho crlled t'-e '■cfendrr.t 3d lbocck to
B« r-. la to hie the dots* 11* rad our.pooe of the experimento.

He Isaac th- order undtr vfc«ch 3d ;lboec: vc-.t to Srch.-u to co in
thi c evi its. Ec received 3d lbooC' 1 -. r. >ort rtf Ur t e exporioent-
rl serlen hrf 'icon* concluded.

Ihrou ‘-.cut rll otr.*ce of the rffeir, fro its inception to ito
conclusion, V <• defendrut lcnov of the dr::..erouo nr.tur* of *.' o exocrl-
aonti. .. sunt f.-.rt c«?ths vcr. rc-sov'l to *:o exx-cted. & .. w

th't co. c- v.-tion cr-o inartos vere to c- use’ «a expcriacntpl #ub-
Jecto. I lo i oaeltlc to believe t! t * •, ou-.nosefi thi t t’u ir.srteo
of f c- no, 'o were to be furnished by hi were to be volunteers

Th antim 1-nur-r of the letter v"Ych vrs -ritten to Siaifllor rokinc
for ■>- -1 it I subjects entirely r-futoo sue: indication.

T '-T' res -o'’s conclusive 1” t v * t 3-petes o’ various nttior.rlities
u-- - orTcrln<r.t-l subjects. They «o" forncr inn-tos of

Ausc •'its - o bre Ven tricked into ce-iln to >ckru under te proaioo
th-.t * to be used in r sped 1 1-cor brttrlion. ' r hen they

rrrlvod r.t Zrct-rc they v«r* detriltd to the cm vnter erperinent* vith-
out t*-‘ i- volvr.trry Consent bein': rake * or Ivon.

>lri- f - course of the expcrlsent a,—' of the exoerlaentrl subjects
verc tr?-tof brutrll-* rad endured much -rln cat* eufferln .

It is n&crent froa the evidence tart 3etfeeiv?rereen; vrs erl.-inrlly

11513


la u*t--Tr-2&-0-riTV«»ic

Coart I


c—••'' ■ ”'• t« ^-vric-ntc. «iv! thr.t the erpericents were essentially
erlnln-a la their n-ture. To the extent that the crises cor._itted by
hlB 0r K; er :i * «»rity vere not v.r cri.joe, they ve*e crir.es egeinst

hunruity.


ccrcirsior

..iUt"-* Tribunal I finds and adjures t o defendant Hermann 3eckcx-
7re-sea- -ill*.- under Counts T-o nnt Three of the Inficteeat.


SC KAZTB3

r ‘*' r °-« *"it Schaefer Is ch.-reed une'er Counts "v 0 pad Throe of the
Indict e.-.t "it* personal re.T>on»ibilitr for and participation in sea-
«oter e.nv-ri-'nts.

Konr 5c refer r scientist whose epcci -1 field of research vr.o

9

ch* :ic 1 cr r. In r 0 r*ab«r igUi he vrs frrftod into the Luftvrffo.

*r. a >rin o' t # fcllovlnj yerr he wr» transferred to the Luftwaffe
iapl co cut 3c ot in Snlow rnd fron thcro to the Luftvrffc b.-so r.t
?rrr-c‘urt or. the Oder. I a suar.er of lgU? ho was trrr.sforrcc*. to 3orlln
me. css', aof to the staff of the ?. c sc-rch Institute for eviction Kedicino.
r '*‘ r c 1 f i.naent At the Inetltuto was to ;o reserxch on the problon
of so.- oner-ency for the Luftvrffc. I'-h included research vorle on
serious oet'iods to render sen v P ter x>tr.blc. Schaefer rerxinod in his
ronltio-x At tie Institute without ever hrvia. attained officer rank.

In -r I°- the defendmt was ordered to ba present r.t r. mooting to

- 1 ' rt Vc &erara 1 Ministry in Berlin, c-lled to consider further
reae 701 ° ~hin- sen vrter potable. Sono withe previous to the


r ‘ co  ' • Sc _e ‘ % r hrd developed r process w ich actually precipitated
o-lta - ;0 8€ . w ater, but it vrs t'wiit by the C«- ie a of t - c Luft _

v 'ff' .-eric 1 Service to be too bulky cof. eroonslvt for military u B e
V t>o Lx-t«~r >.

A 8Bjt v ®« Schaefer; Beckei-Jrcysen , r sc rch rdvlcor to Schroedcr;
'-la-.. -.son, of the Technical 3urcm of the Belch Ministry of *vi-tion;
o;-.ovs. l ie subject of discussion vrs the ferslbility of nslnj the

- — i r


lo -JX -lO-Ti&'hcefc

Court I


Schr * oc- os, or of turning to -not'- r n-ocosa known r.o the 3erka

0

ae- o . y A Ifttcr aethod, while Chen, ti not precipitate or-lts
fro . ac.. •*- Mr mi wra dm.reroua to herlth whoa used for e period of
tiae - Sc* ofcr, previous to the acetic , h t ■ lrerdr reported to
8ehrocder. Vverthcleas, thoce 1= cou mi of tf-c aeetia creed thrt
thrt e=>.*ri-:.'ats ahould he conducted on eoacentrrtion er.v> irai-tea
to et.vrin.. the extent to tfcich tfc# 3erta ret:.of sti.->t he uarhle.

T.-e experiao&ta lrter conducted h-va be t cocriboi rt l^n th in
derlia; vit'- the epae of Schrotder. 2uo tc la r ttend-nco et :Mi
Beotia , Sc’ rfr la aou ht to he held art •Li-ll:' rcspoaololo la
connection vith thi aer vrter ex.xriacata.

:; v 7 . cord recoivcd crreful rttt-.tioa fron the "rihiwl. *.'o-
- heeaoble to fi *. Sohaofor *r» c priaoipol la, or
rcceaaor to, or v,. ©tharviae erir.in llr Involve;' in or connected
vit- - r :• -nto r.cr.tioned. In feet, t'-.o racord f-ila to o ov
.u. --.the? rnythinr to do *4f- those eacpwrlatate, except

.ue'- i hs lulled fro a Me rttetfitnee nt acvcr.-l aertinpa of
... ... . .. - vp re rctlvel/ intcroatod t’-orola. Sovhere in the

uatl oar or elr'-hcrt ia it reverie* f t Schaofcr vot* for cortr.oncc~
ncr.t o.- -prosecution of tho exxriceato or in enr other nnr.noV rided
in tf'cir erocutlon.

co'.xivoi::'

ia.litr.r- rt'.-jcrl I finds eaf rd«u;:oa :hc fccn:'.*nt ZonvrS 3c: refer
not uilv/ of the chrrxa contain-, i in fcho Ii ictatn*. aaf '.irecto
thrt he *ac rclcnaod fro a eaetody under the Inictnent yh B -. the

Jrltuarl vrcoantlr rdfourna..


11515


19 4aicaat-A-IIr-29-l-Prir:-?.a
Court I


Hg

The defendant i: ov:n is charged und.r Counts Two -and
Thr.e of the Indictment with sp-cial responsibility for and
participation in typhus and eth-r v coin- .xperiments; (jns
oedema exp -rlxents; and the euthanasia program. In Count
Four he is charged with b-inr a xemb-r, aft.r 1 September
1939, of n orranizotion dcolar.d criminal by the Int-rnational
Icilitrry Tribunal.

Ebv;n Joined the Ss in 1934 and the 1'azi party in
1937. Soon -ft.r th- outbreak of the war h. Join.d the
/aff-n-33. In °otob.r 1939 he b-eax- assistant m-dio"!
officer in th- 3s Hospital at Suchenwald Concentration
C’tnp. In 1941 he -..as nppoint-d a-dical offic-r in charge
of th- -1 troops ot- tinned in th- oa.-.p. He boonmc assistant
Medical °fflc.r at th . oamo innate hospital and in July 1942
h- b r a. chi f C r.p Physician. K.. r.mainid in th lattor
ooaition until Septcub-r 1943. that tine he was arr .at id
on th. or:..; of th- 3s Police Court in Kassel for having
all-g-ily euri-r.d an 3S non-commission d offic-r *.:ho was

Vi

a dangerous witness against Koch, th- camp commander,

TTKiUS ..J CT": t 7:«5E3 ISKPiiElEffS:

•

Th vacoin- ezo-riments with which »ov-n io charged
w.r- coniict-i at ^uoh-mr.ld und-\- th- supervision of
33 Stun3hennfu-hr -r -T. Jinc alias Ding-Schul :r. Th.y
have already t.-n d-ocri>-d at 1 -ngth in oth-r portions
of this jud- a:nt.

Th- ‘’roo nation has shown bjyond a reasonable doubt
that I-ov.n Jas criminal participant in these experiments.

In collaboration e.ith th- 3s can? administration hi helped
s-lect th. conc-r.tntion o-onp incat-s who b-exa- the
experLeental subjects. During th-. cours- of selection he


11.16


19 Angus t-A-IL-2 9-2 -PT Lacp i
Court I

;rci- -u the right to include ax, prisoners and to r,J.ct
others. .liile oerhrps not saoowored to initiate n .v/ scries
of .xp-rim-nts on his own responsibility — that nppnre.ntly
being a pov;,r which only Ding could exorcise — th - defendant
work-d *.lth Dine on exporirunts th ,n in nr ogress. H-
supervised th - pro partition of diary notes, f,v ,r charts,
and report sheets of the -xperic-nts. Occasionally h,
inj.cted sot- of th; subjects with the vaccines. Ha
acted as Ding's deputy in the conduct cf the experiments.

He was in oocrm of £xp oriental Block 46 in Ding's
absence. Jurinf the ?-riod of Hoven's activity in the
experimental station no less than 100 inmat-s w.r. killed
a a a r suit of th- tyahu9 experiments, -any of th-se
victim v.-r- non-'*-r/tan nationals who had not giv,n th;ir
consult to b- used as experimental subjects.

G.'.s od:’a :y ..irinrrs:

It .5 ss.-t.d in n .ffidavit male by Dr. Jihg-
3chul-r, .ho wr.s ir. charc- °l* Blocks 46 and 5°,

Buch-nwrld, that toward th; .nd of 1942 a confer-noc was
held in the Military helical .vend ny, 3-rlin, for th
purpose of discussing th- fatal -ff .cts of gas oed.-ar
3-run on ur.: .' per? ns. During th. oor.f r;no i Killian
cf th - ..rny ; -dical Ir.sp ectcrat- an’, th. d-f -ndant
Mugro wsky r.cort-d nev-ral cases in which wounded soldiers
who had r-c.iv.J oedecn 3erum inj-ctions in high
auantiti-s di~i suddenly without appar-nt r.ason.
iiigrowshy suso-cted that the fatalities w>r. due to the
phenol cant ait of th, s-ruc. To help solv . the problem
Mrugowsky order.d Ding to take port in a euthanasia
killing with phenol and to r.port on th- results in detail.
- k few dry 3 Ir.t.r £ov-n, in th - pres.nca of Ding, gav,

11517


19 -MJgun t-^-!L-29-3-Priaeau
Court I


ph-nol inj .ctions to sov-ral of the concentration coap
ianatoS wish th- result that th-y died instantly. In
accordance .ith instructions Jing and- a r-port of th:
killings to his superior officer.

The fact that Hov.n engaged in phenol killings is
substantiate by an affidavit voluntarily and- by H 0 ver.
hiaself nrior to th- trial which was r-c-iv;d in evid.ncc

* ' * _ f * ' X 1

an a part of th. case of t ; pro3-cution. In the affidavit
Hov.n flakes th- following stc.teaent: ’Th .r. v;-r- flony
prison: s who were jealous of th- positions h-ld by a
f-w polltlonl orison-rs and tri .d to discredit th.n.

Thes- traitors were inn-diat.ly killed and I was lat.r
notified La order to flak- out otnteaents that they had
di.d of natural onuses.

’In sane insta.ao-s I supervised the killings of
thes- unworthy inflat-s by injections of phenol at the

0

requist of th. inflates, in the hospital assisted by
s-v.ral ia-.-t.s. 3r. Ding cam. one- and said I \r s not

*s

doing it oorr.otly, and o.rfora.d saa- of th- inj-ctions
hia3-lf, killing thr-e innntes who died within a minute.

•Th- total nunb.r of traitors killed vr.s about 15 O,
of whoa 60 w-r- killed by ph-nol inj-ctions, -ith-r bv
ays - If or und r ay supervision, and the r.st were killed
by heating, etc. by th- inflates.•

ElCGeJ 1:

Th- let'ils of th- -uthar.asia program have b--n
discuss d by us at length in dealing with th- charges
against c-rtain other d-f-ndonts; consequently th-y will
not b_ repeat-4 h-re.

In th. Seven pre-trial affidavit, aortions of which

vi.re ouot-d whil- discussing gas cod-an serum

1151S


19 «0f.tt5t-.k"IL-29-4-Prin:au
Sourt I


.2 perieie:at a -ion, th- defendant gives ua a partial pioturo

of t. u .- euthanasia program, in th- following statement:

• •

'In 1941 l-och, th_ Camp Commander, called all the

important 33 officials of the camp together and inforn-d

them that h: had received a secret order from Himmler

that all mentally and physically d-fioi-nt inmates should

be kill-d, including J-ws. 3°0 to 4<>0 J;v/ish prisoners

of diff-r-nt nationalities wer. sent to the '.Su than a sin

Station 1 at 1 rnturg for extermination. I was order .d to

$

i3sue falsifi-d statements of th- death of these Jews,
and obeyed that ord-r. This action w^.s known ns '14 f '13. ’
■,/hJn the e-f-ndont Hov-n took th- stand in his own
defense h- att..apt-d to diner :dit th, .rf.ct3 of the
statements ccnt-in-d in his affidavit by testifying that
th- affidavit was taken as a r.sult of interrogations
propounded to him by the Prosecution in -Inglish and that
he \r.s not suffioi.ntly familiar with the lpncungo to
b- fully aware of th- inculpatory nature of the statements
h- was making,

Th - Tribunal la not impressed with these Assertions*

The evidenc- shows that prior to th. war th. defendant

had lived for several y-ars In the ^nit-d Stat-s, where

h. had acquired at least an average understanding and

oonpr-hension of th- English language. - r h-n he was on

the witnesa stand th- Tribunal questioned him at 1-ngth

in ord-r to :3c-:tain th- ext-nt of his knowledge of
* #

-nglish, and in particular, of hi3 understanding of the

m.axing of the words used by him in his affidavit. «s

%

a r.sult of this questioning th. Tribunal in oonvinc-d
that no undue or imarop.r advantage vr 3 taken of the
d.fondant in procuring the affidavit, and that at th- tine

U535


19 *i^uia——IL-29-5-FrLn.ay
Court I


-f in rrogr.tlon by the Prosecution HoVen imow and
und.rst/-d > .rr ;ofcly v?.ll tho nntur- of the statements
he WOS-mriciiir.

The f -.obs eontoin~d in the ^ovon affidavit were
convincingly aul> 3 cnti '.t..d by oth~r evidence in the record;
th- cnly real difference b.ing that the evidence shows the
defendant to lwv„ b-en guilty of -v-n many hundreds mere
murders than -r* ndmifct d by hi* *n his affidavit. rt s
stated, In .SEenee, by one of th~ Prosecution witn~ss;s
in corm-ottun with the subject: iIov:r. <. r.® r'lly hill id
inentes in the hospital b-rr-cks by injection. These
people v r. .catJr — i r . " r - : malnutrition and
.xhaustion, Gov-n must hav . fcill~d 1,000 of -v:ry
nationality. Th-s- la t '* r. hilled on the initiative •
of Hov^n with no request from the illegal conn .administration
or th. political prisoners.

It ic obvious from the evidence that throughout hin
ontir- s-rvice at uchenwald, Hovsn attempted to s-rve
three .v.st-rs: Th. SS Camp ^ministration, the criminal
prison -re, and the political prisoners of the camp. A 3
- r.sult h- became ori-ainnlly icoliont-d in siurder 3
committed by -.11 thr.e groups involving th- deaths of
non-Ger.u-n n't-ion-Is, 3 oa~ of whom were prisoners of vr.r
and others of whoa were civili-ns. In addition to thes.,
h- comaitt.d .-xurdera on his own individual responsibility.
There cun b. nothing said in mitigation of such conduct.

To the extent that the crin.a committed by *^oven w.re
not war crin.s, th-y wer^ crln s against hunanity.
iiamia3Lir r c3e:c:al o.iG^inz/.Tiai:

’Jjid-r count ^our of the Indictment the defendant
is charged with being a member of an organization


11520


19 cgU3 t——lL-^9-> Primer*

Court I

beolared criminal by tha Judgment of the In tar national

•

-'ilit-ry Tribunal, namely, the SS. The evidence shows
that Ho7-n became a mefflbor of the S 5 in 1934, and
remained in this organization throughout th- war. -^s a
ceat-r of the 3S he ’./as criminally implicated in th-

•

commission of far Crimes end Crimes against Humanity,
as charged under Counts Two and Three of th«- Indictment.

c 0 1; C LU 3 I 0 :t

Military Tribunal I finds'and adjudg-s the

• •

d..fenJ n r.t faldcflLar Hov^n guilty, under Cruntn Two,

Thr-e and Jour cf the Indictment.


11521


T? 194 ?-JU< r I-3C-1—linger

Court I


-HZ •jJ~J>ITrr , I: .?ndgc "ebrlng will continuo with the reeding of
the Judiaant.

J7TC-Z S-Sa&t 3LIC-L3 ICZ

V

'"The dofen-’»nt Beiblbonk la charged with personal responsibility
for, and participation In, seawater experiments.

The defendant Belglbede. or. Austrian cltl-en, «)># a Captain in
the Medical Dcp*rtnent of the C-ercen Air loree fron Key 1941 until
the end of the war. In Jtfflo, 19*4, while atatloaad nt the hospital
for Paratrooporo nt Tnrvlo, Italy v ho ro.ci»ofl fcrror. (roa >.t n
Bllltwy end nodical superior, defendant Becker.Jreyoes.'. vo cerry
out aepvrtor experiments at Dachau.

rt« soaveter exrorlrents hrvo been described in detail in that
portions of thoJudgnent dealing with defendants Schroeder ar.d
Socks r-T raysang,

Tha dofendcnt Bpigloeck testified that ho roported to Berlin at

the end of Juno 19*4, where Bockor-Frcyncng told hin the neturo n nd

purpose of tho eroerlaenta, Upon th*t trip ho aloo reported to and

talkod with the defondant -'chroeder. Frcn *ose conversations ho loarnod

that the prlae purpoco cf the exporirmts vro to tost tho proconc

'■eTOlopod by Berka for raking soavater potable and oloo to accortaln

%

whether It would bo bettor for a shipwrecked person in distress at
sea to go coxrletely without seawater or to drink snail ouahtlties
thereof.

It r ~pc-rg fro B the record that the persona used in the e7T)«>rlnentB
were 40 I-ypaiec of various nationalities who h«d boca forr.orly at
Auachvit- but who had been brought to Dachau under the pretox that
they were to be assigned to various work detollc. These persona had
been inprisonod in the concentration eanps on the baris th-t they
vc-e “Aesoclal persons. r ~othing «as said to then about being used
»s hnaan subjects in =edl*l exporlnor.ts. Vhon they reached Dachan
cose of thee were told that they were being assigned to the seewatcr
experiment detail.


11522


13 logs* 1347_JU«S2_30_2_ Areingcr
Court I


3eigloeck testified •'•at before beginning the emericents he called
*ke subjects together and told then the purpose of the expo lcents
ar.d asked thee If t'-ay wanted to participate. He did not tell thee
the duration of the exncrinentB, or th-t they could withdraw if ever
they reached the phy-lcal or rental otate that continuation of the
experiment should see- to then to he i-poasibla. ?he evidence ie that
non# of the experimental subjects felt that they dared refuge be coning
experimental subjects for fear of unpleasant eonre ft -ior.cos if thoy voiced
any objections,

The defendant testified that pursuant to tho ordsr thrt had boon
given hie, it was necesoary that the subjects to thirst for a .continuous
period.; and that the ^Cwetion <rl vhm, if ever, they ohould bo reliovod
during the course of the experiment v-c a ratter which he rocervod
for his cvn decision,

During the course of tho oxporlno-tc the subjects were locked in
a roos. As to t>i 3 pharo cf the progr* the defendant testified that
"They should hart betn lockol in a lot hotter then thoy wore becauoo
then thoy would have had -to opportunity at all to got frosh vator on
the side."

At the trial tho defendant prod-seed clinical charts which ho oaid
were Bade during the course of the experiments and which, according
to the defendant, showed that tho oubjocto did not suffer injury.

Cn cro-.c—examination tho defendant adaltted that ooce of the charts
had been altered by his since he reached Hurnberg in order to prooont a
sore favorable picture cf the erpericcnts.

•It do r.ot think it noceesary to discuss in d.otail what is c v c*m
by the charts either before or after the fraudulent alterations. v e
think it only sece^sery to say that a nan who intends to roly on
written evidence at a trial docc not fraudulently alter such evidence
frets ary h nest or worthy notice.

-he defendant clains that he was at all tines extremely roluctant
to perform: the experiaento with which ho in charred, and did so only

11523


19 AogaBt I94^-X-K5B-3 0 -3i A -rluger

Court I


out of hie secs* oh obedience ae a ecIdler to superior authority.

'-'eder Control Ccancil L»v So. 10 ouch fact doeo sot constitute hut
will he considered, if at all, cal7 in mitigation of ser.tonce.

In our view the exoe Inenial subjects were treated brutally.

Many of then endured uueh pain end tuf'ering, althourii Iron the evidence
we cannot find that ar.y deaths occurred arose the erpcrinentel
subjects.

It ia apparent fros the evidence that the ernerlne-.ts were ecoon-
teilly criminal in their nature, and that noiwercon nationals wore
•seed without thoir consent as exceriaental oubjectr, To tho extent
that the crl^cc cozcitted hy defendant 3dglbooc>: were -’Ct war crinco
they wero crines orninot Insanity.

CC5CLTJSICH

Hill tar y Tribunal I finds nr-' adjudgoo tho dolendar.t Milholn
Beiglbocck guilty -mder C w «ntc Two rnd Three of tho Xndicteent.

So will r.ow turn to tho ca-o of Pokom".

tSMSBO.

“ho defendant Pefcorny io chergod with opocial responsibility for
and participation in crininal sterilization experiments, as rot forth
In Counts Two and Throo of tho lndictnont.

It io concodod by tho prosecution that in conctrodietinctlon
to all ether defendants the defondant Poloray noror hold and pooition
of reasons ibllity in tho Party or State Hierarchy of Hazl Gcrnany.
Keltbcr w?r ho a c*-.ber of the Sail Party or of tho SS. Formerly a
Creche Slovakian citizen, he bec-re a citizen of tho Creator C-orum
Hoieh, under tho Munich Agreement of October 1936. firing tho war
he served ns a nodical officar In tho C-orran Arsy and attainod the
rank of captain.

The only diroct evidence bearing on tho guilt of the defondant
io a lot tor written by Fokcrny to Hitler in October 1941, suggesting
the use of a drug, caladius ceguinun, «e a possible ueana of nodical

115211


Ccurs I


sterilization of peoples of the occupied territories. The letter
follows!

“To the

3elch Commissioner for the Consolidation of C-ersan Polkdon
33 H i : e 1 o r, Chief of Police,

22LIS.

"1 htc; you tc turn your attention to the following erruner.tr.

I We requested Professor Hoehn to forward thle latter to you. I
hare chosen tvls direct way to you In order tc r.void the slower
process through charnels and tho possibility of an indiccrotion in
-or--d to the eventually enormous ioportarco of tho ldons presented.

"Led by tho Idea that the enesy nust net ono/ o- conquered
but destroyed, I feel obli*ed to present to you, no the Holch
Coenitsicnor fer tho Consolidation of Goman Folkdoc the following!

"Dr. Kadrus published tho result of his research on a
w.Mr-M sterilL- AiHia (*>th article .-ro enclosed). Hording thoco
articles, tho laacnso importance of this dru.; In tho present
fight of our people occurred tc so. If , ga tho frCS lfl th la-TftggoU^-
l* y e -^ pQ««iblo to prod u ce n dmr which after ft r9lfl ll v gJX-flLflX.t
affects an «^-«-pptlblo stert H-atlc a ’*T\ hr wn belies. -then
v- w^iid We A now ncw f . ful weapon at_Qur_dlcnO£nl. *>»® Thou/ht olono
th.t tho 3 Billion Bolsheviks, at present Goman prisoners, could bo
o tori Used so thet they co-aid be used as laborers hut ho prevented
froo reproduction, opens tho aost far ronchlng perspectives.

•KpdBoa found th t tho sap of tho Schwoi.-rohr (Caladlun oogulnua)
when taken by south or given os Injection to male but also to fexolo
animals, also after a cer'aln tlno produces permanent sterility.

The lUuetr-Mona scco-ronylng the scientific articles arc convincing.
If By Ideas meet your a-.prcval tho following co rreo should bo

tokens

1.) Dr. Kadaus must sot publish any core such art idee (-ho
enemy listened)

11! 25


1° Aurest 194’-£^s2_30-5_ir=i=-er
Court I

2. ) Multiplying the plant (easily cultivated in greenhouses')

3. ) I mediate research o2 huaad beings (criminal jI ) in order

to determine the doso and length of tho treatcent.

4 # ) ^lich research of tho constitutional fcrsula of the effoctivo
chcnicfll substance in order tc

5.) produce it synthetically if poaoiblo.

3 A 3 Goman physician and Cfciof physician cf the rocervoe of tho
Goman Vchrcacht, retired, 9d^.a.B), I undertake to keep occrct
tho purooeo M eug ested ty no in thin letter.

Hoil Hitler*

Signed! Dr. Folcrny
Spoclalint fer ekln

Keootau, Gototor 1941. »nd roneral dlocaeco."

Tho defondant hr# attonped to explain hie aotivoo for rending
tho lot*tr ty nrcortinr that for aono tino prior to it« transitttal
ho had k-cvn of Kimlcr's intontions to stcrllizo all «*ovs and in¬
hat It onto of tho -stern territories and had hoped to find ro»o
aeons of provcntln^ tho oxocution of thia dreadful pre.-raa. °o know,
hoc-use cf ’’lo special cxpcrlonco an a apccialiat in akin md vcneroal
User - jo, tVt sterilization of hunrn tolngo could not to effected
ty tho e.dalniott-tioB of ealadlua uogulmxa. a o thought, however, that
if tho articles vrit'en ty Xrdau a could to trowht to.tho attention
to Hinaler tho letter al ht turn ’'is attentions to tho unobtrusive
aothod for atorillxation which hrd teen tug ertod by tho articloo and

a

thus to diverted, at loact tonpcrarily, frea continuing hlo prograc
of castration end sterilization ty well-known, tried and tooted
acthods. Therefore the letter w r written — so explained tho
defondant not for tho purpose cf furthering, tut of sabotaging
the nrc gran.

Wo arc net irpreroed with the defense which has teen tendered ty
the defendant and havu groat difficulty in believing that he v-s aotivetod
by the high purposes which ho aesorted iapollcd hia to vrito tho
letter. Hati*r aro vc inclined to the view that tho letter was written

12526


19 As*wt 1947-JLXSr_30-6-Arr:l=Ecr
Court I


-7 rorfccmy for r cr7 different and coro personal reasons.

3e that howc-xr as it nay, et«.ry defendant la presumed to ho
Innocent until ho heo hen pro-on guilty. In the case of Polorny tho
Prosecution hot failed to sustain the burden. A s -.onotrouo pnd bpso
an tho BU*~cstions in the lottor aro, there is rot the slightort
evidence that ary stops vero ever tpken to put then into cxocutlon
hy h u m an oxperinentation. Vo find, therefore, that tho defendant must
he acquitted — not hoeauso of tho dofer.rc tondcrcd, hut in opito of
It.

ccjcxcsxck


Xilit-ry Tribunal I finds and adjudges that tho defondant Adolf
Polorny is no* guilty of tho chares contained in the Indictnont, and
directs that ho be diochar'cd iron custody ur.dor tho Indictment vhon
the Tribunal proaontly adjourns.

J’J3TL Si-VaSIKi Judgo Crawford will continue with tho rording
•f tho Judgsont.

JVXL CH.VTC2D: Tho ©nao of the Defendant Oberhouaer

:3L?K1’JS1H


The defendant Cbcrheuaor lo charred under Counts Two rod Three
of the Indictnont with Sulfanilamide, hone, K u oclo and L'orvo
?.o r onoration and ono "r-.nsolantaticn, an Storlliration 3x'orlnonto.

The charge of participation in the aiorlliratlon experiments hao
been nbandened by tho prcrecuticn and win not bo considered further.

Tho defendant Oberhousor Joined tho league of C-arman Girlc (3.

-• In 1935 and held tho rank of "Slock Leader". In Au,-u-t 1937
she bocano a member of th.o -n*i Party, "ho wae also o member of tho
A3*ocl->tlon of Optional Socialist Physicians, "he volunteered for
the position of e carp doctor in the women’s depprtnont of tho Bavono—
brude Concentration C*cp in 1940, and remained thoro until June 19d3.
She v:s then given a position as areirtant physician in tho Hohonlychon
Hospital under tho defendant Gcbhprdt.

Sorardin^ her connection with both tho Sulfanilamide and tho Sono,


1152?


19 Jfcy-UBt 1947-lJt:^- 3C-7-lr=lB(-er
Court 1


Muscle end -‘ore He. cncration ami Bone rr«*anlantaticn Ixpcrlsent?,
the *&za f«cts arc applicable ns were presented In tho caoosc of
defendants lischcr and Gebhardt. Fischer and Obcrhcucer were
Gcbh*rdt's activo agents In carrying out these experieents. Thoy
did n grort deni of tho actual work, -hey personally conr.ittcd atro¬
cities involved therein,

O

A <ev facts produced in evidence regarding the special w ork of
defendant Oborhouecr in th<sc experiments arc ontitlcd to cement.


Oberhousor wra thoroughly aware of the nature and pvYposc of
the cTperiBOnts, She aided in the selection of the subjocte, ravo
then physical calcinations, and otherwise prepared that for tho
operation table. She w-g present in the operating room at the tlao
of tho opcr"tions and. assiotod in tho operational procedures. She
faithfully ccoporatcd with C* bhardt and Fischer rt the conclusion of


oach operation by dolibcratoly neglecting the petionts so that
tho vou rft vhich had been riven tho subjects would reach tho
naxicun dogroo of infection.

Tepticeny of tho witness Sofia Kaetko, an X-r r y technician in tho
carp at Savonabruck, ia th"t deaths occurred anon-; tho experimental
oubJcc*c. Most of these deaths c-juld hn-/o been avorted by proper
root-oporDti'O care or proper treateent or by the amputation of badly


infectod aonbcrc.


In one instance — tho c~ o of a Erystyna I’abeka — small plocon
of bor.o were cut 'ro= both lega of the subject. Virtcsa Meezka testi¬
fied f-.-t she road on the c» t of tho patient that one ono leg


periostem had. been loft and on the other leg periosteum had boon
renoved to other with bone. Bocpsuc she w B s of the opinion th t tho
purpose of tho c-pori=cr.t h».d been to check regeneration, tho witness
asked tho defendant Obcrhcus.r, "Hew do you expect to get rcgcrerrti i 'n
»f bone if tho bones arc with periostous?* Tc t*-io the defendant re¬
plied, “?hrt is Just what wo want to check.*

ifen-seneentinr nor—^-erran nationa-ls were usod in at least ooco

11528


19 ingest 1947-J-XSEL30-&- Arringcr
“curt I

of the expcriscnts. Mary of tho- died -a a rca-'lt of the cxpcrinontG.

-o the extent th-t the crimes conrittvd wore rot ver crir.cs r they vero
cringe a -aits t taaanitj.

CC5CL0SIC#

Military Tribunal I finds rad adjudges th.-t the defondart
Gberhouser is guilty under Counts "wo and "hreo cf the indlctaont.

JTJTGS SETSSXVfc The case of the Defendant ?iBchv- r.

T1SCHU

The defendant Fischer is charged under Counts ?„o and Thr.c
with Sulfanllanido and 3cr.c, Muscle and tfcn’c-Jtofoncratic.n and Bono-1
T ran5plartntion Ixpcriaents.

Frits Fischer Joir. d tho Ailgcr.oino-SS In February 1934 and tho
X3U$> In 1939, In tho lattor yc n r ho Joined the *affcn-35 nr.d w a o
aosimod to tho SS unit In tho Hohcnlychcn “ospltal os a physician
•ubordinr.tod to the defendant Gobhnrdt. In Juno 19*0 ho vac trrnoforrcd
to tho SS re ifiCnt Lclbetnndarto ■Adolf K itlcr" f and returned tho once
year to Hohonlychcn ao sooiotant phyoiclim to Gebhardt, vhoro ho
reealned until Xpy 19*3, Ho thon oerrod as a surgoon on both tho tpotorn .
nr.d V 0 atom Froats and, eftcr haring been w-^und, d In A u urt 1944, eaao
bade to Hohonlychcn as a pstiont. Ir. December 1944 ho wao arolgnod
to tho Ch/rity Hospital In Berlin, but returned »-ain to Hohcnlychon
as Gcbhardt'o assistant in A^ril 195, In tho Vrf<o > *—S ho attalnod
tho rank of Strurabonnfuohrcr (Major).

3nJAJILA'I3- apASEEiTSs

C-cbharrt, ae shown olewhero in this Judgaent, was in ncroenal

chargo of the work being <*cno in this field by his oseintnnt Frits

Fischer. ?h-t tho latter performed rioct of tho cular.ilnnldc cxpcrincntnl

work is not denied by hin; on tho contrary, he freoly ahslto it. ?ho

dofonoo offered in his behalf is twofold; that the cxperinontal cub-

Jcc *“ wer to h-rc alleged do th scrtcrccr, then i-ponding, corauted

tc soaothing loss scvorc in tho ccnt they surriv d the cxperlnonte;

and that defendant Fi-cher was acting under ailltary orders free

hio s-acricr officer Frcfccsor Gebhardt, These defenses hare been

”529


19 August 19.*"—J:UW-Imiagor
Court I


ccr-aidcrcd rejected 1 = other p-~rtc of this cudgncat,

I*. i 8 turo, however, th-t p«ra raph 4 (b) of Article II of
Control Council Lpv Jo. 1C reads:

9 The f-ct that any pc sen peted pursuant to tho order of
Me rorernnent or of a a«>crior docs r.ot fr. c his free responsibility
for criac, but nay bo considered in citiration."

It is unnecessary to trice up and answer all tho ar.uaor.to thnt
-i fat bo proaonted upon whether o r not Fischer is entitled to a
litigation of sontonco duo to tho clrcttsstanccs elaised as the bpein
of such mitigation. He acted with the -oct couplotc knowledge thi-t
whpt ho v aa doin.- w*»s fur.dpr.eetally criminal, evon thou#) directed
-7 * superior. Under *hc eircunstonece his defonso oust bo
reject d, ond ho =u-t be hold to be rullty »i dbargod*

3C.T , IT,CL* AiT) /: ? T TIGUTRATIQH iiT SCSI TBAHSPUHSAIXCU:

Ifao osporlsonts hp^o been discuscod in connection with the case
of tho dofondpnt Gebhardt, who vrs arciotod thoroin by tho dofondont
Fiaehcr. “ostiaony and c-hiMtr now constituting parts of tho rocord
in this c--o reveal th-t lieohor has offored no oubntantial defonso
to tho c"'pr o. Indeed, crir.laal connection with thc.-o oxporinonto
is «dal.od, nad tho rdriaolcn include^ tho defendant's own toctinony
that ho personally pcrforccd at least son® of tho oporations. It only
reraise for tho Tribunal to hold th*t cn tho specification pbovc
eontlonod tho defendant Fiachor is ■ •illty.

To tho cr.tcnt thr t tho crises ‘ccssittod by defendant Fischer woro
not v.-,r crises they woro criror a-pinst tessanltjr.

MSOSPS-IP L C?.I Ii*AL 'S I’.-at::

Under Trent Four cf the Ir.dictsont Fritz Fischer is char god
with ’ else a ooobor of an organisation doclrred crir.inal by tho
•'ndfricnt cf *fao Intcruati sal ^il!tory Tribunal, nonely tho The
evidence shews tfaot ”rit- Fi-cher becano a member of the FT in 1934
pnd -eneined in this organisation until tho end :f tho war, Ao a

ncnber of the S3 ho -s criminally 1-plicpted in tho admission

‘ H530


I


19 Au^ust 19/7-S_y^-30-l^- lr-la.-er
^eirt X

of r Crimea and C r lrca against cmarity, »c cfcprred under Counts
"wo and Thrae of the -ndlcteer*.

, c:.*ci3si«a

Hilit ry Tribunal X finds and adjudge* th-t the defendant
?rlt* Ilaclvr ij pullty under Counts Two* ?hreo and four of the
ladlctsent.

JVDGL 3Lil£s The Tribunal vill no* bo in recess until
ten o* cl ode toxorrow acmtn^ vhen the sentence will be loosed by
th« “rlbunal ’-^ea the defendants who hare been found guilty.

-HZ .L-HSEAL: ?he Tribunal will be In racers until ton o' clock
tocorrcv -oraln*.

C^he Tribunal rd„‘eurned u til 20 Aoust 194? at 1000 hourc,)

I


11531


“cert X

2C Aug 4^-Jt-3-l-5EM-4aonard


Official Transcript of the Aaeriean KiJ.itary
fritead in the natter of the United States of
i.-erica against Karl Brandt, et al. defendants,
sitting at Kuernberg. Geicasy, on 20 August 1S47,
\ lg CCy-Justice Seals presiding.


TH E .LABSHAL: Persons in the courtrocc vill please find their seats.

The Eon or able, the Judges of Military Tribunal I- Military Tribunal I

%

is nov in session. God save the United States of Anerica and this
Honorable Tribunal. Thera vill be order in tho court.

TEE PBlSirnaT: Military Trib.. .al I has convened this corning for
the purpose of laposing sentences upec the defendants vr.o have boon on
trial before this Tribunal and who have been, by the Tribunal, adjudged

t

guilty.

Officer of the Guard, vill you bring before the Tribunal the
defendant Karl Brandt.

Karl Brandt, Military Tribunal * has found and adjudged you grilty
of War Crises, Crlsos against Hunan i vy, end eccborshlp in ra organisation
do cl arc d cricinal by the Jud^ent of tho International Military Tribunal,
as chargod under the lndictsont heretofore filed against you.

for your said crises on vhich you have boon end nov stand convictod
Military Tribunal I ssntcnces you, Kori Brandt, to death by hanging.

And cay God have sercy on your soul.

The Officer of the Guard vill recove the defendant Brandt.

Tho Officer of the Guard vill lag before tho Tribunal the defon¬
dant Siegfried Eondlosor.

Siegfried K a rd loscr, Military Tribunal X has found and adjudged
yai guilty of bar Crlsos and Crises against Eusanity, as charged under


the indictaent heretofore filed against ycu.

Tor your said crises on vhich you have boen and nov stand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Siegfried Kandloeer, to ieprisonnent
th^/fOli tern and period of your natural life, to be served at such

^ a. e • v *

priloc or prisons, or other appropriate placo of confineaent, ti shall
ce deterair.ed by cocretent authority.

The Cffic tLr of tho Guard vill recove the defendant Eandloser.


11532


Co-art I

2C Aug 47-M-3-2~S3i-LcOsard

Officer of tk* I' vill bring the defendant Oskar Schroeder.

a— x«r Schroeder, Military Tribunal I haa found and adjudged you
guilty of Var Crises and Crises against Humanity, as charged under the
indictment heretofore filed against you.

Tor ycur 6aid crises on which you have been and now etand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences you. Calcar Schroedor, to imprisonment for
the full tors and period of your natural life, to be eorved at euch
prison or prisons, or other appropriate place of conflnecent, as shall
be determined by cospetent authority.

The Officer of the Suord will remove the defendant Schroedor.

Officer of the Guard, you will bring before the Tribunal tho
defendant Earl Genzken.

Xarl Gensken, military Tribunal Z has found and adjudged you guilty
of Var Crlaee, Crises against Eusanl'v, and acebershlp in an organisation
declared criainal by tho Jud^nt he International Mil;lory Tribunal,
as charged under tho indicteont heretofore filed against you.

Tor your said crises on >&lck you hove been and now stand convictod
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Karl Genxkcn. to ieprlronnent for
the full torn and period of ycur natural life, to be served at ouch
prison or prisons, or other appropriate place of confinement, an shall
be detcrsinol b7 competent authority.

Tho Officer of the Guarl will remove the defondant Gensken.

Officer of the Guard, you will bring beforo the Tribunal the
defendant Earl Gebhardt.

Earl Gebhardt, Military Tribunal I has found and edjudged you
guilty cf Var Crises, Crises against Humanity, end sesberohip in an
organisation declared cri=in?l by the Judgment of the International
Military Tribunal, as charged under the icdictaont heretofore filed
igalnst you.

lor your said crises on Welch you have been and now stand convictod
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Earl Gebhardt, to death by hanging.

And nay God cave serey upon your soul, >.— J


11533


Court I

2C Aug 4?-iC-3-3-S£K-Lacnerd


Officer of the Guard vill remove the defendant Gephardt.

The Officer of the Guard vill ring before the Tribunal the dofondant
Saiolf Brandt.

Pudclf Brandt, kilitary Tribuc* I has found and adjudged you guilty
of Var Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and membership in an organization
declared cririnal by the Judgsent of the International Military Tribunal,
as chargod under the indicteent heretofore filed against you.

7or your said crises on idiich : have been and nov stand convictod
Kilitary Tribunal I sentences you, Rudolf Brandt, to death by hanging.

And nay God have sercy upon your soul.

The Officer of the Guard vill renove the defendant Rudolf Brandt.

Tho Officer of the Guard vill bring before tho Tribunal the dofondant

- vV

Joachis Krugovsky. ^

Coach in Krugovary, kilitary Tribunal I has found and udjudgod you

guilty of Var Crises, Crises against Humanity, and sanberchip in an

• »

organization declorei crlnical V V j Judjaent of the International
Military Tribunal, as chargod under the lndlctnor.t heretofore filed
against ycu.

Tor your said crises on vhich you have boon and nov stand convictod
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Joachis krugovsicy, to doath by hanging.
And say God hove sercy upon your soul.

The Cffleer of the Guard vill renove the defondant Krugovsky.

The Officer of the Guard vill bring before tho Tribunal the dofondant
Helmut Poppendlcic.

Helmut Poppendlcic, Military Tribunal I has found and adjudged you
guilty of membership in an organization declarei criminal by the Judgmont
of the International Military Tribunal, as charged under tho* indictoent
heretofore filed against you.

Tor ycur said crime on vhich you have been and nov stand convictod

kilitary Tribunal I sentences you, Helmut Poppendick, ttf imprisonment

for a term of tec years, to be served at such prison or prisons, or other

• «

appropriate place cf confinement, as shall be determined by competent

U531;


Court I

20 lu* 47-H-3-t-iai-L*o:iard


authority.

Iha Cfficer of the Guard vill reuove the defendant Poppendick.


11535


Coart I

20 «ug 47-4t-4-l-Z3i-ieoaard


The Officer of the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the
def end a n t Volfran Slavers.

Volf ran Slavers, *11 it ary Tribunal I has found and oijudged you
guilty of Var Crises, Crises against Hunanity, and neaberehip in an
organisation declared crininal by the Judgment of the International
Kllltary Tribunal, as charged under the indictaent heretofore filed
•gainst you.

7or your said crinee on which you have been and now stand convictod
*

Kllltary Tribunal I sentences you, Volfror Sievers, to death by hanging.

And cay God have cercy upon your soul.

The Officer of the Guard will recove the defendant Sievers.

The Officer of the Guard will bring beforo the Tribunal the
defendant Gerhard Hose.

Gorhard Bose, Kllltary Tribunal Z has found and adjudged you guilty
of Var Criaeo and Crises against Hunanity, as charged under tho indict¬
ment heretofore filed against you.

Tor your said crlces on id-.ich you have been and now stand convictod
Kllltary Tribunal I sentences you, Gerhard Bono, to leprioonnont for
tho full tens and period of ycur natural life, to bo oervod at such
prison or -,.ri«ons, or other appropriate place of confinenont, as ehull
be deterclned by cospetont author!,/.

The Officer of the Guard will renovo the defendant Hoec.

The Officer of the Guard will bring before tho Tribunal the
defendant Viktor 3reck.

Viktor Brack, Military Tribunal I has found and adjudged you
guilty of Var Crises, Crlccs against Hunanity, and necbcrBhlp in on
organization declared cricinal by ihe Judgment of the International
Military Tribunal, as charged under the Indie teen*, heretofore filed
against 70U.

lor ycur said crises cn which you have been and no- stand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Viktor Brack, to death by hanging.

And nay God have sorsy upon your soul.

11536


Court I

2C Ac.; 47-M-fr-2-ZS*~L«cnsTd -


The Officer of the Guard vlll remove tie defendant Viktor Brack.

5V.e Officer of the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the defen¬
dant Bocicer-Treyseng.

Hermann 3ecker-Tr ay sang, Military Tri banal I hoc found and adjudged
70u guilty of 'far Crises and Crln^s against Eusanity, as charged undor
the indictment heretofore filed against you.

Tor your said crises on ^ich you have been and now stand convicted
Kilitcry Tribunal I sentences you, Hermann Becker Troyscng, to impriaon-
sent for a tern of twenty years, to be served at such prison or prisons,
cr other appropriate place of confinement, as shall be determined by
aoapetent authority.

Tho Officer of the Guard will rcsove the defendant Beckor-Troysong.

Tho Officer of the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the defen¬
dant Kaldsaar Eoven.

Waldenar Hovon, Military Tribunal I has found and adjudged you
guilty of Ear Crisoo, Crireo against Kusanlty, and noaborship In un
organisation dsclored criainal by the judgncnt of the International
Military Tribunal, as charged under the indiotnant heretofore filed
against you.

Tor your said crlooo on which you have boon and nov stand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Vuldocar Horan, to daath by hanging.

And nay God have nercy upon your soul.

The Officer of tho Guard will roaovo the defendant Hoven.

The Cfficor ol the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the defon¬
dant Vilhela Beiglbock.

Vilhele Beiglbock, Military Trilwnal I has found and adjudged you
guilty of War Grices end Crises against Humanity, as charged under the
Indlctaont heretofore filed against you.

Tor your said crimes on which you have boon and new stand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences 70U, Vilhela 3eiglbock, to iaoriBOnnent
for a tern of fifteen years, to be served at such prison or prisons, or

other appropriate place of confinesent, as shall be determined by com¬
petent authority.


11537


Court I

20 lug 47-*:~V-3-E2<-1 to nerd

Tho Officer of the Guard will raore the defendant Vilhelm 3eiglbock.

J.e Officer of the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the defen¬
dant Herts Cberkeuser. '

Herta Cberhduser, Military Tribunal I has found and adjudged you
guilty of Var Crises end Crises against Humanity, as charged under the
indictment heretofore filed against you.

Tor your said crises on which you hare been and non stand convictod
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Herta Oberheusor, to imprisonment for
a tors of twenty yeare, to be served at such prison or prisons, or other
appropriate place of coafinesent, as shall be deternlnod by competent
authority.

The Officer cf the Aiard will remove tho defondant Herta Cberhousor,

Tfco Cfficor of the Guard will bring before the Tribunal the defen¬
dant Fyitr Tischor.

Frits Fischer, Military Tribunal I has found and adjudged you guilty
of Vnr Crisos, Crines against humanity, and membership in nr. organization
declarod criminal by the Jud«sont of tho International Military Tribunal,
as charged under the indictment heretofore filed ngainot you.

7or your sail crines on td-.ich you fcnvo been cud now stand convicted
Military Tribunal I sentences you, Frits Fischer, to l^risonoent for
tfco full tern and period of your natural life, to be sorvod at such
prison or prisons, cr ether appropriate place of confincsont, ao ohall
be determined by competent authority.

The Officer of the Guard will reaove the defendant Fritz Fincher.

Military Tribunal I having now completed Its duties in the trial,
Judgment, and sentence in Case So. 1, United States of America versus

I

lari Brandt and others, long ponding before this Tribunal, it is now
ordered that Military Tribunal I now adjourn without day.

Military Tribunal I stands adjourned.

(At 10cC hours. Military Tribunal I was adjourned.)


U533


ROLL
