Scully's Scrapbook by Frank ScullyScully's Scrapbook by Frank Scully

Magnetic Springs, O.   Oct. 8
Some Hollywood characters manufacturing a picture presuming to give the inside story of flying saucers have closed the set to all visitors, including members of the press.  I presume, in one category or another, that would include muggs like me. 
Others are rushing to Hollywood with legends that they have already photographed saucers swirling around the Alaskan icecaps and have had to sit on the footage for reasons of security up to now.   A publication called Plastics has even claimed seeing the occupants of such a saucer in Oregon.   
Instead of tearing my hair out at being scooped on these items, I feel terribly sorry for the poor wights who are depriving themselves of my vastly superior knowledge in the field of their endeavors.  
I presume these producers are attempting to dramatize saucers which have had the origin of their flight from this earth.  I have just spent a weekend with scientists who know all there is to know about flying saucers, not only from this planet but from others.  In one afternoon, these men convinced me that they knew more about flying saucers than the surviving members of Mack Sennett's crockery that once functioned for entertainment and profit at Edendale, Cal.  
Weeks ago these sages informed me that they had checked on two of the disks which had landed here from another planet and even told where the patters had landed:   The Mojave Desert got one and the Sahara got the other.   The one that landed in Africa was more cracked than a psychiatrist but the other panicked gently to the earth like  a slow motion of Sonja Henie imitating a dying swan.   All the saucer showed on inspection was a tiny hole in its side about the size of a 6B pencil.
The word "pencil" made the scientists think of Venus, a planet well within the cruising limits of our solar system.  IF the disk traveled on magnetic waves, the Scientists assured me the round trip from Venus and back could be made in 42 minutes.  This one obviously had come down on a one-way pass.They Ever Find The Cup?
The saucer was 100 feet across and the cabin itself was about 18 feet in diameter.  Its center remained at rest but it had an outer edge that revolved at terrific speed.  It operated in other words like a magnetically controlled helicopter.   It was not propelled by jet or other power such as we have been using to date.
Magnetic waves, the scientists explained, emanating from the sun, go around the earth and the moon like millions of fine-spun belt line.  Each planet has its moon and operates a similar way the trick in getting from one planet to another is to get from a positive to a negative which those in control of these flying disks managed to do.
The structure which had withstood the trip from one planet to another had two metals completely unknown on this earth of ours, but the rest in the min was of recognizable materials?

What No Women?
Inside the saucer were 16 men.  They were intact but charred black , due either to gases which had been siphoned into that pencil-hole which developed in the outer structure on being caught in between the positive and negative magnetic waves en route from one planet to another.
The men were about the size of Singer midgets.  They weren't Singer midgets because all these have been accounted for.  Neither were they pigmies from African jungle.  Something about their bone and skull structure was different the scientists said.
Though the saucer was loaded with pushbuttons and control instruments none of the American scientists present dared to push any of the buttons for fear of being blown to wherever the charred bodies had come from.  Our scientists bombed the ship with cosmic rays and geiger devices to make sure no lethal dangers were present before they opened the cabin door.  
There was some water in containers in the saucer.  When tested it turned out to be heavier than ours, much like the water found in Norway which the Nazis figured would help them be the first to make an atom bomb.Food clothing Heavy Drinks
Tiny capsules containing food were also found in the turret cabin.  None of the scientists felt very hungry at the time and  so the capsules were fed to guinea pigs which seemingly are always hungry.  The guinea pigs thrived on the concentrates.
Examination of the clothes of the Saucerians revealed that though they were far ahead of us in the sciences, they were behind us in styles.  Their styles were similar to those of 1890 but their cloth was of a material unknown to us.  It had not been damage in flight either.  The clothes had metal buttons and buttonholes but no zippers. 
In other matters these faraway people seemed far ahead of us. What we are still playing around in the kindergarten of atomic energy, they are dealing in magnetic energy.  Currently the scientists said we can direct missiles to Hawaii via magnetic waves in 15 minutes but in the magnetic field 1,00,00 a second is supposed to be a standard speed.   Nobody talks of M.p.h but m.p.s
Indeed one of the scientists showed me a gamma ray magnetron, a little back box about the size of a portable radio which he said can make something like 33,000,000 answers   in a minute tell you how deep you'll have to dig for org bodies, liquids, oil, and so forth and how much volume you'll find when you get there.Something New in Radio
The Saucerians they said are familiar with radio too but not as we know it.  One extracted from their distarred platter had no tubes no serials no plug-ins.  It was operated magnetically and gave off sounds similar to the noises our scientists heard when checking on enemy places and submarines in the last war.  Also on the saucer was found and indestructible parchment with wordings as yet uncoded.  These scientists believe however that the Saucerians must be using a system of mathematics similar to ours and based on numbers from 1 to 9 to have got where they have in teh sciences.  They have passed up but seemingly along the same rout.  Whether we can soon return the compliment and visit the Saucerians even with nothing more than the charred body of Orson Welles depends on our scientists and on how fast we step up our knowledge of magnetics.   
His watch hand, one scientist informed is a magnetic key.  He can find out where a fellow scientist is anywhere in town by tuning into his friends watchhand.  Things got a little Buck Rogerish at this point.  
I asked him if all this were tied to with the magnetic pole.  He wanted to know if I though there were only one.  No I said I kind of thought there two but that only one was in the public domain on account Metro had a claim on the others through the Admiral Byrd pictures.
There are four magnetic poles he said.  
One he said was in Little America but the other was in a place I never heard of before.  The two northern magnetic poles were in parts of Canada, which he named but which I'm afraid I'll have to treat as top secret until Drew Pearson breaks it as n inside story involved the low character of General Vaughan.