THI

SACRED

AND

THB

PROFANE

THE NATURE OF RELIGION

THE NATURE OF RELIGION

by Mircea EUade

Translated from the French 
by Willard R. Trask

A Harvest Book

Harcourt Brace & Company

San Diego New York London

CONTENTS

Copyright © 1957 by Rowohlt Taschenbueh \erlag GmbH 
Copyright C> 1959 by Harcourt Brace & Company 
Copyright renewed 1987 by Harcourt Brace & Company

This book was originally translated from the French into German and 
published in Germany under the title Das HeiUge und das Profane,

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work 
should be mailed to Permissions Department,

Harcourt Brace & Company, 8th Floor,

Orlando, Florida 32887.

ISBN 0-15-679201-X (Harvestrpbk)

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-10904

Printed in the United States of America

tXY Z |

,£<13

INTRODUCTION

8

CHAPTER l Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 
20

CHAPTER II Sacred Time and Myths 
68

CHAPTER III The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 
116

CHAPTER IV Human Existence and Sanctified Life 
162

CHRONOLOGICAL SURVEY The “History of Religions” 
as a Branch of Knowledge 
216

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
234

INDEX

244

INTRODUCTIONCHAPTER IV Human Existence and Sanctified Life 
162

CHRONOLOGICAL SURVEY The “History of Religions” 
as a Branch of Knowledge 
216

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
234

INDEX

244

INTRODUCTION

The extraordinary interest aroused all over the 
world by Rudolf Otto’s Das Heilige (The Sacred), pub¬ 
lished in 1917, still persists. Its success was certainly 
due to the author’s new and original point of view. In¬ 
stead of studying the ideas of God and religion, Otto 
undertook to analyze the modalities of the religious 
experience. Gifted with great psychological subtlety, and 
thoroughly prepared by his twofold training as theo¬ 
logian and historian of religions, he succeeded in de¬ 
termining the content and specific characteristics of 
religious experience. Passing over the rational and 
speculative side of religion, he concentrated chiefly on 
its irrational aspect. For Otto had read Luther and had 
understood what the “living God” meant to a believer. 
It was not the God of the philosophers—of Erasmus,

8

ior example; it was not an idea, an abstract notion, a 
mere moral allegory. It was a terrible power , manifested 
in the divine wrath.

In Das Heilige Otto sets himself to discover the char 
acteristics of this frightening and irrational experience. 
He finds the feeling of terror before the sacred, before 
the awe-inspiring mystery {mysterium tremendum ), the 
majesty (majestas) that emanates an overwhelming 
superiority of power; he finds religious fear before the 
fascinating mystery (mysterium fascinans) in which 
perfect fullness of being flowers. Otto characterizes all 
these experiences as numinous (from Latin numen , god), 
for they are induced by the revelation of an aspect of 
divine power. The numinous presents itself as something 
“wholly other” (ganz andere ), something basically and

9

10

The Sacred and the Pro jane9

10

The Sacred and the Pro jane

totally different. It is like nothing human or cosmic; 
confronted with it, man senses his profound nothing¬ 
ness, feels that he is only a creature, or, in the words in 
which Abraham addressed the Lord, is “but dust and 
ashes” (Genesis, 18, 27).

The sacred always manifests itself as a reality of a 
wholly different order from “natural” realities. It is 
true that language naively expresses the tremendum , or 
the majestas, or the mysterium fas drums by terms bor¬ 
rowed from the world of nature or from man’s secular 
mental life. But we know that this analogical terminol¬ 
ogy is due precisely to human inability to express the 
ganz andere ; all that goes beyond man’s natural expe¬ 
rience, language is reduced to suggesting by terms taken 
from that experience.

After forty years, Otto’s analyses have not lost their 
value; readers of this book will profit by reading and 
reflecting on them. But in the following pages we adopt 
a different perspective. We propose to present the phe¬ 
nomenon of the sacred in all its complexity, and not only 
in so far as it is irrational » What will concern us is not 
the relation between the rational and nonrational ele¬ 
ments of religion but the sacred in its entirety . The first 
possible definition of the sacred is that it is the opposite 
of the profane . The aim of the following pages is to illus¬ 
trate and define this opposition between sacred and 
profane.

Introduction XI

WEEN THE SACRED MANIFESTS ITSELFIntroduction XI

WEEN THE SACRED MANIFESTS ITSELF

Man becomes aware of the sacred because it 
manifests itself, shows itself, as something wholly differ¬ 
ent from the profane. To designate the act of manifes¬ 
tation of the sacred, we have proposed the term kiero- 
phany . It is a fitting term, because it does not imply 
anything further; it expresses no more than is implicit 
in its etymological content, i.e., that something sacred 
shoivs itself to us . 1 It could be said that the history of 
religions—from the most primitive to the most highly 
developed—is constituted by a great number of hiero- 
phanies, by manifestations of sacred realities. From the 
most elementary hierophany— e.g., manifestation of the 
sacred in some ordinary object, a stone or a tree+—to 
the supreme hierophany (which, for a Christian, is the 
incarnation of God in Jesus Christ) there is no solution 
of continuity. In each case we are confronted by the same 
mysterious act—the manifestation of something of a 
wholly different order, a reality that does not belong to 
our world, in objects that are an integral part of our 
natural “profane” world.

The modern Occidental experiences a certain uneasi¬ 
ness before many manifestations of the sacred. He finds 
it difficult to accept the fact that, for many human beings, 
the sacred can be manifested in stones or trees, for

1 Cf. Mircea Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion , New York, Sheed 
& Ward, 1958, pp. 7 ff. Cited hereafter as Patterns.

12 The Sacred and the Profane

example. But as we shall soon see, what is involved is 
not a veneration of the stone in itself, a cult of the tree 
in itself. The sacred tree, the sacred stone are not 
adored as stone or tree; they are worshipped precisely 
because they are hierophanies , because they show some¬ 
thing that is no longer stone or tree but the sacred , the 
ganz andere .It is impossible to overemphasize the paradox repre¬ 
sented by every hierophany, even the most elementary. 
By manifesting the sacred, any object becomes something 
else , yet it continues to remain itself , for it continues to 
participate in its surrounding cosmic milieu. A sacred 
stone remains a stone; apparently (or, more precisely, 
from the profane point of view), nothing distinguishes it 
from all other stones. But for those to whom a stone 
reveals itself as sacred, its immediate reality is trans¬ 
muted into a supernatural reality. In other words, for 
those who have a religious experience all nature is 
capable of revealing itself as cosmic sacrality. The 
cosmos in its entirety can become a hierophany.

The man of the archaic societies tends to live as much 
as possible in the sacred or in close proximity to con¬ 
secrated objects. The tendency is perfectly understand¬ 
able, because, for primitives as for the man of all pre- 
modem societies, the sacred is equivalent to a power , 
and, in the last analysis, to reality. The sacred is saturated 
with being. Sacred power means reality and at the same 
time enduringness and efficacity. The polarity sacred-

Introduction

13

profane is ofien expressed as an opposition between real 
and unreal or pseudoreal. (Naturally, we must not expect 
to find the archaic languages in possession of this philo¬ 
sophical terminology, real-unreal , etc.; but we find the 
thing.) Thus it is easy to understand that religious man 
deeply desires to be, to participate in reality , to be satu¬ 
rated with power.Our chief concern in the following pages will be to 
elucidate this subject—to show in what ways religious 
man attempts to remain as long as possible in a sacred 
universe, and hence what his total experience of life 
proves to be in comparison with the experience of the 
man without religious feeling, of the man who lives, or 
wishes to live, in a desacralized world. It should be said 
at once that the completely profane world, the wholly 
desacralized cosmos, is a recent discovery in the history 
of the human spirit. It does not devolve upon us to show 
by what historical processes and as the result of what 
changes in spiritual attitudes and behavior modem man 
has desacralized his world and assumed a profane exist¬ 
ence. For our purpose it is enough to observe that 
desacralization pervades the entire experience of Ac 
nonreligious man of modem societies and that, in con¬ 
sequence, he finds it increasingly difficult to rediscover 
the existential dimensions of religious man in the archaic 
societies.

14 The Sacred and the Pro jane

TWO MODES OF BEING IN THE WORLD14 The Sacred and the Pro jane

TWO MODES OF BEING IN THE WORLD

The abyss that divides the two modalities of expe¬ 
rience—sacred and profane—will be apparent when we 
come to describe sacred space and the ritual building of 
the human habitation, or the varieties of the religious 
experience of time, or the relations of religious man to 
nature and the world of tools, or the consecration of 
human life itself, the sacrality with which man’s vital 
functions (food, sex, work and so on) can be charged. 
Simply calling to mind what the city or the house, nature, 
tools, or work have become for modem and nonreligious 
man will show with the utmost vividness all that dis¬ 
tinguishes such a man from a man belonging to any 
archaic society, or even from a peasant of Christian 
Europe. For modem consciousness, a physiological act 
—eating, sex, and so on—is in sum only an organic 
phenomenon, however much it may still be encumbered 
by tabus (imposing, for example, particular rules for 
“eating properly” or forbidding some sexual behavior 
disapproved by social morality). But for the primitive, 
such an act is never simply physiological; it is, or can 
become, a safcrament, that is, a communion with the 
sacred.

j The reader will very soon realize that sacred and pro- 
S fane are two modes of being in the world, two existential 
| situations assumed by man in the course of his history. 
These modes of being in the world are not of concern

Introduction

15Introduction

15

only to the history of religions or to sociology; they are 
not the object only of historical, sociological, or ethno¬ 
logical study. In the last analysis, the sacred and profane 
modes of being depend upon the different positions that 
man has conquered in the cosmos; hence they are of 
concern both to the philosopher and to anyone seeking 
to discover the possible dimensions oi human existence. 
| S It is for this reason that, though he is a historian of 
r religions, the author of this book proposes not to confine 
himself only to the perspective of his particular science. 
The man of the traditional societies is admittedly a homo 
religiosus , but his behavior forms part of the general 
behavior of mankind and hence is of concern to philo¬ 
sophical anthropology, to phenomenology, to psychol¬ 
ogy.

The better to bring out the specific characteristics of 
life in a world capable of becoming sacred, I shall not 
hesitate to cite examples from many religions belonging 
to different periods and cultures. Nothing can take the 
place of the example, the concrete fact. It would be use¬ 
less to discuss the structure of sacred space without 
showing, by particular examples, how such a space is 
constructed and why it becomes qualitatively different 
from the profane space by which it is surrounded. I 
shall select such examples from among the Mesopo¬ 
tamians, the Indians, the Chinese, the Kwakiutl and other 
primitive peoples. From the historico-cultural point of 
view, such a juxtaposition of religious data pertaining

16 The Sacred and the Profane16 The Sacred and the Profane

to peoples so far removed in time and space is not with¬ 
out some danger. For there is always the risk of falling 
back into the errors of the nineteenth century and, par¬ 
ticularly, of believing with Tylor or Frazer that the 
reaction of the human mind to natural phenomena is 
uniform. But the progress accomplished in cultural eth¬ 
nology and in the history of religions has shown that 
this is not always true, that man’s reactions to nature 
are often conditioned by his culture and hence, finally, 
by history.

But the important thing for our purpose is to bring 
out the specific characteristics of the religious expe¬ 
rience, rather than to show its numerous variations and 
the differences caused by history. It is somewhat as if, 
in order to obtain a better grasp of the poetic phenome¬ 
non, we should have recourse to a mass of heterogeneous 
examples, and, side by side with Homer and Dante, quote 
Hindu, Chinese, and Mexican poems; that is, should take 
into consideration not only poetics possessing a histori¬ 
cal common denominator (Homer, Vergil, Dante) but 
also creations that are dependent upon other esthetics. 
From the point of view of literary history, such juxta¬ 
positions are to be viewed with suspicion; but they are 
valid if our object is to describe the poetic phenomenon 
as such, if we propose to show the essential difference 
between poetic language and the utilitarian language 
of everyday life.

Introduction I?

THE SACRED AND HISTORYIntroduction I?

THE SACRED AND HISTORY

Our primary concern is to present the specific 
dimensions of religious experience, to bring out the 
differences between it and profane experience of the 
world. I shall not dwell on the variations that religious 
experience of the world has undergone in the course of 
time. It is obvious, for example, that the symbolisms 
and cults of Mother Earth, of human and agricultural 
fertility, of the sacrality of woman, and the like, could 
not develop and constitute a complex religious system 
except through the discovery of agriculture; it is equally 
obvious that a preagricultural society, devoted to hunt¬ 
ing, could not feel fee sacrality of Mother Earth, in the 
same way or with the same intensity. Hence there are 
differences in religious experience explained by differ¬ 
ences in economy, culture, and social organization—in 
short, by history. Nevertheless, between the nomadic 
hunters and the sedentary cultivators there is a similarity 
in behavior that seems to us infinitely more important 
than their differences: both live in a sacralized cosmos, 
both share in a cosmic sacrality manifested equally in 
the animal world and in the vegetable world. We need 
only compare their existential situations with that of a 
man of the modem societies, living in a desacralized 
cosmos , and we shall immediately be aware of all that 
separates him from them. At the same time we realize 
the validity of comparisons between religious facts per-

i8 The Sacred and the Profane

taining to different cultures; all these facts arise from a 
single type of behavior, that of homo religiosus•i8 The Sacred and the Profane

taining to different cultures; all these facts arise from a 
single type of behavior, that of homo religiosus•

This little book, then, may serve as a general intro¬ 
duction to the history of religions, since it describes the 
modalities of the sacred and the situation of man in a 
world charged with religious values. But it is not a study 
in the history of religions in the strict sense, for the 
writer, in citing examples, has not undertaken to indi¬ 
cate their historico-cultural contexts. To do so would 
have required a work in several volumes. The reader 
will find all requisite information in the books listed in 
the Bibliography.

Mircea Eliade

Saint-Cloud 
April, 1956

CHAPTER 1

Sacred Space 
and Making 
the World Sacred

HOMOGENEITY OF SPACE AND HIEROPHANT

For religious man, space is not homogeneous; 
he experiences interruptions, breaks in it; some parts of 
space are qualitatively different from others. “Draw not 
nigh hither,” says the Lord to Moses; “put off thy shoes 
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is 
holy ground” (Exodus, 3, 5). There is, then, a sacred 
space, and hence a strong, significant space; there are 
other spaces that are not sacred and so are without struc¬ 
ture or consistency, amorphous. Nor is this all. For re¬ 
ligious man, this spatial nonhomogeneity finds expres¬ 
sion in the experience of an opposition between space 
that is sacred—the only real and reai’ly existing space 
and all other space, the formless expanse surrounding it.

It must be said at once that the religious experience of 
the nonhomogeneity of space is a primordial experience.

20It must be said at once that the religious experience of 
the nonhomogeneity of space is a primordial experience.

20

homologizable to a founding of the world. It is not a mat¬ 
ter of theoretical speculation, but of a primary religious 
experience that precedes all reflection on the world. 
For it is the break effected in space that allows the world 
to be constituted, because it reveals the fixed point, the 
central axis for all future orientation. When the sacred 
manifests itself in any hierophany, there is not only a 
break in the homogeneity of space; there i_s_a ls oreyela- 
tion of an ab solute reality, opposed to the nonreality of 
the vast surrounding expanse. The manifestation of the 
sacred ontologically founds the world. In the homo¬ 
geneous and infinite expanse, in which no point of refer¬ 
ence is possible and hence no orientation can be estab¬ 
lished, the hierophany reveals an absolute fixed point, 
a center.

21

22 The Sacred and the Profane

So it is clear to what a degree the discovery—'that is,

the revelation—of a sacred space possesses existential 
value for religious man; for nothing can begin, nothing 
can be done, without a previous orientation- and any 
orientation implies acquiring a fixed point. It is for this 
reason that religious man has always sought to fix his 
abode at the “center of the world.” If the world is to be 
lived in, it must be founded —and no world can come to 
birth in the chaos of the homogeneity and relativity of 
profane space.fThe discovery or projection of a fixed ^ 
point—the center—is equivalent to the creation of the r 
world; and we shall soon give some examples that will 
unmistakably show the cosmogonic value of the ritual 
orientation and construction of sacred space.^

For profane experience, on the contrary, space is 
homogeneous and neutral; no break qualitatively differ¬ 
entiates the various parts of its mass. Geometrical space_For profane experience, on the contrary, space is 
homogeneous and neutral; no break qualitatively differ¬ 
entiates the various parts of its mass. Geometrical space_

can be cut and delimited in any direction; but no quali¬ 
tative differentiation and, hence, no orientation are given 
by virtue of its inherent structure. We need only remem¬ 
ber how a classical geometrician defines space. Natu¬ 
rally, we must not confuse the concept of homogeneous 
and neutral geometrical space with the experience of 
profane space, which is in direct contrast to the expe¬ 
rience of sacred space and which alone concerns our 
investigation. The concept of homogeneous space and the 
history of the concept (for it has been part of the com¬ 
mon stock of philosophical and scientific thought since

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 23

antiquity ) are a wholly different problem, upon which 
we shall not enter here. What matters for our purpose 
is the experience otspsLce known to nonreligious man— 
that is, to a man who rejects the sacrality of the world, 
who accepts only a profane existence, divested of all 
religious presuppositions.

It must be added at once that such a profane existence 
is never found in the pure state. To whatever degree 
he may have desacralized the world, the man who has 
made his choice in favor of a profane life never succeeds 
in completely doing away with religious behavior. This 
will become clearer as we proceed; it will appear that 
even the most desacralized existence still preserves traces 
of a religious valorization of the world.But for the moment we will set aside this aspect of the 
problem and confine ourselves to comparing the two 
experiences in question—that of sacred space and that 
of profane space. The implications of the former expe¬ 
rience have already been pointed out/ Revelation of a 
sacred space makes it possible to obtain a fixed point 
and hence to acquire orientation in the chaos of homo¬ 
geneity, to “found the world” and to live in a real sense/ 
The profane experience, on the contrary, maintains the 
homogeneity and hence the relativity of space. No true 
orientation is now possible, for the fixed point no longer 
enjoys a unique ontological status; it appears and dis¬ 
appears in accordance with the needs of the day. Prop¬ 
erly speaking, there is no longer any world, there are

24 The Sacred and the Profane

only fragments of a shattered universe, an amorphous 
mass consisting of an infinite number of more or less 
neutral places in which man moves, governed and driven 
by the obligations of an existence incorporated into an 
industrial society-

I “Yet this experience of profane space still includes 
values that to some extent recall the nonhomogeneity 
peculiar to the religious experience of space. There are, 
for example, privileged places, qualitatively different 
from all others—a man’s birthplace, or the scenes of his 
first love, or certain places in the first foreign city he 
visited in youth. Even for the most frankly nonreligious 
man, all these places still retain an exceptional, a unique 
quality; they are the “holy places” of his private uni- 
verse, as if it were in such spots that he had received 
1 the revelation of a reality other than that in which he 
participates through hi s ord ina ry da ily life .“ This example of crypto-reiigious behavior on profane 
man’s part is worth noting. In the course of this book we 
shall encounter other examples of this sort of degrada¬ 
tion and desacralization of religious values and forms of 
behavior. Their deeper significance will become appar-

ent later.

THEOPHANIES AND SIGNS

To exemplify the nonhomogeneity of space as 
experienced by nonreligious man, we may turn to any 
religion. We will choose an example that is accessible to

Sacred Space and Making the World. Sacred 25

everyone—a church in a modem city. For a believer, 
the church shares in a different space from the street in 
which it stands. The door that opens on the interior of 
the church actually signifies a solution of continuity.

The threshold that separates the two spaces also indi¬ 
cates the distance between two modes of being, the pro¬ 
fane and the religious.tThe threshold is the limit, the 
boundary, the frontier that distinguishes and opposes s 
two worlds—and at the same time the paradoxical place 
where those worlds communicate, where passage from 
the profane to the sacred world becomes possible.

A similar ritual function falls to the threshold of the 
human habitation, and it is for this reason that the thresh¬ 
old is an object of great importance. Numerous ntes 
accompany passing the domestic threshold—a bow, a 
prostration, a pious touch of the hand, and so on. The 
threshold has its guardians—gods and spirits who for¬ 
bid entrance both to human enemies and to demons and 
the powers of pestilence. It is on the threshold that sacri¬ 
fices to the guardian divinities are offered. Here too cer¬ 
tain palaeo-oriental cultures (Babylon, Egypt, Israel) 
situated the judgment place. The threshold, the door 
show the solution of continuity in space immediately . 
and concretely; hence their great religious importance, l . 
for they are symbols and at the same time vehicles of ^ 
passage from the one space to the other.What has been said will make it clear why the church 
shares in an entirely different space from the buildings 
that surround it. Within the sacred precincts the profane

26 The Sacred and the Profane

world is transcended. On the most archaic levels of cul- 
r~ture this possibility of transcendence is expressed by 
various images of an opening; here, in the sacred en¬ 
closure, communication with the gods is made possible; 
hence there must be a door to the world above, by which 
the gods can descend to earth and man can symbolically 
ascend to heaven. We shall soon see that this was the 
case in many religions; properly speaking, the temple 
constitutes an opening in the upward direction and 
ensures communication with the world of the gods.

Ev ery sacred space implies a hiei oph any. an ir ruption 
nf thP 'v u'.tpA that results in detaching a territory f rom 
the surrounding cosmic milieu and mak ingjliiualita- 
tively different. When Jacob in his dream at Haran saw 
a ladder reaching to heaven, with angels ascending and 
descending on it, and heard the Lord speaking from 
above it, saying: “I am the Lord God of Abraham,” he 
awoke and was afraid and cried out: “How dreadful is 
this place: this is none other but the house of God, and 
this is the gate of heaven.” And he took the stone that 
had been his pillow, and set it up as a monument, and 
poured oil on the top of it. He called the place Beth-el, 
that is, house of God (Genesis, 28,12-19). The symbol¬ 
ism implicit in the expression “gate of heaven” is rich 
and complex; the theophany that occurs in a place con¬ 
secrates it by the very fact that it makes it open above— 
that is, in communication with heaven, the paradoxical 
^ point of passage from one mode of being to another. We

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 27

shall soon see even clearer examples—sanctuaries that 
are “doors of the gods” and hence places of passage j 
between heaven and earth. /Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 27

shall soon see even clearer examples—sanctuaries that 
are “doors of the gods” and hence places of passage j 
between heaven and earth. /

Often there is no need for a theophany or hierophany 
properly speaking; some sign suffices to indicate the 
sacredness of a place. “According to the legend, the 
marabout who founded El-Hamel at the end of the six¬ 
teenth century stopped to spend the night near a spring 
and planted his stick in the ground. The next morning, 
when he went for it to resume his journey, he found that 
it had taken root and that buds had sprouted on it. He 
considered this a sign of God’s will and settled in that 
place.” 1 I n such cases fraught with relig ious

meaning, introduces an absolute element and puts an 
end to relativity and confusion. S omething that does n ot 
belong to this wor ld has manifeste dltself apodicfa .cally 
and i n so doing has indicated an orientation or det er¬ 
m ined a course of conduct .

When no sign manifests itself, it is provoked . For 
example, a sort of evocation is performed with the help 
of animals; it is they who show what place is fit to re¬ 
ceive the sanctuary or the village. This amounts to an 
evocation of sacred forms or figures for the immediate 
purpose of establishing an orientation in the homoge¬ 
neity of space. A sign is asked, to put an end to the 
tension and anxiety caused by relativity and disorienta-

1 Rene Basset, in Revue des Traditions Populates, XXII, 1907, p. 287.

28 The Sacred and the Profane1 Rene Basset, in Revue des Traditions Populates, XXII, 1907, p. 287.

28 The Sacred and the Profane

tion—in short, to reveal an absolute point of support. 
For example, a wild animal is hunted, and the sanctuary 
is built at the place where it is killed. Or a domestic 
animal—such as a bull—is turned loose; some days 
later it is searched for and sacrificed at the place where 
it is found. Later the altar will be raised there and the 
village will be built around the altar. In all these cases, 
the sacrality of a place is revealed by animals. This is^ 
as much as to say that men are not free t o choose the 
s acred site, thatthey only seek for it ancT find it by the 
help of mysterious s igns.

These few examples have shown the different means 
by which religious man receives the r evelation of a 
s acred place. In each case the hierophany has annulled 
the homogeneity of space and revealed a fixed point. But 
since religious man cannot live except in an atmosphere 
impregnated with the sacred, we must expect to find a 
large number of techniques for consecrating space. A s_. 
we saw, the sacred is pre-eminently the r eal » at once 
p ower, efficacity, the source of life and fecundity . .Re* 
lig ious man’s desire to live in the sacred is in fact eq uiva- 
lent to his desire to take up his abode in ob jective reality, 
n ot to let himseK be paralyzed by the never-ce asing 
r elativity of purely subjective experiences,_ .to_liye, in a 
real an d effective world, and not in an illusion . This 
behavior is documented on every plane of religious 
man’s existence, but it is particularly evident in his 
desire to move about only in a sanctified world, that is.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 29Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 29

in a sacred space. This is the reason for the elaboration 
of techniques of orientation which, properly speaking, 
are techniques for the construction of sacred space. But 
we must not suppose that human work is in question here, 
that it is through his own efforts that man can consecrate 
a space. In reality the ritual by which he constructs a 
sacred space is efficacious in the measure in which it 
reproduces the work of the gods . But the better to under¬ 
stand the need for ritual construction of a sacred space, 
we must dwell a little on the traditional concept of the 
“world”; it will then be apparent that for religious man 
every world is a sacred world.

CHAOS AND COSMOS

One of the outstanding characteristics of tradi¬ 
tional societies is the opposition that they assume be¬ 
tween their inhabited territory and the unknown and 
indeterminate space that surrounds it. The former is the 
world (more precisely, our world), the cosmos; every¬ 
thing outside it is no longer a cosmos but a sort of 
“other world,” a foreign, chaotic space, peopled by 
ghosts, demons, “foreigners” (who are assimilated to^ 
demons and the souls of the dead). At first sight this 
cleavage in space appears to be due to the opposition 
between an inhabited and organized—hence cosmicized 
—territory and the unknown space that extends beyond 
its frontiers; on one side there is a cosmos, on the other

30 The Sacred and the Profane30 The Sacred and the Profane

a chaos. But we shall see that if every inhabited terri¬ 
tory is a cosmos, this is precisely because it was first 
consecrated, because, in one way or another, it is the 
work of the gods or is in communication with the world 
of the gods. The world (that is, our world) is a universe 
within which the sacred has already manifested itself, in 
which, consequently, the break-through from plane to 
plane has become possible and repeatable. It is not 
difficult to see why the religious moment implies the 
cosmogonic moment. The sacred reveals absolu tguealitx 
and at the same ti me makes orientation possib lei.hence 
it Jounds the world in the sense that it fixes the limits and 
establishes t he order of the wor ld.

All this appears very clearly from the Vedic ritual for 
taking possession of a territory; possession becomes 
legally valid through the erection of a fire altar conse¬ 
crated to Agni. “One says that one is installed when one 
has built a fire altar [ garhapatya ] and all those who 
build the fire altar are legally established” (Shatapatha 
Brdhmana , VII, 1,1,1-4). By the erection of a fire altar 
Agni is made present, and communication with the 
world of the gods is ensured; the space of the altar be¬ 
comes a sacred space. But the meaning of the ritual is far 
more complex, and if we consider all of its ramifications 
!C we shall understand why consecrating a territory is 
equivalent to making it a cosmos, Xo cosmicizing iX. For, 
in fact, the erection of an altar to Agni is nothing but the 
reproduction—on the microcosmic scale—of the Crea¬ 
tion. The water in which the clay is mixed is assimilated

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 31Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 31

to the primordial water; the clay that forms the base of 
the altar symbolizes the earth; the lateral walls represent 
the atmosphere, and so on. And the building of the altar 
is accompanied by songs that proclaim which cosmic 
region has just been created (Shatapcuka Brdhmana I,

9, 2, 29, etc.). Hence the erection of a fire altar—which 
alone validates taking possession of a new territory — is 
equivalent to a cosmogony.

A n unknown, foreign, and unoccupied territory 
( which often means, “unoccupied by our people”) still 
shares in the fluid and larval 1 mo dality of chaos. 
occupying it and, above all, by settl ing in it, man sym¬ 
bol ically transform s it into a cosmosj bioiigh-^rituaL 
repetition of the cosmogony. What is to become “our 
world’^must firstbe “created,” and every creation has a 
paradigmatic model—the creation of the universe by the 
gods. When the Scandinavian colonists took possession 
of Iceland ( land-ndma ) and cleared it, they regarded 
the enterprise neither as an original undertaking nor as 
human and profane w r ork. For them, their labor was 
only repetition of a primordial act, the transformation y// 
of chaos into cosmos by the divine act of creation. When 
they tilled the desert soil, they were in fact repeating the 
act of the gods who had organized chaos by giving it a 
structure, forms, and norms . 2

Whether it is a case of clearing uncultivated ground

2 Cf. Mircea Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return, New York. Pan¬ 
theon Books, Bollingen Series XLVI, 1954, pp. 11 f?. Cited hereafter as 
Myth.

32 The Sacred and the Profane2 Cf. Mircea Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return, New York. Pan¬ 
theon Books, Bollingen Series XLVI, 1954, pp. 11 f?. Cited hereafter as 
Myth.

32 The Sacred and the Profane

or of conquering and occupying a territory already in¬ 
habited by “other” human beings, ritual taking posses¬ 
sion must always repeat the cosmogony. For in the view 
of archaic societies everything that is not “our world” is 
not yet a world. A territory can be made ours only by 
cr eating it anew ,_thatis^by-consecrating it This religious 
behavior in respect to unknown lands continued, even in 
the West, down to the dawn of modern times. The Span¬ 
ish and Portuguese conquistadores, discovering and con¬ 
quering territories, took possession of them in the name 
of Jesus Christ* The raising of the Cross was equivalent 
to consecrating the country, hence in some sort to a “new 
birth.” For through Christ “old things are passed away; 
behold, all things are become new” (II Corinthians, 5, 
17). The newly discovered country was “renewed,” “re¬ 
created” by the Cross.

CONSECRATION OF A PLACE=

REPETITION OF THE COSMOGONY

It must be understood that the cosmicization of 
unknown territories is always a consecration; to organize 
a space is to repeat the paradigmatic work of the gods. 
The close connection between cosmicization and conse¬ 
cration is already documented on the elementary levels 
of culture—for example, among the nomadic Australians 
whose economy is still at the stage of gathering and 
small-game hunting. According to the traditions of an

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 33Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 33

Arunta tribe, the Achilpa, in mythical times the divine 
being Numbakula cosmicized their future territory, 
created their Ancestor, and established their institutions. 
From the trunk of a gum-tree Numbakula fashioned the 
sacred pole (kauwa-auwa ) and, after anointing it with 
blood, climbed it and disappeared into the sky. This pole 
represents a cosmic^axis, for it is around the sacred pole 
that territory becomes habitable, hence is transformed 
into a world. T he sacred pole consequently p lays an 
i mportant role ritually. During their wandering s the 
Achilp a_alwavs carry it with them an d choose the direc* 
tion they are to take by the direction tow ard which it 
bends. This allows them, while being c ontinu ally on the 
move, to be always in “their world” and, at the same 
time, in communication with the sky into which Numba¬ 
kula vanished.

For the pole to be broken denotes catastroph e; it is 
lik e “the end of the world.” reversion to chaos. Spence r 
and Gillen report that once, when the pole was broken, 
t he entire clan were in consternation; they wand ered 
a bout

ground together and waited for death to overtake them. 8

This example admirably illustrates both the cosmo¬ 
logical function of the sacred pole and its soteriological 
role. For on the one hand the kauwa-auwa reproduces 
the pole that Numbakula used to cosmicize the world.

8 B. Spencer and F» J. Gillen. The Arunta, London, 1926, X, p. 388.

34 The Sacred and the Profane

and on the other the Achilpa believe it to be the means 
by which they can communicate with the sky realm. Now, 
h uman existence is possible only by virtue o f this perma- 
nent^mmuni^ Th e world of the

Achilpa really becomes their world only in proportion as 
it reproduces the cosmos organized and sanctified by 
Numbakula. Life is not possible without an op ening 
t oward the transcend^ ;..in^^ human bein gsi^annat live in cha oSe.On ce contact withtheTtranscende nt 
is lost, egj kterice in the worl d ceases to be p ossible—and 
the Achilpa let themselves die.

To settle in a territory is, in the last analysis, equiva¬ 
lent to consecrating it. When settlement is not temporary, 
as among the nomads, but permanent, as among seden¬ 
tary peoples, it implies a vital decision that involves the 
existence of the entire community. Establishment in a 
particular place, organizing it, inhabiting it, are acts that 
presuppose an existential choice—the choice of the uni¬ 
verse that one is prepared to assume by creating it. 
Now, this universe is always the replica of the paradig¬ 
matic universe created and inhabited by the gods; hence 
it shares in the sanctity of the gods’ work.

The sacred pole of the Achilpa supports their world 
and ensures communication with the sky. Here we have 
the prototype of a cosmological image that has beef* very 
widely disseminated—the cosmic pillars that support* 
heaven and at the same time open the road to the work}

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 35

r o f the gods. Until their conversion to Christianity, the 
Celts and Germans still maintained their worship of

t_such sacred pillars. The Chronicum Lauris sense breve , 
written about 800, reports that in the course of one of 
his wars against the Saxons (772), Charlemagne de¬ 
stroyed the temple and the sacred wood of their “famous 
IrminsuT in the town of Eresburg. Rudolf of Fulda 
(c. 860) adds that this famous pillar is the “pillar of 
the universe which, as it were, supports all things”(universalis columna quasi sustinens omnia ). The same 
cosmological image is found not only among the Romans 
(Horace, Odes , III, 3) and in ancient India, where we 
hear of the skambha , the cosmic pillar (Rig Veda, I, 
105; X, 89, 4; etc.), but also among the Canary Island¬ 
ers and in such distant cultures as those of the Kwakiutl 
(British Columbia) and of the Nad’a of Flores Island 
(Indonesia). The Kwakiutl believe that a copper pole 
passes through the three cosmic levels (underworld, 
earth, sky); the point at which it enters the sky is the 
“door to the world above.” The visible image of this 
cosmic pillar in the sky is the Milky Way. But the work 
of the gods, the universe, is repeated and imitated by 
men on their own scale. The axis mundi , seen in the sky 
in the form of the Milky Way, appears in the ceremonial 
house in the form of a sacred pole. It is the trunk of a 
cedar tree, thirty to thirty-five feet high, over half of 
which projects through the roof. This pillar plays a

36 The Sacred and the Profane

primary part in the ceremonies; it confers a cosmic 
structure on the house. In the ritual songs the house is 
called “our world” and the candidates for initiation, 
who live in it, proclaim: “I am at the Center of the 
World.... I am at the Post of the World,” and so on. 4 
The same assimilation of the cosmic pillar to the sacred 
pole and of the ceremonial house to the universe is 
found among the Nad’a of Flores Island. The sacrificial 
pole is called the “Pole of Heaven” and is believed to 
support the sky. 5

THE CENTER OF THE WORLDTHE CENTER OF THE WORLD

The cry of the Kwakiutl neophyte, “I am at the 
Center of the World!” at once reveals one of the deepest 
meanings of sacred space. Where the break-through 
from plane to plane has been effected by a hierophany, 
there too an opening has been made, either upward (the 
divine world) or downward (the underworld, the world 
of the dead). The three cosmic levels—earth, heaven, 
underworld—have been put in communication. As we 
just saw, this communication is sometimes expressed 
through the image of a universal pillar, axis mundi, 
which at once connects and supports heaven and earth 
and whose base is fixed in the world below (the infernal

4 Werner Muller, WeltbUd und Knit der KwakiuU-Indianer, Wiesbaden, 
1955, pp. 17.2R

Arndt, “Die Megalithenkultur des Nad*a w (Amfiropos 27, 1932), pp 
61 - 62 .

Sacred Space and Maki ng the World Sacred 37

regions). Such a cosmic pillar can be only at the very 
center of the universe, for the whole of the habitable 
world extends around it. Here, then, we have a sequence 
of religious conceptions and cosmological images that 
are inseparably connected and form a system that may 
be called the “system of the world” prevalent in tradi¬ 
tional societies: (a ) a sacred pla ce co nstitutes a break in 
t he homogeneity of sp ace; (6) t tusTbreak is symbolized~ 
by an opening by which passage from one cosmic reg ion 
to a nother is made possible (from heaven to earth an d 
vic e versa: from earth to the underworld);' (c) com - 
munication with heaven is expressed by one or another

"”"1 I 1 1 "". 11 " . , ■ 1 r . .'

pillar (cf. the universalis co tona^ladder (cf ^ Jaco b’s 
ladder ), mountain, tree, vine, etc.; (d) around this cos- 
mic axis lies the world (= our world), Ji ence the axis is 
l ocated “in the midd^ of t he^arA”; it

is the Cen ter oft heiWorld.is the Cen ter oft heiWorld.

Many different myths, rites, and beliefs are derived 
from this traditional “system of the world.” They cannot 
all be mentioned here. Rather, we shall confine our¬ 
selves to a few examples, taken from various civiliza¬ 
tions and particularly suited to demonstrate the role of 
sacred space in the life of traditional societies. Whether 
that space appears in the form of a sacred precinct, a 
ceremonial house, a city, a world, we everywhere find the 
symbolism of the Center of the World; and it is this 
symbolism which, in the majority of cases, explains re-

38 The Sacred and the Profane

ligious behavior in respect to the space in which one 
lives.

We shall begin with an example that has the advan¬ 
tage of immediately showing not only the consistency 
but also the complexity of this type of symbolism—the 
cosmic mountain. We have just seen that the mountain 
occurs among the images that express the connection 
between heaven and earth; hence it is believed to be at 
the center of the world. And in a number of cultures we 
do in fact hear of such mountains, real or mythical, situ¬ 
ated at the center of the world; examples are Meru in 
India, Haraberezaiti in Iran, the mythical ‘‘Mount of the 
Lands” in Mesopotamia, Gerizim in Palestine—which, 
moreover, was called the “navel of the earth.”® Since the 
sacred mountain is an axis mundi connecting earth with 
heaven, it in a sense touches heaven and hence marks 
the highest point in the world; consequentlv the territory 
that surrounds it, and that constitutes “our world,” is 
held to be the highest among countries. This is stated in 
Hebrew tradition: Palestine, being the highest land, was 
not submerged by the Flood. 7 According to Islamic tra¬ 
dition, the highest place on earth is the ka’aba, because 
“the Pole Star bears witness that it faces the center of 
Heaven.” 8 For Christians, it is Golgotha that is on the 
summit of the cosmic mountain. All these beliefs express• See the bibliographical referenceg in Eliade, Myth , pp. 10 ff.

7 A. E. Wensinck and E. Borrows, cited in ibid^ p. 10.

8 Wensinck, cited in ibid., p. 15.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 39

the same feeling, which is profoundly religious: “our 
world” is holy ground because it is the place nearest to 
heaven , because from here, from our abode, it is possible 
to reach heaven; hence our world is a high place. In cos¬ 
mological terms, this religious conception is expressed 
by the projection of the favored territory which is “ours” 
onto the summit of the cosmic mountain. Later specula¬ 
tion drew all sorts of conclusions—for example, the one 
just cited for Palestine, that the Holy Land was not sub¬ 
merged by the Flood.

This same symbolism of the center explains other 
series of cosmological images and religious beliefs. 
Among these the most important are: (a) holy sites and 
sanct uaries are believed to be s ituated at the center of 
the world; (6) te mples are replicas of the cosmic moun - ,v 
tain and hence constitute the pre-eminent “link” between 
earth and heaven; (c) the found ations of temples d e- 
scend deep into the lower regions. A few~examples will 
suffice. After citing them, we shall attempt to integrate 
all these various aspects of the same symbolism; the 
remarkable consistency of these traditional conceptions 
of the world will then appear with greater clarity.

The capital of the perfect Chinese sovereign is located 
at the center of the world; there, on the day of the 
summer solstice, the gnomon must cast no shadow.® It is 
striking that the same symbolism is found in regard to

9 M. Granet, ia Eliade, Patterns, p. 376.

40 The Sacred and the Profane9 M. Granet, ia Eliade, Patterns, p. 376.

40 The Sacred and the Profane

the Temple of Jerusalem; the rock on which it was built 
was the navel of the earth. The Icelandic pilgrim, Nicho¬ 
las of Thverva, who visited Jerusalem in the twelfth cen¬ 
tury, wrote of the Holy Sepulcher: “The Center of the 
World is there; there, on the day of the summer solstice, 
the light of the Sun falls perpendicularly from Heaven.’ 510 
The same conception occurs in Iran; the Iranian land 
(Airyanam Vaejah) is the center and heart of the world. 
Just as the heart lies at the center of the body, “the land 
of Iran is more precious than all other countries because 
it is set at the middle of the world.” 11 This is why Shiz, 
the “Jerusalem” of the Iranians (for it lay at the center 
of the world) was held to be the original site of the 
royal power and, at the same time, the birthplace of 
Zarathustra. 12

As for the assimilation of temples to cosmic mountains 
and their function as links between earth and heaven, 
the names given to Babylonian sanctuaries themselves 
bear witness; they are called “Mountain of the House, 
“House of the Mountain of all Lands,” “Mountain of 
Storms ” “Link between Heaven and Earth,” and the 
like. The ziggurat was literally a cosmic mountain; the 
seven stories represented the seven planetary heavens; 
by ascending them, the priest reached the summit of the

10 l. L Ringbom, Graltempel and Parodies, Stockholm, 1951, p. 255.

11 Sad-dar, 84, 4*5, cited in Ringbom, p. 327.

12 Sec the material assembled and discussed in Ringbom, pp. 294 ff. and 
passim.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 41

universe. A like symbolism explains the immense temple 
of Borobudur, in Java; it is built as an artificial moun¬ 
tain. Ascending it is equivalent to an ecstatic journey to 
the center of the world; reaching the highest terrace, the 
pilgrim experiences a break-through from plane to 
plane; he enters a “pure region” transcending the pro¬ 
fane world.Dur-an-ki , “Link between Heaven and Earth,” was a 
name applied to a number of Babylonian sanctuaries (it 
occurs at Nippur, Larsa, Sippara, and elsewhere). 
Babylon had many names, among them “House of the 
Base of Heaven and Earth ” “Link between Heaven and 
Earth.” But it was also in Babylon that the connection 
between earth and the lower regions was made, for the 
city had been built on bdb apsl, “the Gate of Apsu,” 
apsu being the name for the waters of chaos before Crea¬ 
tion. The same tradition is found among the Hebrews; 
the rock of the Temple in Jerusalem reached deep into 
the tehom, the Hebrew equivalent of apsu . And, just as 
Babylon had its Gate of Apsu, the rock of the temple in 
Jerusalem contained the “mouth of the ieAont.” 13

The apsu, the tehom symbolize the chaos of waters, 
the preformal modality of cosmic matter, and, at the 
same time, the world of death, of all that precedes and 
follows life. The Gate of Apsii and the rock containing 
the “mouth of the tehom ” designate not only the point of

13 CL the references in Eliade, Myth, pp. 15 2.

42 The Sacred and the Profane

intersection—and hence of communication between the 
lower world and earth, but also the difference in onto¬ 
logical status between these two cosmic planes. There is 
a break of plane between the tehom and the rock of the 
Temple that blocks its mouth, passage from the virtual to 
the formal, from death to life. The watery chaos that 
p receded Creation at the same time symbolizes the retr o¬ 
gressi on to the formless that follows on death, return t o 
the larval modality of existence. From one point of view, 
the lower regions can be homologized to the unknown 
and desert regions that surround the inhabited territory; 
the underworld, over which our cosmos is firmly estab¬ 
lished, corresponds to the chaos that extends to its 
frontiers.

“our world” is always situated

at the center“our world” is always situated

at the center

From all that has been said, it follows that the 
true world is always in the middle, at the Center, for it 
is here that there is a break in plane and hence com¬ 
munication among the three cosmic zones. Whatever the 
extent of the territory involved, the cosmos that it repre¬ 
sents is always perfect. An entire country (e.g., Pales¬ 
tine), a city (Jerusalem), a sanctuary (the Temple in 
Jerusalem), all equally well present an imago mundi. 
Treating of the symbolism of the Temple, Flavius Jose¬ 
phus wrote that the court represented the sea (i.e., the

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 43

lower regions), the Holy Place represented earth, and 
the Holy of Holies heaven (Ant. Jud Ill, 7, 7). It is 
clear, then, that both the imago mundi and the Center are 
repeated in the inhabited world. Palestine, Jerusalem, 
and the Temple severally and concurrently represent the 
image of the universe and the Center of the World. This 
multiplicity of centers and this reiteration of the image % 
of the world on smaller and smaller scales constitute one 
of the specific characteristics of traditional societies.To us, it seems an inescapable conclusion that the re¬ 
ligious man sought to live as near as possible to the 
Center of the World. He knew that his country lay at the 
midpoint of the earth; he knew too that his city consti¬ 
tuted the navel of the universe, and, above all, that the 
temple or the palace were veritably Centers of the World. 
But he also wanted his own house to be at the Center 
and to be an imago mundi . And, in fact, as we shall see, 
houses are held to be at the Center of the World and, on 
the microcosmic scale, to reproduce the universe. In 
other words, the man of traditional societies could only 
live in a space opening upward, where the break in plane 
was symbolically assured and hence communication with 
the other world , the transcendental world, was ritually 
possible. Of course the sanctuary—the Center par excel- 
lence—was there, close to him, in the city, and he could 
be sure of communicating with the world of the gods 
simply by entering the temple. But he felt the need to 
live at the Center always —like the Achilpa, who, as we

44 The Sacred and the Profane

saw, always carried the sacred pole, the axis mundi, 
with them, so that they should never be far from the 
Center and should remain in communication with the 
supraterrestrial world. In short, whatever the dimensions 
of the space with which he is familiar and in which he 
regards himself as situated—his country, his city, his 
village, his house—religious man feels the need always 1 
to exist in a total and organized world, in a cosmos.A universe comes to birth from its center; it spreads 
ou t from a central point that is, as it were, its nave l. It is 
in this way that, according to the Rig Veda (X, 149), 
the .universe was born and developed—from a core, a 
central point. Hebrew tradition is still more explicit: 
“The Most Holy One created the world like an embryo. 
As the embryo grows from the navel, so God began to 
create the world by the navel and from there it spread 
out in all directions.” And since the “navel of the earth,” 
the Center of the World, is the Holy Land, the Yoma 
affirms that “the world was created beginning with 
Zion.” 14 Rabbi ben Gorion said of the rock of Jerusalem: 
“it is called the Foundation Stone of the Earth, that is, 
the navel of the Earth, because it is from there that the 
whole Earth unfolded.” 15 Then too, because the creation 
of man is a replica of the cosmogony, it follows that the 
first man was fashioned at the “navel of the earth” or in

H References in ibid., p. 16.

15 Cited in W. W. Roacher, “Neue Oraphalosstudien” (Abk. der KonigL 
Sachs. Ges. d. fFiss., Phil.-hist. Klasse, 31, 1, 1915), p. 16.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 45

Jerusalem (Judaeo-Christian traditions). It could not 
be otherwise, if we remember that the Center is precisely 
the place where a break in plane occurs, where space 
becomes sacred, hence pre-eminently real . A creation im- 
plies a su perabundance of reality, in other words an 
irruption of the sacred into the world.It follows that every construction or fabrication has 
the cosmogony as paradigmatic model . The creation of 
the world becomes the archetype of every creative human ^ 
gesture, whatever its plane of reference may be. We 
have already seen that settling in a territory reiterates the 
cosmogony. Now that the cosmogonic value of the Center 
has become clear, we can still better understand why 
every human establishment repeats the creation of the 
world from a central point (the navel). Just as the uni¬ 
verse unfolds from a center and stretches out toward the 
four cardinal points, the village comes into existence 
around an intersection. In Bali, as in some parts of Asia, 
when a new village is to be built the people look for a 
natural intersection, where two roads cross at right 
angles. A square constructed from a central point is an;f 
imago mundi . The division of the village into four 
sections—which incidentally implies a similar division 
of the community—corresponds to the division of the 
universe into four horizons. A space is often left empty 
in the middle of the village; there the ceremonial house 
will later be built, with its roof symbolically represent¬ 
ing heaven (in some cases, heaven is indicated by the

46 The Sacred and the Profane

top of a tree or by the image of a mountain). At the 
other end of the same perpendicular axis lies the world 
of the dead, symbolized by certain animals (snake, 
crocodile, etc.) or by ideograms expressing darkness. 16The cosmic symbolism of the village is repeated in the 
structure of the sanctuary or the ceremonial house. At 
Waropen, in New Guinea, the “men’s house” stands at 
the center of the village; its roof represents the celestial 
vault, the four walls correspond to the four directions of 
space. In Ceram, the sacred stone of the village sym¬ 
bolizes heaven and the four stone columns that support it 
incarnate the four pillars that support heaven. 17 Similar 
conceptions are found among the Algonquins and the 
Sioux. Their sacred lodge, where initiations are per¬ 
formed, represents the universe. The roof symbolizes the 
dome of the sky, the floor represents earth, the four walls 
the four directions of cosmic space. The ritual construc¬ 
tion of the space is emphasized by a threefold symbol¬ 
ism: the four doors, the four windows, and the four 
colors signify the four cardinal points. The construction 
of the sacred lodge thus repeats the cosmogony, for the 
lodge represents the world. 16

We are not surprised to find a similar concept in an-

ie Cf. C. T. Bertling, Vierzakl, Kreuz und Mandala in Asien , Amster¬ 
dam, 1954, pp. 8 £F.

17 See the references in Bertling, op. cit ., pp. 4-5.

is See the material and interpretations in Werner Muller, Die blaue 
Hiitte, "Wiesbaden, 1954, pp. 60 ff-

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 47is See the material and interpretations in Werner Muller, Die blaue 
Hiitte, "Wiesbaden, 1954, pp. 60 ff-

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 47

cient Italy and among the ancient' Germans. In short, 
the underlying idea is both archaic and widely dissemi¬ 
nated: from a center, the four horizons are projected in 
the four cardinal directions. The Roman mundus was a 
circular trench divided into four parts; it was at once 
the image of the cosmos and the paradigmatic model for 
the human habitation. It has been rightly proposed that 
Roma quadrata is to be understood not as being square 
in shape but as being divided into four parts. 10 The mun¬ 
dus was clearly assimilated to the omphalos 9 to the navel 
of the earth; the city ( urbs ) was situated in the middle 
of the orbis terrarum. Similar ideas have been shown to 
explain the structure of Germanic villages and towns. 20 
In extremely varied cultural contexts, we constantly find 
the same cosmological schema and the same ritual 
scenario: sealing in a territory is equivalent to founding^ 
a world .

CITY-COSMOS

Since “our world” is a cosmos, any attack from 
without threatens to turn it into chaos. And as “our 
world” was founded by imitating the paradigmatic work 
of the gods, the cosmogony, so the enemies who attack it 
are assimilated to the enemies of the gods, the demons, 
and especially to the archdemon, the primordial dragon

19 F. Altheim, in Werner Muller, Kreis and Kreuz, Berlin, 1938, pp. 60 S.

28 W. Muller, op. cit., pp. 65 &

48 The Sacred and the Profane19 F. Altheim, in Werner Muller, Kreis and Kreuz, Berlin, 1938, pp. 60 S.

28 W. Muller, op. cit., pp. 65 &

48 The Sacred and the Profane

conquered by the gods at the beginning of time. An at¬ 
tack on “our world” is equivalent to an act of revenge 
by the mythical dragon, who rebels against the work of 
the gods, the cosmos, and struggles to annihilate it 
“Our” enemies belong to the powers of chaos. Any de¬ 
struction of a city is equivalent to a retrogression to 
chaos. Any victoxy over the attackers reiterates the para* 
digmatic victory of the gods over the dragon (that is, 
over chaos).

This is the reason the Pharaoh was assimilated to the 
God Re, conqueror of the dragon Apophis, while his 
enemies were assimilated to the mythical dragon. Darius 
regarded himself as a new Thraetaona, the mythical 
Iranian hero who was said to have slain a three-headed 
dragon. In Judaic tradition the pagan kings were repre¬ 
sented in the likeness of the dragon; such is the Nebu¬ 
chadnezzar described by Jeremiah (51, 34) and the 
Pompey presented in the Psalms of Solomon (9,29).

As we shall see later, the dragon is the paradigmatic 
figure of the marine monster, of the primordial snake, 
symbol of the cosmic waters, of darkness, night, and 
death—in short, of the amorphous and virtual, of every* 
* thing that has hot yet acquired a “form ” The dragon 
must be conquered and cut to pieces by the gods so that 
the cosmos may come to birth. It was from the body of 
the marine monster Tiamat that Marduk fashioned the 
world. Yahweh created the universe after his victory over 
the primordial monster Rahab. But, as we shall see, this

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 49

victory of the gods over the dragon must be symbolically 
repeated each year, for each year the world must be 
created anew. Similarly the victory of the gods over the 
forces of darkness, death, and chaos is repeated with 
every victory of the city over its invaders.It is highly probable that the fortifications of inhabited 
places and cities began by being magical defenses; for 
fortifications—trenches, labyrinths, ramparts, etc.— 
were designed rather to repel invasion by demons and 
the souls of the dead than attacks by human beings. In 
North India, during epidemics, a circle is drawn around 
the village to keep the demons of sickness from entering 
the enclosure. 21 In Europe, during the Middle Ages, the 
walls of cities were ritually consecrated as a defense 
against the devil, sickness, and death. Then, too, sym¬ 
bolic thinking finds no difficulty in assimilating the 
human enemy to the devil and death. In the last analysis 
the result of attacks, whether demonic or military, is 
always the same—ruin, disintegration, death.

It is worth observing that the same images are still 
used in our own day to formulate the dangers that 
threaten a certain type of civilization; we speak of the 
chaos, the disorder, the darkness that will overwhelm 
“our world.” All these terms express the abolition of an 
order, a cosmos, an organic structure, and reimmersion 
in the state of fluidity, of formlessness—in short, of

21 Eli ad e. Patterns, p» 371.

50 The Sabred and the Profane

chaos. This, in our opinion, shows that the paradigmatic 
images live on in the language and cliches of nonreli¬ 
gious man. Som ething of the r eligious conception of the 
yr^lrl ctij] persists in the behavio£ 3l-^£Q^ ne 
although he is not alw a ys jconscious of this immemorial 
heritage.

UNDERTAKING THE CREATION

OF THE WORLDUNDERTAKING THE CREATION

OF THE WORLD

Let us consider the basic difference observable 
between these two types of behavior-—traditional re¬ 
ligious and profane—in respect to the human habitation. 
There is no need to dwell on the value and function of 
the habitation in industrial societies; they are well 
known. According to the formula of a famous contem¬ 
porary architect, Le Corbusier, the house is 4 ‘a machine 
to live in.” Hence it takes its place among the countless 
machines mass-produced in industrial societies. The 
ideal house of the modern world must first of all be 
functional; that is, it must allow men to work and to 
rest in order that they may work. You can change your 
“machine to live in” as often as you change your bicycle, 
your refrigerator, your automobile. You can also change 
cities or provinces, without encountering any difficulties 
aside from those that arise from a difference in climate.

It does not lie within our province to write the history 
of the gradual desacralization of the human dwelling.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 51It does not lie within our province to write the history 
of the gradual desacralization of the human dwelling.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 51

The process is an integral part of the gigantic transfor¬ 
mation of the world undertaken by the industrial socie¬ 
ties, a transformation made possible by the desacraliza¬ 
tion of the cosmos accomplished by scientific thought 
and above all by the sensational discoveries of physics 
and chemistry. We shall later have occasion to inquire 
whether this secularization of nature is really final, if no 
possibility remains for nonreligious man to rediscover 
the sacred dimension of existence in the world. As we 
just saw, and as we shall see still more clearly later, 
certain traditional images, certain vestiges of the be-^ 
havior of archaic man still persist, in the condition of 
“survivals,” even in the most highly industrialized socie¬ 
ties. But for the moment our concern is to describe, in its 
pure state, religious behavior in respect to the habitation, 
and to discover the Weltanschauung that it implies.

As we saw, to settle in a territory, to build a dwelling, 
demand a vital decision for both the whole community and 
the individual. For what is involved is undertaking the^ 
creation of the world that one has chosen to inhabit . 
Hence it is necessary to imitate the work of the gods, 
the cosmogony. But this is not always easy, for there are 
also tragic, blood-drenched cosmogonies; as imitator of 
the divine gestures, man must reiterate them. Since the 
gods had to slay and dismember a marine monster or a 
primordial being in order to create the world from it, 
man in his turn must Imitate them when he builds his 
own world, his city or his house. Hence the necessity for

52 The Sacred and the Profane

bloody or symbolic sacrifices on the occasion of con¬ 
structions, the countless forms of the Bauopjer (build¬ 
ing sacrifice), concerning which we shall have to say a 
few words further on.bloody or symbolic sacrifices on the occasion of con¬ 
structions, the countless forms of the Bauopjer (build¬ 
ing sacrifice), concerning which we shall have to say a 
few words further on.

Whatever the structure of a traditional society—be it 
a society of hunters, herdsmen, or cultivators, or already 
at the stage of urban civilization—the habitation always 
undergoes a process of sanctification, because it consti¬ 
tutes an imago mundi and the world is a divine creation. 
But there are various ways of faomologizing the dwell¬ 
ing place to the cosmos, because there are various types 
of cosmogonies. For our purpose, it will suffice to dis¬ 
tinguish two methods of ritually transforming the dwell¬ 
ing place (whether the territory or the house) into cos¬ 
mos, that is, of giving it the value of an imago mundi: 
( a) assimilating it to the cosmos by th^ j>roj^ctkm>ef the 
f our h orizo ns from a central p mnt (in the case of a 
village) or by the symboli c in stallation of the axis m undi 
(in the c ase of a house); (6) repeating, through a ritual 
of construction, the paradigm atic acts of the gods by 
virtue of whichjheworldcame to birth from the body of 
a marine dragon or of a primordial^ant. We need not 
here dwell on the Basic Hifferences in Weltanschauung 
underlying these two methods of sanctifying the dwell¬ 
ing place, nor on their historical and cultural presup¬ 
positions. Suffice it to say that the first method— 
cosmicizing a space by projection of the horizons or by 
installation of the axis mundi —is already documented

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 53

in the most archaic stages of culture (cf. the hauw&auwa 
pole of the Australian Achilpa), while the second method 
seems to have been developed in the culture of the 
earliest cultivators/ What is important for our investiga¬ 
tion is the fact that, in all traditional cultures, die 
habitation possesses a sacred aspect by the simple fact 
that it reflects the worldsThus, in the habitation of the primitive peoples of the 
North American and North Asian Arctics we find a cen¬ 
tral post that is assimilated to the axis mundi , i.e., to the 
cosmic pillar or the world tree, which, as we. saw, con¬ 
nect earth with heaven. In other words, cosmi cjymbo lr ^ 
ism is found in the very structure of the habitation. The 
house is an imago mundi. The sky is conceived asTa vast 
tent supported by a central pillar; the tent pole or the 
central post of the house is assimilated to the Pillars of 
the World and is so named. This central pole or post has 
an important ritual role; the sacrifices in honor of the 
celestial Supreme Being are performed at the foot of it. 
The same symbolism has been preserved among the 
herdsmen-breeders of Central Asia, but since here the 
conical-roofed habitation with central pillar is replaced 
by the yurt, the mythico-ritual function of the pillar is 
transferred to the upper opening for the escape of smoke. 
Like the pole (= axis mundi) , the stripped tree trunk 
whose top emerges through the upper opening of the 
yurt (and which symbolizes the cosmic tree) is con¬ 
ceived as a ladder leading to heaven; the shamans climb

54 The Sacred and the Profane

it on their celestial journeys. And it is through the upper 
opening that the shamans set out on their flights. 22 The 
sacred pillar, set in the middle of the habitation, is found 
again in Africa among the Hamitic and Hamitoid pas¬ 
toral peoples. 28

COSMOGONY AND BUILDING SACHIFICECOSMOGONY AND BUILDING SACHIFICE

A similar conception is found in such a highly 
evolved culture as that of India; but here there is also an 
exemplification of the other method of homologizing the 
mouse to the cosmos, to which we referred briefly above. 
/Before the masons lay the first stone the astronomer 
I shows them the spot where it is to be placed, and this 
/ spot is supposed to lie above the snake that supports the 
world. The master mason sharpens a stake and drives it 
into the ground, exactly at the indicated spot, in order to 
fix the snake’s head. A foundation stone is then laid 
above the stake. Thus the cornerstone is at the exact 
center of the world?* But, in addition, the act of founda¬ 
tion repeats the cosmogonic act; for to drive the stake 
into the snake’s head to “fix” it is to imitate the primor¬ 
dial gesture of Soma or Indra, when the latter, as the Rig 
Veda expresses it, “struck the Snake in his lair” (IV, 17,

22 M. Eliade, Le Chamanisme et les techniques archmques de Fextase, 
Paris, 1951, pp. 238 ff. Cited hereafter as Le Chamanisme .

23 Wilhelm Schmidt, “Der heilige Mittelpfahi des Hauses,” Anthropos, 
35-36, 1940-1941, p. 967.

24 S. Stevenson, The Rites of the Twice-Born, Oxford, 1920, p. 354.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 55

9). when his lightning bolt “cut off its head” (1,52,10).

As we said, th e snake symbolizes chaos , the formless, the 
unmanifested . To be head it is equivalent to an art of 
creation , passage from the virtua f^^^ieanw^lMus to t 
that which has form . A gain, it was from the body of a 
primordial marine monster, Tiaraat, that the god Mar- 
duk fashioned the world. This victory was symbolically 
repeated each year, since each year the cosmos was r e¬ 
newed. But the paradigmatic act of the divine victory was 
likewise repeated on the occasion of every construction, 
for every new construction reproduced the creation of 
the world.This second type of cosmogony is much more complex, 
and it will only be outlined here. But it was necessary to 
cite it, for, in the last analysis, it is with such & cos¬ 
mogony that the countless forms of the building sacrifice 
are bound up; the latter, in short, is only an imitation, 
often a symbolic imitation, of the primordial sacrifice 
that gave birth to the world. For, beginning with a cer¬ 
tain stage of culture, the cosmogonic myth explains the 
Creation through the slaying of a giant (Ymir in Ger¬ 
manic mythology, Purusha in Indian mythology, P’an-ku 
in China); his organs give birth to the various cosmic 
regions. According to other groups of myths, it is not 
only the cosmos that comes to birth in consequence of the 
immolation of a primordial being and from his own sub¬ 
stance, but also food plants, the races of man, or different 
social classes. It is on this type of cosmogonic myth that

56 The Sacred and the Profane

building sacrifices depend. If a “construction” is to en¬ 
dure (be it house, temple, tool, etc.), it must be ani¬ 
mated, that is, it must receive life and a soul. The trans¬ 
fer of the soul is possible only through a blood sacrifice. 
The histor y of religions. ethnologV v-folklpxe, record 
countless forms of building sacrifices—that i s^of-sym- 
bol ic orjjlood sacrifices for the benefit of a structu re. 25 
In southeastern Europe, these beliefs have inspired ad¬ 
mirable popular ballads describing the sacrifice of the 
wife of the master mason in order that a structure may 
be completed (cf. the ballads on the Arta Bridge in 
Greece, on the Monastery of Argesh in Romania, on the 
city of Scutari in Yugoslavia, etc.)., We have said enough about the religious significance 
I of the human dwelling place for certain conclusions to 
have become self-evident. Exactly like the city or the 
sanctuary, the house is sanctified, in whole or part, by a 
cosmological symbolism or ritual. This is why settling 
somewhere—building a village or merely a house— 
represents a serious decision, for the very existence of 
man is involved; he must, in short, create his own world 
and assume the responsibility of maintaining and renew¬ 
ing it. Habitations are not lightly changed, for it is not 
| easy to abandon one’s world. The house is not an object, 
a “machine to live in”; it is the universe that man con - 
' structs for himself by imitating the paradigmatic creat

25CL Paul Sartori, “fiber das Bauopfer” Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, 30, 
1938, pp. 1*54.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 57

tion of the gods , the cosmogony . Every construction and 
every inauguration of a new dwelling are in some 
measure equivalent to a new beginnings a new life . And 
every beginning repeats the primordial beginning, when 
the universe first saw the light of day. Even in modem 
societies, with their high degree of desacralization, the 
festivity and rejoicing that accompany settling in a new 
house still preserve the memory of the festival exuber¬ 
ance that, long ago, marked the incipit vita nova .Since the habitation constitutes an imago mundi 9 it is 
symbolically situated at the Center of the World. The 
multiplicity, or even the infinity, of centers of the world 
raises no difficulty for religious thought. For it is not a 
matter of geometrical space, but of an existential and 
sacred space that has an entirely different structure, that 
admits of an infinite number of breaks and hence is 
capable of an infinite number of communications with 
the transcendent. We have seen the cosmological mean¬ 
ing and the ritual role of the upper opening in various 
forms of habitations. In other cultures these cosmologi¬ 
cal meanings and ritual functions are transferred to the 
chimney (= smoke hole) and to the part of the roof that 
liesaEovrffie “sacred area” and that is removed or even 
broken in cases of prolonged death-agony. When we 
come to the homologation cosmos-house-human body, 
we shall have occasion to show the deeper meaning of 
“breaking the roof.” For the moment, we will mention 
that the most ancient sanctuaries were hypaethrai or

58 The Sacred and the Profane

built with an aperture in the roof—the “eye of the 
dome,” symbolizing break-through from plane to plane, 
communication with the transcendent.

Thus religious architecture simply took over and de¬ 
veloped the cosmological symbolism already present in 
the structure of primitive habitations . In its turn, the 
human habitation had been chronologically preceded by 
the provisional “holy place,” by a space provisionally 
consecrated and cosmicized (cf. the Australian Achilpa). 
This is as much as to say that all symbols and rituals 
having to do with temples, cities, and houses are finally 
derived from the primary experience of sacred space .

TEMPLE, BASILICA, CATHEDRALTEMPLE, BASILICA, CATHEDRAL

In the great oriental civilizations—from Mesopo¬ 
tamia and Egypt to China and India—the temple re¬ 
ceived a new and important valorization. It is not only an 
imago mundi; it is also interpreted as the earthly repro¬ 
duction of a transcendent model. Judaism inherited this 
ancient oriental conception of the temple as the copy of 
a celestial work of architecture. In this idea we probably 
have one of the last interpretations that religious man has 
given to the primary experience of sacred space in con¬ 
trast to profane space. Hence we must dwell a little on 
the perspectives opened by this new religious concep¬ 
tion.

To summarize the essential data of the problem: If

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 59

the temple constitutes an imago mundi , this is because 
the world, as the work of the gods, is sacred. But the 
cosmological structure of the temple gives room for a 
new religious valorization; as house of the gods, hence 
holy place above all others, the temple continually 
resanctifies the world, because it at once represents and 
contains it. In the last analysis, it is by virtue of the 
temple that the world is resanctified in every part . How¬ 
ever impure it may have become, the world is continually 
purified by the sanctity of sanctuaries.Another idea derives from this increasingly accepted 
ontological difference between the cosmos and its sancti¬ 
fied image, the temple. This is the idea that the sanctity 
of the temple is proof against all earthly corruption, by " 
virtue of the fact that the architectural plan of the temple 
is the work of the gods and hence exists in heaven, near 
to the gods. The transcendent models of temples enjoy a 
spiritual, incorruptible celestial existence. Through the 
grace of the gods, man attains to the dazzling vision of 
these models, which he then attempts to reproduce on 
earth. The Babylonian king Cudea saw in a dream the 
goddess Nidaba showing him a tablet on which were 
written the names of the beneficent stars, and a god re¬ 
vealed the plan of the temple to him. 26 Sennacherib built 
Nineveh according to “the plan established from most 
distant times in the configuration of the Heavens.” This

S»0- Eliade, MytK PP- 7-8.

60 The Sacred and the Profane

means not only that celestial geometry made the first 
constructions possible, but above all that since the archi¬ 
tectonic models were in heaven, they shared in the sacral- 
ity of the sky.means not only that celestial geometry made the first 
constructions possible, but above all that since the archi¬ 
tectonic models were in heaven, they shared in the sacral- 
ity of the sky.

For the people of Israel, the models of the tabernacle, 
of all the sacred utensils, and of the temple itself had 
been created by Yahweh who revealed them to his 
chosen, to be reproduced on earth. Thus Yahweh says 
to Moses: “And let them make me a sanctuary; that I 
may dwell among them. According to all that I shew 
thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern 
of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it” 
(Exodus, 25,8-9). “And look that thou make them after 
their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount” 
(ibid., 25, 40). When David gives his son Solomon the 
plans for the Temple buildings, the tabernacle, and all 
the utensils, he assures him that “all this ... the Lord 
made me understand in writing by his hand upon me” 
(II Chronicles, 28, 19). He must, then, have seen the 
celestial model created by Yahweh from the beginning 
of time. This is what Solomon affirms: “Thou hast com¬ 
manded me to build a temple upon thy holy mount, 
and an altar in the city wherein thou dwellest, a resem¬ 
blance of the holy tabernacle which thou hast prepared 
from the beginning” (Wisdom of Solomon, 9, 8).

The Heavenly Jerusalem was created by God at the 
same time as Paradise, hence in aetemum . The city of 
Jerusalem was only an approximate reproduction of the

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 61

transcendent model; it could be polluted by man, but 
the model was incorruptible, for it was not involved 
in time. “This building now built in your midst is not 
that which is revealed with Me, that which was prepared 
beforehand here from the time when I took counsel to 
make Paradise, and showed it to Adam before he sinned” 
(II Baruch, 4, 3-7; trans. R. H. Charles 27 ).The Christian basilica and, later, the cathedral take 
over and continue all these symbolisms. On the one hand, 
the church is conceived as imitating the Heavenly Jeru¬ 
salem, even from patristic times; on the other, it also 
reproduces Paradise or the celestial world. But the cos¬ 
mological structure of the sacred edifice still persists in 
the thought of Christendom; for example, it is obvious 
in the Byzantine church. “The four parts of the interior 
of the church symbolize the four cardinal directions. 
The interior of the church is the universe. The altar is 
paradise, which lay in the East. The imperial door to 
the altar was also called the Door of Paradise. During 
Easter week, the great door to the altar remains open 
during the entire service; the meaning of this custom is 
clearly expressed in the Easter Canon: ‘Christ rose from 
the grave and opened the doors of Paradise unto us.* 
The West, on the contrary, is the realm of darkness, of 
grief, of death, the realm of the eternal mansions of 
the dead, who await the resurrection of the flesh and the

27 R. H. Charley ed., The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of She Old 
Testament in English, Oxford* 1913, VoL H» p. 482.

62 The Sacred and the Pro jane

Last Judgment. The middle of the building is the earth. 
According to the views of Kosmas Indikopleustes, the 
earth is rectangular and is bounded by four walls, which 
are surmounted by a dome. The four parts of the interior 
of the church symbolize the four cardinal directions” 28 
As “copy of the cosmos,” the Byzantine church incar¬ 
nates and at the same time sanctifies the world.

SOME CONCLUSIONSSOME CONCLUSIONS

From the thousands of examples available to the 
historian of religions, we have cited only a small num¬ 
ber but enough to show the varieties of the religious 
experience of space. We have taken our examples from 
different cultures and periods, in order to present at 
least the most important mythological constructions and 
ritual scenarios that are based on the experience of 
sacred space. For in the course of history, religious man 
has given differing valorizations to the same fundamental 
experience. We need only compare the conception of the 
sacred space (and hence of the cosmos) discernible 
among the Australian Achilpa with the corresponding 
conceptions of the Kwakiutl, the Altaic peoples, or the 
Mesopotamians, to realize the differences among them. 
There is no need to dwell on the truism that, since the 
religious life of humanity is realized in history, its 
expressions are inevitably conditioned by the variety of

28 Hans Sedlmayr, Die Entstehung der Kathedrale, Zurich, 1950, p. 119.

Sacred Space and Making the World Sacred 63

historical moments and cultural styles. But for our pur¬ 
pose it is not the infinite variety of the religious expe¬ 
riences of space that concerns us but, on the contrary, 
their elements of unity. Pointing out the contrast between 
the behavior of nonreligious roan with respect to the 
space in which he lives and the behavior of religious 
man in respect to sacred space is enough to make the 
difference in structure between the two attitudes clearly 
apparent.? If we should attempt to summarize the result of the 
I descriptions that have been presented in this chapter, we 
| could say that the experience of sacred space makes 
possible the “founding of the world”: where the sacred 
manifests itself in space, the real unveils itself , the world 
comes into existence. But the irruption of the sacred does 
not only project a fixed point into the formless fluidity 
of profane space, a center into chaos; it also effects a 
break in plane, that is, it opens communication between 
the cosmic planes (between earth and heaven) and 
I makes possible ontological passage from one mode of 
! being to another. It is such a break in the heterogeneity 
of profane space that creates the center through which 
communication with the transmundane is established, 
that, consequently, founds the world, for the center 
renders orientation possible. Hence the manifestation of 
the sacred in space has a cosmological valence; every 
spatial hierophany or consecration of a space is equiva¬ 
lent to a cosmogony. The first conclusion we might draw

64 The Sacred and the Profane

would be: the world becomes apprehensible as world, as 
cosmos, in the measure in which it reveals itself as a 
sacred world.64 The Sacred and the Profane

would be: the world becomes apprehensible as world, as 
cosmos, in the measure in which it reveals itself as a 
sacred world.

Every world is the work of the gods, for it was either 
created directly by the gods or was consecrated, hence 
cosmicized, by men ritually reactualizing the paradig¬ 
matic act of Creation. This is as much as to say that 
religious man can live only in a sacred world, because 
it is only in such a world that he participates in being, 
that he has a real existence . This religious need expresses 
an unquenchable ontological thirst. Religious man thirsts 
ior being. His terror of the chaos that surrounds his in¬ 
habited world co rresponds to his terror of nothingness . 
The unknown space that extends beyond bis world—an 
uncosmicized because unconsecrated space, a mere amor¬ 
phous extent into which no orientation has yet been pro¬ 
jected, and hence in which no structure has yet arisen 
—for religious man, this profane space represents abso« 
lute nonbeing. If, by some evil chance, he strays into it, 
he feels emptied of his ontic substance, as if he were 
dissolving in Chaos, and he finally dies.

This ontological thirst is manifested in many ways. 
In the realm of sacred space which we are now consider¬ 
ing, its most striking manifestation is religious man’s 
will to take his stand at the very heart of the real, at the 
Center of the World—that is, exactly where the cosmos 
came into existence and began to spread out toward the 
four horizons, and where, too, there is the possibility of 
communication with the gods; in short, precisely where

Sacred Space and Making ike World Sacred 65Sacred Space and Making ike World Sacred 65

he is closest to the gods . We have seen that the symbol¬ 
ism of the center is the formative principle not only of 
countries, cities, temples, and palaces but also of the 
humblest human dwelling, be it the tent of a nomad 
hunter, the shepherd’s yurt, or the house of the sedentary 
cultivator. This is as much as to say that every religious 
man places himself at the Center of the World and by 
the same token at the very source of absolute reality, as 
close as possible to the opening that ensures him com¬ 
munication with the gods.

But since to settle somewhere, to inhabit a space, is 
/ equivalent to repeating the cosmogony and hence to irai- 
j tating the work of the gods, it follows that, for religious 
j man, every existential decision to situate himself in space

( in fact constitutes a religious decision. By_ags uming th e 
responsibility of creating the world that he ha s chosen 
to inhabit, h e not only c o smicizei chaos but also san cti- 
fies his little cosmo s by m akiu^-it-like the world of the 
gods. Religious man’s profound nostalgia is'Torinbabit 
a “divine world,” is his desire that his house shall be 
j like the house of the gods, as it was later represented in 
temples and sanctuaries. In short, this religious nostalgia ^ 
expresses the desire to live in a pure and holy~cosmos t 
as it was in the beginning, when it came fresh from the 
Creator’s hands.

The experience of sacred time will make it possible 
for religious man periodically to experience the cosmos 
as it was in principio , that is, at the mythical moment of 
Creation.

Sacred Time 
and Myths

PROFANE DURATION AND SACRED TIMESacred Time 
and Myths

PROFANE DURATION AND SACRED TIME

For re ligious roan time too, like space, is 
neither homo geneous nor continuou s. On the one hand 
there^re theintervals of a sacred time, the time of fes¬ 
tivals (by far the greater part of which are periodical); 
on the other there is profane time, ordinary temporal 
duration, in which acts without religious meaning have 
their setting. Between these two kinds of time there is, 
of course, solutioaof^contmuity; but by m ea^j ^rites , 
religio us man can pass wi th out dang ^fiom ordinary 
t emporal duration to sa credjime.

One essential difference between these two qualities 
of time strikes us immediately: by its very nature . $G£red ^ 
time is reversible in the sense that, p roper 1 VL,speaking, 
it is cl primordial mythical, time made pres ent. Every_ 
r eligious festival, anv liturri fiaL time i, re pr esents-the

68

reactualization of_a sacred event that took place, in a 
mythic al past, “in the beginning,” iRe ligious participa¬ 
tion in a festival implies emerging from ordinary tem¬ 
poral duration and reintegration of the mythical time 
reactualized by the festival itself. Hence sacred time is 
indefinitely recoverable, indefinitely repeatable./From 
one point of view it could be said that it does not “pass,” 
that it does not constitute an irreversible duration. It 
is an ontological, Parmenidean time; it always remains 
equal to itself, it neither changes nor is exhausted. With 
each periodical festival, the participants find the same 
sacred time—the same that had been manifested in the 
festival of the previous year or in the festival of a cen¬ 
tury earlier; it is the time that was created and sanctified 
by the gods at the period of their gesta* of which the

69

70 The Sacred and the Profane69

70 The Sacred and the Profane

festival is precisely a reactualization. In other words the 
participants in the festival meet in it the first appearance 
of sacred time , as it appeared ab origine, in illo tempore . 
For the sacred time in which the festival runs its course 
did not exist before the divine gesta that the festival 
commemorates. By creating the various realities that 
today constitute the world, t he gods also founded sa cred 
fuqgz for *hg_ tipn^ contemporary with a creation was

Henc e religious m arL-li yes in two kinds of time,j)f 
which the^more im portant sacred time, appearsunder 
the paxadoxical aspect of^exrctdar-timerfeversible and

re covera ble^^, sort of eternal mythic al presgnLthat is 
p eriodically rein tegrated4^v-meansj) f rite s. This attitude 
in regard to time suffices to distinguish religious torn 
nonreligious man; the former refuses to live solely in 
what, in modem terms, is called the historical present; 
he attempts to regain a sacred time that, from one point 
of view, can be homologized to eternity.

What time is for the nonreligio m man of mod em 
societies~would^elno reiiffieult to puHntcta few„words. 
We do not intend to discuss the modem philosophies of 
time nor the concepts that modem science uses in its own 
investigations. Our aim is to compare not systems or 
philosophies but existential attitudes and behaviors. 
N ow, what it is possible to observe in respect to a non- 
religious ma n is that he too experiences a certain dis-

Sacred Time and Myths 71Sacred Time and Myths 71

con tinuity o ,nd heterogeneity nt For him too there 
is the comparatively monotonous time of his work, and 
the time of celebrations and spectacles—in short, “festal 
time.” He too lives in varying temporal rhythms and is 
aware of times of different intensities; when he is listen¬ 
ing to the kind of music that he likes or, being in love, 
waits for or meets his sweetheart, he obviously expe¬ 
riences a different temporal rhythm from that which he 
experiences when he is working or bored.

| But, in comparison with religious man, there is an 
essential difference. The latter experiences intervals of 
time that are “sacred,” that have no part in the temporal 
duration that precedes and follows them, that have a 
wholly different structure and origin, for they are of a 
primordial time, sanctified by the gods and capable of 
being made present by the festival. This transhuman 
qualit y of liturgical time is inaccessiblel o.a nonreligipiis 
man. This is as much as to say that, for him, time can" 
present neither break nor mystery; for him, time con¬ 
stitutes man’s deepest existential dimension; it is linked 
to his own life, hence it has a beginning and-an end, 
which is death, the annihilation of his life. However 
m any the temporal rhythms that he experiences^ however 
diff ereiic^s-in-Jnle nsity. nonrelig ious man 
kn ows that t h ey always represent a human experience, 
i n which ther ^s,QQ-X(xm^for-aBy-4ivine^reseiice.

Fnr religious man. onJ hfiLisaitrar y? profane temporal 
duration can be periodirally arrested; for certain rituals

72 The Sacred and the ProfaneFnr religious man. onJ hfiLisaitrar y? profane temporal 
duration can be periodirally arrested; for certain rituals

72 The Sacred and the Profane

have the power to interrupt it by periods of a sacred 
time that is nonhistorical (in the sense that it does not 
belong to the historical present). Just as a church con¬ 
stitutes a break in plane in the profane space of a 
modem city, the service celebrated inside it marks a 
break in profane temporal duration. It is no longer to¬ 
day’s historical time that is present—the time that is 
experienced, for example, in the adjacent streets—but 
the time in which the historical existence of Jesus Christ 
occurred, the time sanctified by his preaching, by his 
passion, death, and resurrection. But we must add that 
this example does not reveal all the difference between 
sacred and profane time; Christianity radically changed 
the experience and the concept of liturgical time, and 
this is due to the fact that Christianity affirms the his¬ 
toricity of the person o f Christ. The Christian liturgy 
unfolds in ah isto ricaltimej s an ctifled by the incarnation 
. of the Son of God. The sacred time periodically reactu- 
v alized in pre-Christian religions (especially in the 
archaic religions) is a. mythical timet that is, a primor-

i ai- time, not t< 
r iginal time, in

le sense

at once , that it was not prece dedJ ^another time, because 
n o time could exist before the appearance of the reality 
narrated in tkej nyth ,

It isTEiTarchaic conception of mythical time that is 
of chief concern to us. We shall later see how it differs 
from the conceptions held by Judaism and Christianity.

Sacred Time and Myths 73

TEMPLXJM-TEMPUSSacred Time and Myths 73

TEMPLXJM-TEMPUS

We shall begin our investigation by presenting 
certain facts that have the advantage of immediately 
revealing religious man’s behavior in respect to time. 
First of all, an observation that is not without impor¬ 
tance: in a number of North American Indian languages 
the term world (- Cosmos) is also used in the sense of 
_year. The Yokuts say “the world has passed,” meaning 
“a year has gone by.” For the Yuki, the year is expressed 
by the words for earth or world. Like the Yokuts, they 
say “the world has passed” when a year has passed. 
This vocabulary reveals the intimate religious connec¬ 
tion between the world and cosmic time. The cosmos is 
conceived as a living unity that is born, develops, and 
dies on tbe last day of the year, to be reborn on New 
Year’s Day. We shall see that this rebirth is a birth, that 
the cosmos is reborn each year because, at every New 
Year, time begins ab initio.

The intimate connection between the cosmos and time 
is religious in nature: the cosmos is homologizable to 
cosmic time (= the Year) because they are both sacred 
realities, divine creations. Among some North American 
peoples this cosmic-temporal connection is revealed even 
in the structure of sacred buildings. Since the temple 
represents the image of the world, it can also comprise 
a temporal symbolism. We find this, for example, among 
the Algonquins and the Sioux. As we saw, their sacred

74 The Sacred and the Pro jane

lodge represents the universe; but at the same time it 
symbolizes the year. For the year is conceived as a jour¬ 
ney through the four cardinal directions, signified by 
the four doors and four windows of the lodge. The 
Dakotas say: “The Year is a circle around the world”— 
that is, around their sacred lodge, which is an imago 
mundi}A still clearer example is found in India. We saw that 
the erection of an altar is equivalent to a repetition of 
the cosmogony. The texts add that “the fire altar is the 
year” and explain its temporal system as follows: the 
360 bricks of the enclosure correspond to the 360 nights 
of the year, and the 360 yajusmati bricks to the 360 days 
(Shatapatha Brahmana , X, 5, 4, 10; etc.). This is as 
much as to say that, with the building of each fire altar, 
not only is the world remade but the year is built too; 
in other words, time is regenerated by being created 
anew . But then, too, the year is assimilated to Prajapati, 
the cosmic god; consequently, with each new altar Pra¬ 
japati is reanimated—that is, the sanctity of the world 
is strengthened. It is not a matter^ of profane time, of 
mere temporaLjjuratio n, but of the sanc tification of 
cosmic-time. What is sought by the erection of the fire 
altar is to sanctify the world, hence to place it in a sacred 
time.

We find a similar temporal symbolism as part of the

1 Werner Muller, Die blaue Hutte t Wiesbaden, 1954, p, 133.

75

Sacred Time and Myths

cosmological symbolism of the Temple at Jerusalem. 
According to Flavius Josephus (Ant. Jud. 9 III, 7, 7), 
the twelve loaves of bread on the table signified the 
twelve months of the year and the candelabrum with 
seventy branches represented the decans (the zodiacal 
division of the seven planets into tens) . The Temple was 
an imago mundi; being at the Center of the World, at 
Jerusalem, it sanctified not only the entire cosmos but 
also cosmic life—that is, time.

Hermann Usener has the distinction of having been 
the first to explain the etymological kinship between 
templum and tempos by interpreting the two terms 
through the concept of “intersection,” (Schneidung 9 
Kreuzung) 2 Later studies have refined the discovery: 
“templum designates the spatial, tempus the temporal 
aspect of the motion of the horizon in space and time.” 8The underlying meaning of all these facts seems to be 
the following: for religious man of the archaic cultures, 
the world is rene wed a nnually ; in other words, with each 
new year it recovers its original sanctity, the sanctity 
that it possessed when it came from the Creator’s hands. 
This symbolism is clearly indicated in the architectonic 
structure of sanctuaries. Since the temple is at once the 
holy place par excellence and the image of the world, 
it sanctifies the entire cosmos and also sanctifies cosmic 
life. This cosmic life was imagined in the form of a

a H, Usener, Golternamen, 2nd ed^ Bonn, 1920, pp. 191 ft 
3 Werner Muller, Kreis und Kreuz, Berlin, 1938, p. 39; ct also pp, 33 ff.

76 The Sacred and the Profane

circular course; it was identified with the year. The 
year was a closed circle; it had a beginning and an end, 
but it also had the peculiarity that it could be reborn in 
the form of a new year. With each New Year, a time 
that was “new,” “pure,” “holy”—because not yet worn 
—came into existence.But time was reborn, began again, because with each 
New Year the world was created anew. In the preceding 
chapter we noted the considerable importance of the 
cosmogonic myth as paradigmatic model for every kind 
of creation and construction. We will now add that the 
cosmogony equally implies the creation of time. Nor is 
this all. For just as the cosmogony is the archetype of 
all creation, cosmic time, which the cosmogony brings 
forth, is the paradigmatic model for all other times— 
that is, for the times specifically belonging to the various 
categories of existing things. To explain this further: for 
religious man of the archaic cultures, every creation, 
every existence begins in time; before a thing exists, it s 
particular time could not exist . Before the cosmos came 
into existence, there was no cosmic time. Before a par- 
ticula Tvegetable species was created, the time thaorow 
causes it to gr ow, bear fruit, and die did not exist . It 
is for this reason that e very creation is imagined ashay: 
ing taken place at theb}eginmng~oftime 9 in prin cipio ... 
Time gushes forth with the first appearance of a new 
category of existents. This is why myth plays such an 
important role; as we shall show later, the way in which 
a reality came into existence is revealed by its myth.

Sacred Time and Myths 77

ANNUAL REPETITION OF THE CREATIONSacred Time and Myths 77

ANNUAL REPETITION OF THE CREATION

It is the cosmogonic myth that tells how the cos¬ 
mos came into existence. At Babylon during the course 
of the akitu ceremony, which was performed during the 
last days of the year that was ending and the first days 
of the New Year, the Poem of Creation > the Enuma elish , 
was solemnly recited. This ritual recitation reactualized 
the combat between Marduk and the marine monster 
Tiamat, a combat that took place ab origine and put an 
end to chaos by the final victxoy of the god. Marduk 
created the cosmos from Tiamat’s dismembered body 
and created man from the blood of the demon Kingu, 
Tiamat’s chief ally. That this commemoration of the 
Creation was in fact a reactualization of the cosmogonic 
act is shown both by the rituals and in the formulas 
recited during the ceremony.

The combat between Tiamat and Marduk, that is, was 
mimed by a battle between two groups of actors, a cere¬ 
monial that we find again among the Hittites (again in 
the frame of the dramatic scenario of the New Year), 
among the Egyptians, and at Ras Shamra. The battle 
between two groups of actors repeated the passage from 
chaos to cosmos , actualized the cosmogony. The mythical 
event became present once again. “May he continue to 
conquer Tiamat and shorten his days!” the priest cried. 
The combat, the victory, and the Creation took place at 
that instant , hie et nunc.

Since the New Year is a reactualization of the cos-

78 Tke Sacred and the ProfaneSince the New Year is a reactualization of the cos-

78 Tke Sacred and the Profane

mogony, it implies starting time over again at its begin> 
ning , that is, re storation of the primordial time, the 
“pure” time, th at existed at the moment of Creati on* 
This is why the New Year is the occasion for “purifica ¬ 
tion s.” for the expulsion of sms, oi demons, or mer ely 
of a scapegoat For it is not a matter merely of a certain 
temporal interval coming to its end and the beginning of 
another (as a modem man, for example, thinks); it is 
also a matter of abolishing the past year and past time. 
Indeed, this is the meaning of ritual purifications; there 
is more than a mere “purification”; the sins and faults 
of the individual and of the community as a whole are 
annulled, consumed as by fire .

The Nawroz—the Persian New Year—commemorates 
the day that witnessed the creation of the world and 
man. It was on the day of Nawroz that the “renewal of 
the Creation” was accomplished, as the Arabic historian 
al-Blrunf expressed it. T he king proclaimed: “Here is a 
ne w day of a new mo nt h of a new year^j what time has 
worn must be ren ewed/* Time had worn the human 
being, society, the cosmos—and this destructive time 
was profane time, duration strictly speaking; it had to 
be abolished in order to reintegrate the mythical moment 
in which the world had come into existence, bathed in a 
“pure,” “strong,” and sacred time. The abolition of pro¬ 
fane past time was accomplished by rituals that signified 
a sort of “end of the world.” The extinction of fires, the 
return of the souls of the dead, social confusion of the

Sacred Time and Myths 79Sacred Time and Myths 79

type exemplified by the Saturnalia, erotic license, orgies, 
and so on, symbolized the retrogression of the cosmos 
into chaos. On the last day of the year the universe was 
dissolved in the primordial waters. The marine monster 
Tiamat—symbol of darkness, of the formless, the non- 
manifested—revived and once again threatened. The 
world that had existed for a whole year really disap¬ 
peared. Since Tiamat was again present, the cosmos was 
annulled; and Marduk was obliged to create it once 
again, after having once again conquered Tiamat. 4

The meaning of this periodical retrogression of the 
world into a chaotic modality was this: all the “sins” of 
the year, everything that time had soiled and worn, was 
annihilated in the physical sense of the word. By sym¬ 
bolically participating in the annihilation and re-crea¬ 
tion of the world, man too was created anew; he was 
reborn, for he began a new life. With each New Year, 
man felt freer and purer, for he was delivered from the 
burden of his sins and failings. He had reintegrated the 
fabulous time of Creation, hence a sacred and strong 
time—sacred because transfigured by the presence of 
the gods, strong because it was the time that belonged, 
and belonged only, to the most gigantic creation ever 
accomplished, that of the universe. Symbolically, man 
became contemporary with the cosmogony, he was pres¬ 
ent at the creation of the world. In the ancient Near East,

* For New Year rituals, cf. Myth, pp. 55 0.

80 The Sacred and the Profane

lie even participated actively in its creation (cf. the two 
opposed groups, representing the god and the marine 
monster).* For New Year rituals, cf. Myth, pp. 55 0.

80 The Sacred and the Profane

lie even participated actively in its creation (cf. the two 
opposed groups, representing the god and the marine 
monster).

It is easy to understand why the memory of that mar¬ 
velous time haunted religious man, why he periodically 
sought to return to it. In illo tempore the gods had dis¬ 
played their greatest powers. The cosmogony is the 
supreme divine manifestation, the paradigmatic act of 
strength, superabundance, and creativity. Religious man 
thirsts for the real. By every means at his disposal, he 
seeks to reside at the very source of primordial reality, 
when the world was in statu nascendi.

REGENERATION THROUGH RETURN

TO THE TIME OF ORIGINS

All this would warrant detailed study, but for the 
moment only two features will occupy our attention: 
(1) through annual repetition of the cosmogony, time 
was regenerated, that is, it began again as sacred time, 
for it coincided with the illud tempus in which the world 
had first come into existence; (2) by participating ritu¬ 
ally in the end of the world and in its re-creation, any 
man became contemporary with the illud tempus; hence 
he was bom anew, he began life over again with his 
reserve of vital forces intact , as it was at the moment of 
his birth.

These facts are important; they reveal the secret of

Sacred Time and Myths 81

religious man’s attitude and behavior in respect to time.

* Since the sacred and strong time is the time of origins , 
the stupendous instant in which a reality was created, 
was for the first time fully manifested, man will seek 
periodically to return to that original time./This ritual 
reactualizing of the illud tempus in which the first epi¬ 
phany of a reality occurred is the basis for all sacred 
calendars; the festival is not merely the commemoration 
of a mythical (and hence religious) event; it reactuaU 
izes the event.The paramount time of origins is the time of the cos¬ 
mogony, the instant that saw the appearance of the most 
immense of realities, the world. This, as we saw in the 
preceding chapter, is the reason the cosmogony serves 
as the paradigmatic model for every creation, for every 
kind of doing. It is for this sa me reason that cosmogonic 
ti me serves as the model for all sacred times; tor if 
sagred time jgjhat In .which the gods manif ested theS 
s elves and created, obviously the most complete divine 
m anifestation and the mosX gjgaMic creatio n is the crea- 
tion of the worlds _

Consequently, religious man reactualizes the cosmog¬ 
ony not only each time he creates something (his “own 
world”—the inhabited territory—or a city, a house, 
etc.), but also when he wants to ensure a fortunate reign 
for a new sovereign, or to save threatened crops, or in 
the case of a war, a sea voyage, and so on. But, above 
all, the ritual recitation of the cosmogonic myth plays

82 The Sacred and the Pro jane82 The Sacred and the Pro jane

an important role in healing, when what is sought is the 
regeneration of the human being. In Fiji, the ceremony 
for installing a new ruler is called creation of the world, 
and the same ceremony is repeated to save threatened 
crops. But it is perhaps Polynesia that exhibits the widest 
, application of the cosmogonic myth. The words that lo 
I spoke in illo tempore to create the world have become 
I ritual formulas. Men repeat them on many occasions— 
| to fecundate a sterile womb, to heal (mental as well as 
| physical ailments), to prepare for war, but also on the 
j occasion of a death or to stimulate poetic inspiration. 5 
i Thus the cosmogonic myth serves the Polynesians as 
j the archetypal model for all creations, on whatever plane 
| —biological, psychological, spiritual. But since ritual 
| recitation of the cosmogonic myth implies reactualiza- 
1 tion of that primordial event, it follows that he for whom 
it is recited is magically projected in illo tempore 9 into 
the “beginning of the World”; he becomes^eaiitemporary 
with the cosmogo ny. What is involved is, in short, a 
return to the original time, the therapeutic purpose of 
which is to begin life once again, a symbolic rebirth. 
The conception underlying these curative rituals seems 
to be the following: life cannot be repaired, it can on ly 
be r ecreated thro ugh symbolic repetition of the cosmo g¬ 
o ny, for, as we have said, the cosmogony is the p aradigm 
matic model for alLcreation.

5 Cf. the bibliographical reference in Myth, pp, 82 ff. and in Patterns, 
p. 410.

Sacred Time and Myths 835 Cf. the bibliographical reference in Myth, pp, 82 ff. and in Patterns, 
p. 410.

Sacred Time and Myths 83

The regenerative functio n of the return to the time of 
origin s becomes still more clear if we make a detailed 
examination of an archaic therapy, such, for example, 
as that of the Na-khi, a Tibeto-Burmese people living in 
Southwest China (Yiin-nan Province). The therapeutic 
ritual proper consists in the solemn recitation of the 
myth of the creation of the world, followed by myths of 
the origin of maladies from the wrath of the snakes and 
the appearance of the first Shaman-Healer who brought 
humanity the necessary medicines. Almost all the rituals 
invoke the mythical beginning, the mythical Mud tern- 
pus , when the world was not yet made: “In the begin¬ 
ning, at the time when the heavens, sun, moon, stars, 
planets and the land had not yet appeared, when nothing 
had yet come forth,” etc. Then comes the cosmogony 
and the appearance of the snakes: “At the time when 
heaven came forth, the sun, moon, stars and planets, and 
the earth was spread out; when the mountains, valleys, 
trees and rocks came forth ... at that time there came 
forth the Nagas and dragons,” etc. The birth of the First 
Healer and the appearance of medicines is then narrated. 
After this.it is said: “Unless its origin is related one 
should not speak about it.” 6

The important fact to be noted in connection with these 
magical healing chants is that the myth of the origin of 
the medicines employed is always incorporated into the

6 J. F. Rock, The Na-khi Naga Cult and Related Ceremonies, Rome, 
1952, Vol. II, pp. 279 ff.

84 The Sacred and the Profane6 J. F. Rock, The Na-khi Naga Cult and Related Ceremonies, Rome, 
1952, Vol. II, pp. 279 ff.

84 The Sacred and the Profane

cosmogonic myth . It is well known that in all primitive 
and traditional therapies a remedy becomes efficacious 
only if its origin is ritually rehearsed in the sick person’s 
presence. A large number of Near Eastern and European 
incantations contain the history of the sickness or of the 
demon who has provoked it, at the same time that they 
evoke the mythical moment in which a divinity or a saint 
succeeded in conquering the malady. But we consider 
it certain that the origin myth was copied after the cos¬ 
mogonic myth, for the latter is the paradigmatic model 
for all origins. This, moreover, is why, in therapeutic 
incantations, the origin myth is often preceded by the 
cosmogonic myth and even incorporated into it. An Assy¬ 
rian incantation against toothache rehearses that “after 
Anu made the heavens, the heavens made the earth, the 
earth made the rivers, the rivers made the canals, the 
canals made the pools, the pools made the worm.” And 
the worm goes “weeping” to Shamash and Ea and asks 
them what will be given it to eat, to destroy. The gods 
offer it fruits, but the worm asks them for human teeth. 
‘‘Since thou hast spoken thus, O Worm, may Ea break 
thee with his powerful hand!” 7 Here are presented: (1) 
the creation of the world; (2) the birth of the worm and 
of the sickness; (3) the primordial and paradigmatic ges¬ 
ture of healing (Ea’s destruction of the worm). The

t Campbell Thompson, Assyrian Medical Texts, London, 1932, p. 59. CL 
also Eliade, “Kosmogonische Mythea and magische Beilungen,” 
Pddeuma, 1956, pp. 194-204.

Sacred Time and Myths 85

therapeutic efficacy of the incantation lies in the fact that, 
ritually uttered, it reactualizes the mythical time of 
origins, both the origin of the world and the origi of 
toothaches and their treatment.

FESTIVAL TIME

AND THE STRUCTURE OF FESTIVALSFESTIVAL TIME

AND THE STRUCTURE OF FESTIVALS

The time of origin of a reality—that is, the time 
inaugurated by the first appearance of the reality—has 
a paradigmatic value and function; that is why man 
seeks to reactualize it periodically by means of appro¬ 
priate rituals. But the “first manifestation” of a reality 
is equivalent to its creation by divine or semidivine be¬ 
ings; hence, recovering this time of origin i mpl i es ri tual 
repetition of the gods’ cre a tiv e act. The periodic reactu¬ 
alization of the creative acts performed by the divine 
beings in illo tempore constitutes the sacred calendar, 
the series of festivals. A festival always takes place in 
the original time. It is precisely the reintegration of this 
original and sacred time that differentiates man’s be¬ 
havior during the festival from his behavior before or 
after it. For in many cases the same acts are performed 
during the festival as during nonfestival periods. But 
religious man believes that he then lives in another time, 
that he has succeeded in returning to the mythical Mud 
tempos .

During their annual totemic ceremony, the Intickiuma ,

86 The Sacred and the Profane

the Australian Arunta repeat the journey taken by the 
particular elan’s divine Ancestor in the mythical tim e 
(alche ringa , literally, the dream tim e). They stop at all 
the countless places at which the Ancestor stopped and 
repeat the same acts and gestures that he performed in 
illo tempore . During the entire ceremony they fast, carry 
no weapons, and avoid all contact with their women and 
with members of other clans. They are completel y im¬ 
mersed in the dream time. 8The festivals annually celebrated in a Polynesian 
island, Tikopia, reproduce the “works of the Gods”— 
that is, the acts by which in the mythical time the gods 
fashioned the world as it is today. 9 The festival time in 
which the Tikopia live during the ceremonies is char¬ 
acterized by certain prohibitions (tabus) : noise, games, 
dancing cease. The passage from profane to sacred time 
is indicated by ritually cutting a piece of wood in two. 
The numerous ceremonies that make up the periodical 
festivals—and which, once again, are only the reitera¬ 
tion of the paradigmatic acts of the gods— seem not to 
be different from normal activities; they comprise ritual 
repairing of boats, rites relative to the cultivation of food 
plants (yam, taro, etc.), repairing of sanctuaries. But 
in reality all these ceremonial activities differ from 
similar labors performed at ordinary times by the fact

8 F. J. Gillen, The Native Tribes o} Central Australia, 2nd ed, London, 
1938, pp. 170 ff.

9 CL Raymond Firth, The Work of the Cods in Tikopia, I, London, 1940.

Sacred Time and Myths 87

that they are performed on only a few objects (which in 
some sort constitute the archetypes of their respective 
classes) and also because the ceremonies take place in 
an atmosphere saturated with the sacred. The natives, 
that is, are conscious that they are reproducing, to the 
smallest detail, the paradigmatic acts of the gods as they 
were performed in illo tempore .

T his is as much as to say that religious man period i- 
caU y becomes the contemporary of th e gods in the meas¬ 
ure i n which he reactualizes the primo rdial time in which 
the divine works were accompl ished. O n the level of 
primitive c ivilizations, whatever man does has a trans- 
human mo del; hence, even outside of the festival time. 
fa js acts and gestures imitate the pa radigmatic models 
established by the gods and the mythical ancestors. B ut

this imitati on is like!

$ -

* Hie modelis-likelyjthis imitati on is like!

$ -

* Hie modelis-likelyj

lanzanons 03

less accurate.

nvme act

short, the religious f estivals—that rest ore human knowl- 
ed ge of the sacralitv of the modelsiTfr e ritual repairing 
of ships and the ritual cultivation of the yam no longer 
resemble the similar operations performed outside of the 
sacred periods. For one thing, they are more precise, 
closer to the divine models; for another, they are ritual 
—that is, their intent is religious. A^oat-is-repairod 
ceremonially-^^ it is i n repair Km K*.

cause, in illo tempore *- tho-sods s howed men how t o 
repair boats. It is a case not of an empirical operation

88 The Sacred and the Profane

but of a religious act, an imitatio dei . The object repaired 
is no longer one of the many objects that constitute the 
class “boats” but a mythical archetype —the very boat 
that the gods manipulated in illo tempore . Hence the time 
in which the ritual repairing of boats is performed co¬ 
heres with primordial time; it is the same time in which 
the gods labored.Obviously, not all varieties of periodical festivals can 
be reduced to the type just examined. But it is not with 
the morphology of the festival that we are concerned; it 
is with the structure of the sacred time actualized in fes¬ 
tivals. It can be said of sacred time that it is always the 
same, that it is “a succession of eternities” (Hubert and 
Mauss). For, however complex a religious festival may 
be, it always involves a sacred event that took place ab 
origine and that is ritually made present. The partici¬ 
pants in the festival become contemporaries of the mythi¬ 
cal event. I n other words, they emerge from their h is¬ 
torical time—that is. from the time constituted by th e 
s um total of profane personal and intrapersonal even ts 
—and recover primordial time, whi ch is always the 
same, which belongs to eternity. Religious man periodi¬ 
cally^ finds his way into mythical and sacred time, 
re-enters the time of origin, the time that “floweth not” 
because it does not participate in profane temporal 
duration, because it is composed of an eternal present, 
which is indefinitely recoverable.

| Religious man feels the need to plunge periodically

Sacred Time and Myths 89| Religious man feels the need to plunge periodically

Sacred Time and Myths 89

into this sacred and indestructible time./For him it is 
sacred time that makes possible the other time, ordinary 
time, the profane duration in which every human life 
takes its course.flt is the eternal present of the mythical 
event that makes possible the profane duration of his¬ 
torical events. To give only one example: it is the divine 
hierogamy, which took place in illo tempore , that made 
human sexual union possible. The union between the 
god and goddess occurs in an atemporal instant, in an 
eternal present; sexual unions between human beings— 
when they are not ritual unions—take place in duration, 
in profane time. Sacred, mythical time also originates 
and supports existential, historical time, for it is the 
latter’s paradigmatic model. In short, it is by virtue of 
the divine or semidivine beings that everything has come 
into existence. The origin of realities and of life itself 
is religious. The yam can be cultivated and eaten in the 
ordinary way because it is periodically cultivated and 
eaten ritually . And these rituals can be performed be¬ 
cause the gods revealed them in illo tempore , by creating 
man and the yam and by showing men how to cultivate 
and eat that particular food plant.

In the festival the sacred dimension of life is re¬ 
covered, the participants experience the sanctity of 
human existence as a divine creation. At all other times 
there is always the danger of forgetting what is funda¬ 
mental—that existence is not given by what modem men 
call Nature but is a creation of Others , the gods or semi-

90 The Sacred and the Profane

divine beings. But in festivals the participants recover 
die sacred dimension of existence, b / y_Igami ng again 
how the gods or the mythical ancestors created man and 
taught him the various kinds of social behavior and of 
practical work.From one point of view this periodical emergence 
from historical time—and especially the consequences 
that it has for the total existence of religious man—may 
appear to be a refusal of history, hence a refusal of 
creative freedom. After all, what is involved is an eter¬ 
nal return in illo tempore, to a past that is mythical, 
completely unhistorical. It coul d be conc ludedjhattins 
et ernal repetition of the paradig matic acts and gestures 
revealed by the gods ab o rpine i 5 ^posed t(Tariy~liuman 
pro^ess^miJ^jaralyzes any ^ cieativf r~spentgheity. 
< tair^^~S e^i r)n c b 1einTI la j ust ifiable in part. But only.in 
part. For religious man,-ev,en. the most primitj ye,__does

rint~fefuie~progressln^princi^e^he acce pts it but a t die

camjtime be st ows on it a divine origin and dimension. 
Everything that from the modern point of view seems 
to us to have signified progress (of whatever kind 
whether social, cultural, technical, etc.) in comparison 
with a previous situation, all this the various primitive 
societies have accepted in the course of their long his¬ 
tory as a series of new divine revelations. But for the 
moment we shall leave this aspect of the problem aside. 
What is of primary importance to us is to understand 
the religious meaning of this repetition of divine acts

Sacred Time and Myths 91

and gestures. Now, it seems obvious that, if religious 
man feels the need of indefinitely reproducing the same 
paradigmatic acts and gestures, this is because he desires 
and attempts to live close to his gods .

/ PERIODICALLY BECOMING CONTEMPORARY

WITH THE GODS/ PERIODICALLY BECOMING CONTEMPORARY

WITH THE GODS

In the preceding chapter, when we studied the 
cosmological symbolism of cities, temples, and houses, 
we showed that it is bound up with the idea of a Center 
of the World. The religious symbolism implicit in the 
symbolism of the center appears to be this: man desires 
to have his abode in a space opening upward, that is, 
communicating with the divine world. To live near to a 
Center of the World is, in short, equivalent to living as 
close as possible to the gods.

We find the same desire for a close approach to 
the gods if we analyze the meaning of religious festivals. 
To reintegrate the sacred time of origin is equivalent to 
becoming contemporary with the gods, hence to living 
in their presence—even if their presence is mysterious 
in the sense that it is not always visible. The intention 
that can be read in the experience of sacred space and 
sacred time reveals a desire to reintegrate a primordial 
situation—that in which the gods and the mythical an¬ 
cestors were present , that is, were engaged in creating 
the world, or in organizing it, or in revealing the foun*

92 The Sacred and the Profane

dations of civilization to man. This primordial situation 
is not historical, it is not calculable chronologically; 
what is involved is a mythical anteriority, the time of 
origin, what took place “in the beginning,’’ in principio.Now, what took place “in the beginning” was this: the 
divine or semidivine beings were active on earth. Hence 
the nostalgia for origins is equivalent to a religious nos¬ 
talgia. Man desires to recover the active presence of 
the gods; he also desires to live in the world as it came 
from the Creator’s hands, fresh, pure, and strong. It is 
the nostalgia for the perfection of beginnings that chiefly 
explains the periodical return in illo tempore . In Chris¬ 
tian terms, it could be called a nostalgia for paradise, 
although on the level of primitive cultures the religious 
and ideological context is entirely different from that 
of Judaeo-Christianity. But the mythical time whose 
reactualization is periodically attempted is a time sancti¬ 
fied by the divine presence, and we may say that the 
desire to live in the divine presence and in a perfect 
world (perfect because newly bom) corresponds to the 
nostalgia for a paradisal situation.

As we noted above, this desire on the part of religious 
man to travel back periodically, his effort to reintegrate 
a mythological situation (the situation as it was in the 
beginning) may appear intolerable and humiliating to 
modem eyes. Such a nostalgia inevitably leads to the 
continual repetition of a limited number of gestures and 
patterns of behavior. From one point of view it may even

Sacred Time and Myths 93

be said that religious man—especially the religious man 
of primitive societies—is above all a man paralyzed by 
the myth of the eternal return.! A modem psychologist 
would be tempted to interpret such an attitude as anxiety 
before the danger of the new, refusal to assume responsi¬ 
bility for a genuine historical existence, nostalgia for a 
situation that is paradisal precisely because it is embry¬ 
onic, insufficiently detached from nature, fThat problem is too complex to be discussed here. In 
any case, it lies outside the field of our investigation, 
for, in the last analysis, it implies the problem of the 
opposition between premodem and modem man. Let us 
rather say that it would be wrong to believe that the 
religious man of primitive and archaic societies refuses 
to assume the responsibility for a genuine existence. On 
the contrary, as we have seen and shall see again, he 
courageously assumes immense responsibilities—for 
example, that of collaborating in the creation of the cos¬ 
mos, or of creating his own world, or of ensuring the life 
of plants and animals, and so on. But it is a different 
kind of responsibility from those that, to us modems, 
appear to be the only genuine and valid responsibilities. 
It is a responsibility on the cosmic plane , in contradis¬ 
tinction to the moral, social, or historical responsibilities 
that are alone regarded as valid in modem civilizations. 
From the point of view of profane existence, man feels 
no responsibility except to himself and to society. For 
him, the universe does not properly constitute a cosmos

94 The Sacred and the Profane

—that is, a living and articulated unity; it is simply the 
sum of the material reserves and physical energies of 
the planet, and the great concern of modern man is to 
avoid stupidly exhausting the economic resources of the 
globe. But, existentially, the primitive always puts him¬ 
self in a cosmic context. His personal experience lacks 
neither genuineness nor depth; but the fact that it is 
expressed in a language unfamiliar to us makes it appear 
spurious or infantile to modem eyes.To revert to our immediate subject: we have no war¬ 
rant for interpreting periodic return to the sacred time 
of origin as a rejection of the real world and an escape 
into dream and imagination. On the contrary, it seems 
to us that, here again, we can discern the ontological 
obsession to which we have referred and which, more¬ 
over, can be considered an essential characteristic of 
the man of the primitive and archaic societies. For 
to wish to reintegrate the time of origin is also to wish 
to return to the presence of the gods , to recover the 
strong , fresh , pure world that existed in illo tempore . It 
is at once thirst for the sacred and nostalgia for being . 
On the existential plane this experience finds expression 
in the certainty that life can be periodically begun over 
again with a maximum of good fortune. Indeed, it is not 
only an optimistic vision of existence, but a total cleav¬ 
ing to being. By all his behavior, religious man pro¬ 
claims that he believes only in being, and that his 
participation in being is assured him by the primordial

95

Sacred Time and Myths

revelation of which he is the guardian. The sum total 
of primordial revelations is constituted by his myths.

MYTH=PARADIGMATIC MODEL

\ y95

Sacred Time and Myths

revelation of which he is the guardian. The sum total 
of primordial revelations is constituted by his myths.

MYTH=PARADIGMATIC MODEL

\ y

The myth relates a sacred history, that is, a pri¬ 
mordial event that took place at the beginning of time, 
ab initio . But to relate a sacred history is equivalent to 
revealing a mystery. For the persons of the myth are not 
human beings; they are gods or culture heroes, and for 
this reason their gesta constitute mysteries; man could 
not know their acts if they were not revealed to him. The 
myth, then, is the history of what took place in illo temr 
pore, the recital of what the gods or the semidivine 
beings did at the beginning of time. To tell a myth is to 
proclaim what happened ab origine . Once told, that is, 
revealed, the myth becomes apodictic truth; it establishes 
a truth that is absolute. “It is so because it is said that 
it is so,” the Netsilik Eskimos declare to justify the valid¬ 
ity of their sacred history and religious traditions. The 
myth proclaims the appearance of a new cosmic situa¬ 
tion or of a primordial event. Hence it is always the 
recital of a creation; it tells how something was accom¬ 
plished, began to be. It is for this reason that myth is 
bound up with ontology; it speaks only of realities , of 
what really happened, of what was fully manifested.

Obviously these realities are sacred realities, for it 
is the soared that is pre-eminently the real. Whatever

96 The Sacred and the ProfaneObviously these realities are sacred realities, for it 
is the soared that is pre-eminently the real. Whatever

96 The Sacred and the Profane

belongs to the sphere of the profane does not participate 
in being, for the profane was not ontologically estab¬ 
lished by myth, has no perfect model. As we shall soon 
see, agricultural work is a ritual revealed by the gods 
or culture heroes. This is why it constitutes an act that 
is at once real and significant. Let us think, by compari¬ 
son, of agricultural work in a desacralized society. Here, 
it has become a profane act, justified by the economic 
profit that it brings. The ground is tilled to be exploited; 
the end pursued is profit and food. Emptied of religious 
symbolism, agricultural work becomes at once opaque 
and exhausting; it reveals no meaning, it makes possi¬ 
ble no opening toward the universal, toward the world of 
spirit. No god, no culture hero ever revealed a profane 
act. Everything that the gods or the ancestors did, hence 
everything that the myths have to tell about their creative 
activity, belongs to the sphere of the sacred and there¬ 
fore participates in being . In contrast, what men do on 
their own initiative, what they do without a mythical 
model, belongs to the sphere of the profane; hence it is 
a vain and illusory activity, and, in the last analysis, 
unreal. The more religious man is, the more paradig¬ 
matic models does he possess to guide his attitudes and 
actions. In other words, the more religious he is, the 
more does he enter into the real and the less is he in 
danger of becoming lost in actions that, being nonpara- 
digmatic, “subjective,” are, finally, aberrant.

This is the aspect of myth that demands particular 
emphasis here. The myth reveals absolute sacrality, be-

Sacred Time and Myths 97This is the aspect of myth that demands particular 
emphasis here. The myth reveals absolute sacrality, be-

Sacred Time and Myths 97

cause it relates the creative activity of the gods, unveils 
the sacredness of their work. In other words, the myth 
describes the various and sometimes dramatic irruptions 
of the sacred into the world. This is why, among many 
primitives, myths cannot be recited without regard for 
time or place, but only during the seasons that are ritu¬ 
ally richest (autumn, winter) or in the course of reli¬ 
gious ceremonies—in short, during a sacred period of 
time . It is the irruption of the sacred into the world, 
an irruption narrated in the myths, that establishes the 
world as a reality. Ever y myth shows how a reali ty_£amg 
into ex istence, whether it be the total reality, the cosmo s, 
or only a fragment— an island, a species of plant, a 
human in stitution. T o tell how things came into existence 
is to explain them and at the same time indirectly to 
answer another question: Why did they come into exist- \ 
ence? The why is always implied in the how—for the \

simple reason that to tell how a thing was bom is to j 
reveal an irruption of the sacred into the world, and the j

Moreover, since every creation is a divine work and 
hence an irruption of the sacred, it at the same time 
represents an irruption of creative energy into the world. 
Every creation springs from an abundance. The gods 
create out of an excess of power, an overflow of energy. 
Creation is accomplished by a surplus of ontological 
substance. This is why the myth, which narrates this 
sacred ontophany, this victorious manifestation or a 
plenitude of being, becomes the paradigmatic model for

98 The Sacred and the Pro jane98 The Sacred and the Pro jane

all human activities* For it alone reveals the real, the 
superabundant, the effectual. “We must do what the 
Gods did in the beginning,” says an Indian text (ShaU> 
patha Brdhmana, VII, 2, 1, 4). “Thus the Gods did; 
thus men do,” the Taittiriya Brahmana adds (1,5,9,4). 
Hence the supreme function of the myth is to “fix” the 
paradigmatic models for all rites and all significant 
human activities—eating, sexuality, work, education, 
and so on. Acting as a fully responsible human being, 
man imitates the paradigmatic gestures of the gods, 
repeats their actions, whether in the case of a simple 
physiological function such as eating or of a social, eco¬ 
nomic, cultural, military, or other activity.

In New Guinea a great many myths tell of long sea 
voyages, thus providing “exemplars for the modem voy¬ 
agers,” as well as for all other activities, “whether of 
love, or war, or rain-making, or fishing, or whatever 
else. ... The narrative gives precedents for the stages 
of construction, the tabu on sexual intercourse, etc.” 
When a captain goes to sea he personifies the mythical 
hero Aori. “He wears the costume which Aori is sup¬ 
posed to have worn, with blackened face .. . [and] the 
same kind of love in his hair which Aori plucked from 
Iviri’s head. He dances on the platform and extends his 
arms like Aori’s wings. ... A man told me that when 
he went fish shooting (with bow and arrow) he pretended 
to be Kivavia himself.” 10 He did not pray to the mythical

10 F. E. Williams, cited in Lncien Levy-Bruhl, La mythologie primitive , 
Paris, 1935, pp. 162, 163-164.

Sacred Time and Myths 99

hero for aid and favor; he identified himself with him.10 F. E. Williams, cited in Lncien Levy-Bruhl, La mythologie primitive , 
Paris, 1935, pp. 162, 163-164.

Sacred Time and Myths 99

hero for aid and favor; he identified himself with him.

This symbolism of mythical precedents is also found 
in other primitive cultures. Writing on the Karuk In¬ 
dians of California, J. P. Harrington says: “Everything 
that the Karuk did was enacted because the Ikxareyavs 
were believed to have set the example in story times. The 
Ikxareyavs were the people who were in America before 
the Indians came. Modern Karuks, in a quandary now to 
render the word, volunteer such translations as ‘the 
princes,’ ‘the chiefs,’ ‘the angels.’.. . [The Ikxareyavs] 
remain[ed] with the Karuk only long enough to state 
and start all customs, telling them in every instance, 
‘Humans will do the same.’ These doings and sayings are 
still related and quoted in the medicine formulas of the 
Karuk.” 11 —,

f~'~' This faithful repetition of divine models has a two¬ 
fold result: (1) by imitating the gods, man remains in j 
the sacred, h ence in reali ty; (2) by the continuous J 
reactualization of paradigmatic divine gestures, the 
world is sanctified. Men’s religious behavior contributes 
to maintaining the sanctity of the world. |

REACTUALIZING MYTHS

It is not without interest to note that religious 
man assumes a humanity that has a transhuman, tran¬ 
scendent model. He does not consider himself to be

11 J. P. Harrington, cited in ibid., p. 165.

100 The Sacred and the Pro jane11 J. P. Harrington, cited in ibid., p. 165.

100 The Sacred and the Pro jane

truly man except in so far as he imitates the gods, the 
culture heroes, or the mythical ancestors. This is as 
much as to say that religious man wishes to be other than 
he is on the plane of his profane experience. Religious 
man is not given; he makes himself, by approaching the 
divine models. These models, as we said, are preserved 
in myths, in the history of the divine gesta. Hence reli¬ 
gious man too regards himself as made by history, just 
as profane man does; but the only history that concerns 
him is the sacred history revealed by the myths—that is, 
the history of the gods; whereas profane man insists that 
he is constituted only by human history, hence by the 
sum of the very acts that, for religious man, are of no 
importance because they have no divine models. The 
point to he emphasized is that, from the beginning, reli¬ 
gious man sets the model he is to attain on the trans¬ 
human plane, the plane revealed by his myths. One be¬ 
comes truly a man only by conforming to the teaching 
of the myths , that is, by imitating the gods .

We will add that, for the primitives, such an imitatio 
dei sometimes implies a very grave responsibility. We 
have seen that certain blood sacrifices find their justifi¬ 
cation in a primordial divine act; in illo tempore the god 
had slain the marine monster and dismembered its body 
in order to create the cosmos. Man repeats this blood 
sacrifice—sometimes even with human victims—when he 
has to build a village, a temple, or simply a house. What 
the consequences of this imitatio dei can be is clearly 
shown by the mythologies and rituals of numerous primi-

Sacred Time and Myths 101Sacred Time and Myths 101

live peoples. To give only one example: according to the 
myths of the earliest cultivators, man became what he is 
today—mortal, sexualized, and condemned to work—in 
consequence of a primordial murder; in illo tempore a 
divine being, quite often a woman or a maiden, some¬ 
times a child or a man, allowed himself to be immolated 
in order that tubers or fruit trees should grow from his 
body. This first murder basically changed the mode of 
being of human life. The immolation of the divine being 
inaugurated not only the need to eat but also the doom 
of death and, in consequence, sexuality, the only way to 
ensure the continuity of life. The body of the immolated 
divinity was changed into food; its soul descended under 
ground, where it established the Land of the Dead. A. E. 
Jensen, who has devoted an important book to this type 
of divinities—which he calls dema divinities—has con¬ 
clusively shown that in eating and in dying man partici¬ 
pates in the life of the demosd 2

For all these palaeo-agricultural peoples, what is 
essential is periodically to evoke the primordial event 
that established the present condition of humanity. 
Their whole religious life is a commemoration, a re¬ 
membering. The memory reactualized by the rites 
(hence by reiterating the primordial murder) plays a 
decisive role; what happened in illo tempore must never 
be forgotten. The true sin is forgetting. The girl who at

12 A. E, Jensen, Das religiose WeltbUd einer fruhen J Zultur, Stuttgart, 
1948. Jensen borrowed the word dema from tbe Marind-anira of New 
Guinea.

102 The Sacred and the Profane12 A. E, Jensen, Das religiose WeltbUd einer fruhen J Zultur, Stuttgart, 
1948. Jensen borrowed the word dema from tbe Marind-anira of New 
Guinea.

102 The Sacred and the Profane

her first menstruation spends three days in a dark hut 
without speaking to anyone does so because the mur¬ 
dered maiden, having become the moon, remains three 
days in darkness; if the menstruating girl breaks the 
tabu of silence and speaks, she is guilty of forgetting a 
primordial event. Personal memory is not involved; 
what matters is to remember the mythical event, the only 
event worth considering because the only creative event 
It falls to the primordial myth to preserve true history, 
the history of the human condition; it is in the myth that 
the principles and paradigms for all conduct must be 
sought and recovered.

It is at this stage of culture that we encounter ritual 
cannibalism. The cannibal’s chief concern would seem 
to be essentially metaphysical; he must not forget what 
happened in illo tempore . Volhardt and Jensen have 
shown this very clearly; the killing and devouring of 
sows at festivals, eating the first fruits when tubers are 
harvested, are an eating of the divine body, exactly as 
it is eaten at cannibal feasts . Sacrifice of sows, head¬ 
hunti ng, cannibalism are symbolically the same as har¬ 
vesting tubers or coconuts. It is Volhardt’s accomplish¬ 
ment to have demonstrated the religious meaning of 
anthropophagy and at the same time the human respon¬ 
sibility assumed by the cannibal. 13 The food plant is not

18 E. Volhardt, Kannibalismus, Stuttgart, 1939. CL Eliade, “Le myths da 
bon salvage ou les prestiges de Torigine,” in Mythes, reves U 
mysteres, Paris, 1957, pp. 36 2.

Sacred Time and Myths 10318 E. Volhardt, Kannibalismus, Stuttgart, 1939. CL Eliade, “Le myths da 
bon salvage ou les prestiges de Torigine,” in Mythes, reves U 
mysteres, Paris, 1957, pp. 36 2.

Sacred Time and Myths 103

given in nature; it is the product of a slaying, for it was 
thus that it was created in the dawn of time. Head* 
hunting, human sacrifices, cannibalism were all accepted^ 
by man to ensure the life of plants. Volhardt’s insistence 
on this point is fully justified. The cannibal assumes his 
responsibility in the world; cannibalism is not a 
“natural” behavior in primitive man (moreover, it is not 
found on the oldest levels of culture); it is cultural 
behavior, based on a religious vision of life. For the 
vegetable world to continue, man must kill and be killed; 
in addition, he must assume sexuality to. its extreme 
limit—the orgy. An Abyssinian song declares this: “She 
who has not yet engendered, let her engender; he who 
has not yet killed, let him kill!” This is a way of saying 
that the two sexes are doomed to assume their destiny.

Before passing judgment on cannibalism, we must 
always remember that it was instituted by divine beings. 
But they instituted it to give human beings the oppor¬ 
tunity to assume a responsibility in the cosmos, to enable 
them to provide for the continuity of vegetable life. The 
responsibility, then, is religious in nature. The Uito 
cannibals affirm it: “Our traditions are always alive 
among us, even when we are not dancing; but we work 
only that we may dance.” Their dances consist in repeat¬ 
ing all the mythical events, hence also the first slaying, 
followed by anthropophagy.

We have cited this example in order to show that, 
among primitives as in the palaeo-oriental civilizations.

104 The Sacred and the ProfaneWe have cited this example in order to show that, 
among primitives as in the palaeo-oriental civilizations.

104 The Sacred and the Profane

the imitatio del is not conceived idyllically, that, on the 
contrary, it implies an awesome human responsibility. 
In judging a “savage” society, we must not lose sight of 
the fact that even the most barbarous act and the most 
aberrant behavior have divine, transhuman models. To 
inquire why and in consequence of what degradations 
and misunderstandings certain religious activities deteri¬ 
orate and become aberrant is an entirely different prob¬ 
lem, into which we shall not enter here. For our purpose, 
what demands emphasis is the fact that religious man 
sought to imitate, and believed that he was imitating, his 
gods even when he allowed himself to be led into acts 
that verged on madness, depravity, and crime.

SACRED HISTORY, HISTORY, HISTORICISM

Let us recapitulate:

Religious man experiences two kinds of time— 
profane and sacred. The one is an evanescent duration, 
the other a “succession of eternities,” periodically recov¬ 
erable during the festivals that made up the sacred 
calendar. The liturgical time of the calendar flows in a 
closed circle; it is the cosmic time of the year, sanctified 
by the works of the gods. And since the most stupendous 
divine work was the creation of the world, commemora¬ 
tion of the cosmogony plays an important part in many 
religions. The New Year coincides with the first day of 
Creation. The year is the temporal dimension of the

Sacred Time and Myths 105

cosmos. “The world has passed” expresses that a year 
has run its course.Sacred Time and Myths 105

cosmos. “The world has passed” expresses that a year 
has run its course.

At each New Year the cosmogony is reiterated, the 
world re-created, and to do this is also to create time— 
that is, to regenerate it by beginning it anew. This is 
why the cosmogonic myth serves as paradigmatic model 
for every creation or construction; it is even used as a 
ritual means of healing. By symbolically becoming con¬ 
temporary with the Creation, one reintegrates the pri¬ 
mordial plenitude. The sick man becomes well because 
he begins his life again with its sum of energy intact.

The religious festival is the reactualization of a pri¬ 
mordial event, of a sacred history in which the actors 
are the gods or semidivine beings. But sacred history is 
recounted in the myths. Hence the participants in the 
festival become contemporaries of the gods and the 
semidivine beings. They live in the primordial time that 
is sanctified by the presence and activity of the gods. 
The sacred calendar periodically regenerates time, be¬ 
cause it makes it coincide with the time of origin , the 
strong, pure time.|The religious experience of the festi¬ 
val—that is, participation in the sacred—enables man 
periodically to live in the presence of the gods.|This is 
the reason for the fundamental importance of myths in 
all pre-Mosaic religions, for the myths narrate the gesta 
of the gods and these gesta constitute paradigmatic 
models for all human activities. In so far as he imitates 
his gods, religious man lives in the time of origin , the

106 The Sacred and the Profane

time of the myths. In other words, he emerges from pro¬ 
fane duration to recover an unmoving time, eternity.106 The Sacred and the Profane

time of the myths. In other words, he emerges from pro¬ 
fane duration to recover an unmoving time, eternity.

Since, for religious man of the primitive societies, 
myths constitute his sacred history, he must not forget 
them; by reactualizing the myths, he approaches his gods 
and participates in sanctity. But there are also tragic 
divine histories, and man assumes a great responsibility 
toward himself and toward nature by periodically 
reactualizing them. Ritual cannibalism, for example, is 
the consequence of a tragic religious conception.

In short, through the reactualization of his myths, 
religious man attempts to approach the gods and to 
participate in being; the imitation of paradigmatic 
divine models expresses at once his desire for sanctity 
and his ontological nostalgia.

In the primitive and archaic religions the eternal 
repetition of the divine exploits is justified as an imitatio 
dei. The sacred calendar annually repeats the same 
festivals, that is, the commemoration of the same mythi¬ 
cal events. Strictly speaking, the sacred calendar proves 
to be the “eternal return” of a limited number of divine 
gesta —and this is true not only for primitive religions 
but for all others. The festal calendar everywhere con¬ 
stitutes a periodical return of the same primordial situa¬ 
tions and hence a reactualization of the same sacred 
time. For religious man, reactualization of the same 
mythical events constitutes his greatest hope; for with 
each reactualization he again has the opportunity to

Sacred Time and Myths 107Sacred Time and Myths 107

transfigure his existence, to make it like its divine model. 
In short, for religious man of the primitive and archaic 
societies, the eternal repetition of paradigmatic gestures 
and the eternal recovery of the same mythical time of 
origin, sanctified by the gods, in no sense implies a 
pessimistic vision of life. On the contrary, for him it is 
by virtue of this eternal return to the sources of the 
sacred and the real that human existence appears to be 
saved from nothingness and death.

The perspective changes completely when the sense of 
the religiousness of the cosmos becomes lost. This is 
what occurs when, in certain more highly evolved socie¬ 
ties, the intellectual elites progressively detach them¬ 
selves from the patterns of the traditional religion. The 
periodical sanctification of cosmic time then proves use¬ 
less and without meaning. The gods are no longer acces¬ 
sible through the cosmic rhythms. The religious mean¬ 
ing of the repetition of paradigmatic gestures is for¬ 
gotten. But repetition emptied of its religious content 
necessarily leads to a pessimistic vision of existence .

. When it is no longer a vehicle for reintegrating a pri¬ 
mordial situation, and hence for recovering the mysteri¬ 
ous presence of the gods, that is, when it is desacralized , 
cyclic time becomes terrifying; it is seen as a circle for¬ 
ever turning on itself, repeating itself to infinity.

This is what happened in India, where the doctrine of 
cosmic cycles (yugas) was elaborately developed. A

108 The Sacred and the ProfaneThis is what happened in India, where the doctrine of 
cosmic cycles (yugas) was elaborately developed. A

108 The Sacred and the Profane

complete cycle, a mahdyuga, comprises 12,000 years. 
It ends with a dissolution, a pralaya, which is repeated 
more drastically ( makdpralaya, the Great Dissolution) 
at the end of the thousandth cycle. For the paradigmatic 
schema “creation-destruction-creation-etc.” is repro¬ 
duced ad infinitum . The 12,000 years of a mahdyuga 
were regarded as divine years, each with a duration of 
360 years, which gives a total of 4,320,000 years for a 
single cosmic cycle. A thousand such mahdyugas make 
up a kalpa (form); 14 kalpas make up a manvantdra 
(so named because each manvantdra is supposed to be 
ruled by Manu, the mythical Ancestor-King.) A kalpa is 
equivalent to a day in the life of Brahma; a second 
kalpa to a night. One hundred of these “years” of 
Brahma, in other words 311,000 milliards of human 
years, constitute the life of Brahma. But even this dura¬ 
tion of the god’s life does not exhaust time, for the gods 
are not eternal and the cosmic creations and destructions 
succeed one another forever. 14

This is the true eternal return, the eternal repetition of 
the fundamental rhythm of the cosmos—its periodical 
destruction and re-creation. In short, it is the primitive 
conception of the Year-Cosmos, but emptied of its reli¬ 
gious content . Obviously, the doctrine of yugas was 
elaborated by intellectual elites, and if it became a pan- 
Indian doctrine, we must not suppose that it revealed its

14 Cf. Eliade, Myth , pp. 113 ff.; see also id. Images et symboles, Paris. 
1952, pp. 80 ff.

Sacred Time and Myths 10914 Cf. Eliade, Myth , pp. 113 ff.; see also id. Images et symboles, Paris. 
1952, pp. 80 ff.

Sacred Time and Myths 109

terrifying aspect to all the peoples of India. It was chiefly 
the religious and philosophical elites who felt despair in 
the presence of cyclic time repeating itself ad infinitum . 
For to Indian thought, this eternal return implied eternal 
return to existence by force of karma, the law of univer¬ 
sal causality. Then, too, time was homologized to the 
cosmic illusion (mdyd), and the eternal return to exist¬ 
ence signified indefinite prolongation of suffering and 
slavery. In the view of these religious and philosophical 
elites, the only hope was nonretum-to-existence, the 
abolition of karma; in other words, final deliverance 
( moksha ), implying a transcendence of the cosmos. 15

Greece too knew the myth of the eternal return, and 
the Greek philosophers of the late period carried the 
conception of circular time to its furthest limits. To 
quote the perceptive words of H. C. Puech: “According 
to the celebrated Platonic definition, time, which is deter¬ 
mined and measured by the revolution of the celestial 
spheres, is the moving image of unmoving eternity, 
which it imitates by revolving in a circle. Consequently 
all cosmic becoming, and, in the same manner, the dura¬ 
tion of this world of generation and corruption in which 
we live, will progress in a circle or in accordance with 
an indefinite succession of cycles in the course of which 
the same reality is made, unmade, and remade in con-

15 This transcendence Is achieved through the “fortunate instant* 
(kshana) t which implies a sort of sacred Time that permits emergence 
from time; see Images et symboles, pp, 10 ff.

110 The Sacred and the Profane110 The Sacred and the Profane

formity with an immutable law and immutable alterna¬ 
tives. Not only is the same sum of existence preserved in 
it, with nothing being lost and nothing created, but in 
addition certain thinkers of declining antiquity—Pytha¬ 
goreans, Stoics, Platonists—reached the point of admit¬ 
ting that within each of these cycles of duration, of these 
clones, these aeva , the same situations are reproduced 
that have already been produced in previous cycles and 
will be reproduced in subsequent cycles— ad infinitum . 
No event is unique, occurs once and for all (for example, 
the condemnation and death of Socrates), but it has 
occurred, occurs, and will occur, perpetually; the same 
individuals have appeared, appear, and will reappear at 
every return of the cycle upon itself. Cosmic duration is 
repetition and anakuklosis , eternal return.” 16

Compared with the archaic and palaeo-oriental reli¬ 
gions, as well as with the mythic-philosophical concep¬ 
tions of the eternal return, as they were elaborated in 
India and Greece, Judaism presents an innovation of 
the first importance. For Judaism, time has a beginning 
and will have an end. The idea of cyclic time is left be¬ 
hind. Yahweh no longer manifests himself in cosmic

time (like the gods of other religions) but in a historical 
time , which is irreversible. Each new manifestation of 
Yahweh in history is no longer reducible to an earlier 
manifestation. The fall of Jerusalem expresses Yahweh’s

16 Henri Charles Puech, “La gnose et le temps,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX. 
1952, pp. 60*61.

Sacred Time and Myths 111

wrath against his people, but it is no longer the same 
wrath that Yahweh expressed by the fall of Samaria. His 
gestures are personal interventions in history and reveal 
their deep meaning only for his people , the people that 
Yahweh had chosen . Hence the historical event acquires 
a new dimension; it becomes a theophany , 17Christianity goes even further in valorizing kistqrical 
time . Since God was incarnated , that is, since he took on 
a historically conditioned human existence , history 
acquires the possibility of being sanctified. The illud 
tempus evoked by the Gospels is a clearly defined his¬ 
torical time—the time in which Pontius Pilate was Gov¬ 
ernor of Judaea—but it was sanctified by the presence 
of Christ . When a Christian of our day participates in 
liturgical time, he recovers the illud tempus in which 
Christ lived, suffered, and rose again—but it is no 
losgexjjnythical time, it is the time when Pontius Pilate 
governed Judaea. For the Christian, too, the sacred 
calendar indefinitely rehearses the same events of the 
existence of Christ—hut these events took glace in his¬ 
tory; they are no longer facts that happened at the origin 
ofjime, “in the beginning.” (But we should add that, for 
the Christian, time begins anew with the birth of Christ, 
for the Incarnation establishes a new situation of man in 
the cosmos). This is as much as to say that history re¬ 
veals itself to be a new dimension of the presence of God

17 Cl Eliade, Myth, pp. 102 5., on the valorization of history in Judaism, 
especially by the prophets.

112 The Sacred and the Profane

in the world. Histor^becomes sacred history once more 
—as it was conceived, but in a mythical perspective, in 
primitive and archaic religions. 16

Christianity arrives, not at a philosophy but at a the¬ 
ology of history. For God’s interventions in history, and 
above all his Incarnation in the historical person of 
Jesus Christ, have a transhistorical purpose—the salva¬ 
tion of man.Hegel takes over the Judaeo-Christian ideology and 
applies it to universal history in its totality: the universal 
spirit continually manifests itself in historical events and 
manifests itself only in historical events. Thus the whole 
of history becomes a theophany; everything that has 
happened in history had to happen as it did, because the 
universal spirit so willed it. The road is thus opened to 
the various forms of twentieth-century historicistic phi¬ 
losophies. Here our present investigation ends, for all 
these new valorizations of time and history belong to 
the history of philosophy. Yet we must add that historic- 
ism arises as a decomposition product of Christianity; it 
accords decisive importance to the historical event 
(which is an idea whose origin is Christian) but to the 
historical event as such, that is, by denying it any possi¬ 
bility of revealing a transhistorical, soteriological in¬ 
tent 10

As for the conceptions of time on which certain his-

18 Cf. Eliade, Images et symboles, pp. 222 5

19 On the difficulties of historicism. see Myth, pp. 147 &

Sacred Time and Myths 113

toricistic and existentialist philosophies have insisted, 
the following observation is not without interest: al¬ 
though no longer conceived as a circle, time in these 
modem philosophies once again wears the terrifying 
aspect that it wore in the Indian and Greek philosophies 
of the eternal return. Definitively descralized, time pre¬ 
sents itself as a precarious and evanescent duration, 
leading irremediably to death.

The Saeredness 
of Nature

and Cosmic ReligionThe Saeredness 
of Nature

and Cosmic Religion

For religious man, nature is never only “nat¬ 
ural”; it is always fraught with a religious value. This 
is easy to understand, for the cosmos is a divine creation; 
coming from the hands of the gods, the world is impreg¬ 
nated with sacredness. It is not simply a sacrality corn- 
municated by the gods, as is the case, for example, with 
a place or an object consecrated by the divine presence. 
The gods did more; they manifested the different moduli • 
ties of the sacred in the very structure of the world and 
of cosmic phenomena.

The world stands displayed in such a manner that, in 
contemplating it, religious man discovers the many 
modalities of the sacred, and hence of being. Above all, 
the world exists, it is there, and it has a structure; it ia 
not a chaos but a cosmos, hence it presents itself as

creation, as work of the gods. This divine work always 
preserves its quality of transparency, that is, it spon¬ 
taneously reveals the many aspects of the sacred. The 
sky directly, “naturally,” reveals the infinite distance, 
the transcendence of the deity. The earth too is trans¬ 
parent; it presents itself as universal mother and nurse. 
The cosmic rhythms manifest order, harmony, perma¬ 
nence, fecundity. The cosmos as a whole is an organism 
at once real, living, and sacred; it simultaneously re¬ 
veals the modalities of being and of sacrality. Ontophany 
and hierophany meet

In this chapter we shall try to understand how the 
world presents itself to the eyes of religious man—or, 
more precisely, how sacrality is revealed through the 
very structures of the world. We must not forget that for

U6

li?

118 The Sacred and the ProfaneU6

li?

118 The Sacred and the Profane

religious man the supernatural is indissolubly connected 
with the natural, that nature always expresses something 
that transcends it. As we said earlier: a sacred stone is 
venerated because it is sacred, not because it is a stone; 
it is the sacrality manifested through the mode of being 
of the stone that reveals its true essence. This is why we 
cannot speak of naturism or of natural religion in the 
sense that the nineteenth century gave to those terms; 
for it is “supemature” that the religious man apprehends 
through the natural aspects of the world.

5 :

THE CELESTIAL SACRED

AND THE URANIAN GODS

I

Simple contemplation of the celestial vault 
already provokes a religious experience. The sky shows 
itself to he infinite, transcendent. It is pre-eminently the 
“wholly other” than the little represented by man and 
his environment. Transcendence is revealed by simple 
awareness of infinite height. “Most high” spontaneously 
becomes an attribute of divinity. The higher regions in¬ 
accessible to man, the sidereal zones, acquire the mo¬ 
mentousness of the transcendent, of absolute reality, of 
eternity. There dwell the gods; there a few privileged 
mortals make their way by rites of ascent; there, in the 
conception of certain religions, mount the souls of the 
dead. The “most high” is a dimension inaccessible to 
man as man; it belongs to superhuman forces and be-

Tke Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 119

ings. He who ascends by mounting the steps of a sanc¬ 
tuary or the ritual ladder that leads to the sky ceases to 
be a man; in one way or another, he shares in the divine 
condition.ings. He who ascends by mounting the steps of a sanc¬ 
tuary or the ritual ladder that leads to the sky ceases to 
be a man; in one way or another, he shares in the divine 
condition.

AH this is not arrived at by a logical, rational opera¬ 
tion. The transcendental category of height, of the Super¬ 
terrestrial, of the infinite, is revealed to the whole man, 
to his intelligence and his soul. It is a total awareness on 
man’s part; beholding the sky, he simultaneously dis¬ 
covers the divine incommensurability and his own situa¬ 
tion in the cosmos. For the sky, by its own mode of being 9 
reveals transcendence, force, eternity. It exists absolutely 
because it is high, infinite, eternal, powerful .

This is the true significance of the statement made 
above—that the gods manifested the different modalities 
of the sacred in the very structure of the world. In other 
words, the cosmos—paradigmatic work of the gods—is 
so constructed that a religious sense of the divine tran¬ 
scendence is aroused by the very existence of the sky. 
And since the sky exists absolutely, many of the supreme 
gods of primitive peoples are called by names designat¬ 
ing height, the celestial vault, meteorological phenom¬ 
ena, or simply Owner of the Sky or Sky Dweller.

The supreme divinity of the Maori is named Iho; iho 
means elevated, high up. Uwoluwu, the supreme god of 
the Akposo Negroes, signifies what is on high, the upper 
regions. Among the Selk’nam of Tierra del Fuego God 
is called Dweller in the Sky or He Who is in the Sky.

120 The Sacred and the Profane120 The Sacred and the Profane

Puluga, the supreme being of the Andaman Islanders, 
dwells in the sky; the thunder is his voice, wind his 
breath, the storm is the sign of his anger, for with his 
lightning he punishes those who break his command¬ 
ments. The Sky God of the Yoruba of the Slave Coast is 
named Olorun, literally Owner of the Sky. The Samoyed 
worship Num, a god who dwells in the highest sky and 
whose name means sky. Among the Koryak, the supreme 
divinity is called the One on High, the Master of the 
High, He Who Exists. The Ainu know him as the Divine 
Chief of the Sky, the Sky God, the Divine Creator of the 
Worlds, but also as Kamui> that is, Sky. The list could 
easily be extended. 1

We may add that the same situation is found in the 
religions of more civilized peoples, that is, of peoples 
who have played an important role in history. The Mon¬ 
gol name for the supreme God is Tengri, which means 
sky. The Chinese T’ien means at once the sky and the 
god of the sky. The Sumerian term for divinity, dingir , 
originally meant a celestial epiphany—clear, brilliant. 
The Babylonian Anu also expresses the idea of sky. The 
Indo-European supreme god, Dieus, denotes both the 
celestial epiphany and the sacred (cf. Sanskrit div, to 
shine, day; djaus , sky, day; Dyaus, Indian god of 
heaven). Zeus and Jupiter still preserve in their names 
the memory of the sacredness of the sky. The CeidS 
Taranis (from tar an, to thunder), the Baltic Perkunas

1 Examples and bibliography in Eliade, Patterns, pp. 33-67.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 121

(lightning), and the proto-Slavic Perun (cf. Polish 
piorun, lightning) are especially revealing for the later 
transformations of sky gods into storm gods. 2(lightning), and the proto-Slavic Perun (cf. Polish 
piorun, lightning) are especially revealing for the later 
transformations of sky gods into storm gods. 2

There is no question of naturism here. The celestial 
god is not identified with the sky, for he is the same god 
who, creating the entire cosmos, created the sky too. 
This is why he is called Creator, All-powerful, Lord, 
Chief, Father, and the like. The celestial god is a person, 
not a uranian epiphany. But he lives in the sky and is 
manifested in meteorological phenomena—thunder, 
lightning, storm, meteors, and so on. This means that 
certain privileged structures of the cosmos—the sky, the 
atmosphere—constitute favorite epiphanies of the su¬ 
preme being;| he reveals his presence by what is specifi¬ 
cally and peculiarly his—the majesty ( majestas) of the 
celestial immensity, the terror ( tremendum) of the 
storm, J

THE REMOTE GOD

The history of supreme beings whose structure 
is celestial is of the utmost importance for an under¬ 
standing of the religious history of humanity as a whole. 
We cannot even consider writing that history here, in a 
few pages. 3 But we must at least refer to a fact that to ua 
seems primary. Celestially structured supreme beings

2 On this see ibid., pp. 66 ff., 79 ff.» etc.

3 For basic data, cf. Eliade, Patterns, pp. 38-123. Cf. especially R. Pet- 
tazoni, Dio, Rome, 1921; id., Vonniscienza di Dio, Turin, 1955; Wilhelm 
Schmidt, Ur sprung der GoUesidee, I-XII, Munster, 1926-1955.

122 The Sacred and the Profane122 The Sacred and the Profane

tend to disappear from the practice of religion, from 
cult; they depart from among men, withdraw to the sky, 
and become remote, inactive gods (dei oticsi). In short, 
it may be said of these gods that, after creating the cos¬ 
mos, life, and man, they feel a sort of fatigue, as if the 
immense enterprise of the Creation had exhausted their 
resources. So they withdraw to the sky, leaving a son 
or a demiurge on earth to finish or perfect the Creation. 
Gradually their place is taken by other divine figures— 
the mythical ancestors, the mother-goddesses, the fecun¬ 
dating gods, and the like. The god of the storm still 
preserves a celestial structure, but he is no longer a 
creating supreme being; he is only the fecundator of 
the earth, sometimes he is only a helper to his com¬ 
panion ( paredros ), the earth-mother. The celestially 
structured supreme being preserves his preponderant 
place only among pastoral peoples, and he attains a 
unique situation in religions that tend to monotheism 
(Ahura-Mazda) or that are fully monotheistic (Yahweh, 
Allah).

The phenomenon of the remoteness of the supreme 
god is already documented on the archaic levels of cul¬ 
ture. Among the Australian Kulin, the supreme being 
Bunjil himself created the universe, animals, trees, and 
man; but after investing his son with power over the 
earth and his daughter with power over the sky, Bunjil 
withdrew from the world. He remains among the clouds, 
like a lord, holding a huge sword. Puluga, the supreme

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 123

being of the Andaman Islanders, withdrew after creating 
the world and the first man. The mystery of his remote¬ 
ness has its counterpart in an almost complete absence 
of cult; there is no sacrifice, no appeal, no thank offer¬ 
ing. The memory of Puluga survives in only a few 
religious customs—for example, the sacred silence of 
hunters returning to their village after a successful hunt.The Dweller in the Sky or He Who Is in the Sky of 
the Selk’nam is eternal, omniscient, all-powerful, the 
creator; but the Creation was finished by the mythical 
ancestors, who had also been made by the supreme god 
before he withdrew to a place above the stars. For now 
this god has isolated himself from men, is indifferent to 
the affairs of the world. He has neither images nor 
priests. Prayers are addressed to him only in case of 
sickness. “Thou who art above, take not my child; he is 
still too young!” 4 Offerings are rarely made to him ex¬ 
cept during storms.

It is the same among many African peoples; the great 
celestial god, the supreme being, all-powerful creator, 
plays only a minor role in the religious life of most 
tribes. He is too far away or too good to need an actual 
cult, and he is invoked only in extreme cases. Thus, for 
example, Glorun (Owner of the Sky) of the Yoruba, 
after beginning the Creation of the world, deputed finish¬ 
ing and ruling it to a lower god, Obatala. For his part,

4 Martin Gusinde, “Das hochste Wesen bei den Selk’n&m aaf Fenes- 
laad,” Festschrift W. Schmidt, Vienna, 1928, pp. 269-274.

124 The Sacred and the Profane

Olorun withdrew from human and earthly affairs, and 
the supreme god has neither temples nor statues nor 
priests. Nevertheless, he is invoked as a last resource in 
times of calamity.Olorun withdrew from human and earthly affairs, and 
the supreme god has neither temples nor statues nor 
priests. Nevertheless, he is invoked as a last resource in 
times of calamity.

Withdrawn into the sky, Ndyambi, the supreme god of 
the Herero, has abandoned humanity to lower divinites. 
“Why should we sacrifice to him?’ 5 a member of the 
tribe explained. “We do not need to fear him, for he does 
not do us any harm, as do the spirits of our dead.” 5 The 
supreme being of the Tukumba is “too great for the 
common affairs of men.” 6 The case is the same with 
Njankupon among the Tshi-speaking Negroes of West 
Africa; he has no cult, and homage is paid to him only 
under unusual circumstances, in case of famines or epi¬ 
demics or after a violent storm; men then ask him how 
they have offended him. Dzingbe (the Universal Father), 
the supreme being of the Ewe, is invoked only during 
droughts: “0 Sky, to whom we owe thanks, great is the 
drought; make it rain, so that the earth will be refreshed 
and the fields flourish!” 7 The remoteness and passivity 
of the supreme being are admirably expressed in a say¬ 
ing of the Gyriama of East Africa, which also describes 
their god: “Mulugu (God) is up above, the ghosts are 
down below!” 8 The Bantu say: “God, after creating man,

5 CL Frazer, The Worship of Nature , I, London, 1926, pp. 150 if. 
s Ibid^ p. 185.

7 J« Spieth, Die Religion der £Wer, Gottingen-Leipzig, 1911, pp. 46 £L

8 A. Le Roy, La religion des primitifs, 7th ed., Paris, 1925, p. 184

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 125

no longer cares about him.” And the Negritos repeat: 
“God has gone far away from us.” 9 The Fang peoples of 
the grasslands of Equatorial Africa sum up their reli* 
gious philosophy in a song:

God (Nzame) is above, man below.

God is God, man is man.

Each at home, each in his house. 10God (Nzame) is above, man below.

God is God, man is man.

Each at home, each in his house. 10

It is useless to multiply examples. Everywhere in these 
primitive religions the celestial supreme being appears 
to have lost religious currency; he has no place in the 
cult, and in the myths he draws farther and farther away 
from man until he becomes a deus btiosus. Yet he is re¬ 
membered and entreated as the last resort, when dl ways 
of appealing to other gods and goddesses, the ancestors, 
and the demons, have failed. As the Oraons express it: 
“Now we have tried everything, but we still have you to 
help us.” And they sacrifice a white cock to him, crying, 
“God, thou art our creator, have mercy on us.” 11

THE RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE OF LIFE

The divine remoteness actually expresses man’s 
increasing interest in his own religious, cultural, and 
economic discoveries. Through his concern with hiero- 
phanies of life, through discovering the sacral fertility

9 H. Trilies, Les Pygmees de la Foret equatorial^, Paris, 1932, p. 74 
™Ibid„ p. 77.

IJ Frazer, op. cit^ p. 631.

126 The Sacred and the Profane

of the earth, and through finding himself exposed to 
religious experiences that are more concrete (more car¬ 
nal, even orgiastic), primitive man draws away from 
the celestial and transcendent god. The discovery of 
agriculture basically transforms not only primitive 
man’s economy but also and especially his economy of 
the sacred . Other religious forces come into play—sexu¬ 
ality, fertility, the mythology of woman and of the earth, 
and so on. Religious experience becomes more concrete, 
that is, more intimately connected with life. The great 
mother-goddesses and the strong gods or the spirits of 
fertility are markedly more dynamic and more accessi¬ 
ble to men than was the Creator God.Yet, as we have just seen, in cases of extreme distress, 
when everything has been tried in vain, and especially 
in cases of disaster proceeding from the sky—drought, 
storm, epidemic—men turn to the supreme being again 
and entreat him. This attitude does not obtain only 
among primitives. Each time that the ancient Hebrews 
experienced a period of peace and prosperity, they 
abandoned Yahweh for the Baals and Astartes of their 
neighbors. Only historical catastrophes forced them to 
turn to Yahweh. “And they cried unto the Lord, and said. 
We have sinned, because we have forsaken the Lord, 
and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver 
us out of the hands of our enemies, and we will serve 
thee” (I Samuel, 12, 10).

The Hebrews turned to Yahweh after historical catas-

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 127

trophes and under the threat of an annihilation deter¬ 
mined by history; the primitives remember their 
supreme beings in cases of cosmic catastrophe. But the 
meaning of this return to the celestial god is the same in 
both cases: in an extremely critical situation, in which 
the very existence of the community is at stake, the 
divinities who in normal times ensure and exalt life are 
abandoned in favor of the supreme god. Seemingly, this 
is a great paradox: the deities that, among the primitives, 
took the place of the celestially structured gods were— 
like the Baals and Astartes among the Hebrews—divini¬ 
ties of fertility, of opulence, of fullness of life; in short, 
divinities that exalted and amplified life, both cosmic 
life—vegetation, agriculture, cattle—and human life. 
These divinities seemed to be strong, powerful . Their 
religious currency was explained precisely by their 
strength, their unlimited vital reserves, their fertility.And yet their worshippers—primitives and Hebrews 
alike—had the feeling that all these great goddesses and 
all these vegetation gods were unable to save them, that 
is, to ensure them existence in really critical moments. 
These gods and goddesses could only reproduce and 
augment life; and they could perform that function only 
during normal times; in short, they were divinities who 
governed the cosmic rhythms admirably, but who 
proved incapable of saving the cosmos or human society 
in moments of crisis (historical crisis among the He¬ 
brews) .

128 The Sacred and the Profane

The various divinities who took the place of the 
supreme beings were the repository of the most concrete 
and striking powers, the powers of life. But by that 
very fact they had become “specialists’* in procreation 
and lost the subtler, nobler, more spiritual powers of the 
Creator Gods. In discovering the sacredness of life, man 
let himself be increasingly carried away by his own dis¬ 
covery; he gave himself up. to vital hierophanies and 
turned from the sacrality that transcended his immediate 
and daily needs.

PERENNIALITY OF CELESTIAL SYMBOLS

Yet we must note that even when the celestial 
gods no longer dominate religious life, the sidereal 
regions, uranian symbolism, myths and rites of ascent, 
and the like, retain a preponderant place in the economy 
of the sacred . What is “above,” the “high,” continues to 
reveal the transcendent in every religious complex. 
Driven from the cult and replaced in mythologies by 
other themes, in the religious life the sky remains ever 
present by virtue of its symbolism. And this celestial 
symbolism in turn infuses and supports a number of 
rites (of ascent, climbing, initiation, royalty, and so on), 
of myths (the cosmic tree, the cosmic mountain, the chain 
of arrows connecting earth with heaven, and so on), of 
legends (e.g., magical flight). The symbolism of the 
Center of the World—whose immense dissemination weThe Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 129

have seen—likewise illustrates the importance of celes¬ 
tial symbolism; for it is at a center that communication 
with the sky is effected, and the sky constitutes the para¬ 
digmatic image of transcendence.

It could be said that the very structure of the cosmos 
keeps memory of the celestial supreme being alive. It is 
as if the gods had created the world in such a way that 
it could not but reflect their existence; for no world is 
possible without verticality, and that dimension alone is 
enough to evoke transcendence.

Driven from religious life in the strict sense, the celes¬ 
tial sacred remains active through symbolism. A reli¬ 
gious symbol conveys its message even if it is no longer 
consciously understood in every part. For a symbol 
speaks to the whole human being and not only to the 
intelligence.

STRUCTURE OF AQUATIC SYMBOLISM

Before treating of the earth, we must present the 
religious valorizations of the waters. 18 There are two 
reasons for this: (1) The waters existed before the earth 
(as in Genesis, 1, 2, “Darkness was upon the face of 
the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of 
the waters”) . (2) By analyzing the religious values of 
the waters we shall better grasp the structure and func-

12 On all the following see Eliade, Patterns , pp, 188 S.; id^ Images 
symboles, pp. 199 fi.

130 The Sacred and the Profane

tion of symbols. Now, symbolism plays a decisive part 
in the religious life of humanity; it is through symbols 
that the world becomes transparent, is able to show the 
transcendent.tion of symbols. Now, symbolism plays a decisive part 
in the religious life of humanity; it is through symbols 
that the world becomes transparent, is able to show the 
transcendent.

The waters symbolize the universal sum of virtuali¬ 
ties; they are fons et origo, “spring and origin,” the res¬ 
ervoir of all the possibilities of existence; they precede 
every form and support every creation. One of the para¬ 
digmatic images of creation is the island that suddenly 
manifests itself in the midst of the waves. On the other 
hand, immersion in water signifies regression to the 
preformal, reincorporation into the undifferentiated 
mode of pre-existence. Emersion repeats the cosmogonic 
act of formal manifestation; immersion is equivalent to 
a dissolution of forms. This is why the symbolism of the 
waters implies both death and rebirth. Contact with water 
always brings a regeneration—on the one hand because 
dissolution is followed by a new birth, on the other be¬ 
cause immersion fertilizes and multiplies the potential 
of life. The aquatic cosmology has its counterpart—on 
the human level—in the hylogenies, the beliefs accord¬ 
ing to which mankind was bom of the waters. The Flood, 
or the periodical submersion of the continents (myths of 
the Atlantis type) have their counterpart, on the human 
level, in man’s “second death” (the “dampness” and the 
leimon —the “humid field”—of the Underworld, and 
so on) or in initiatory death through baptism, put both 
on the cosmological and the anthropological planes im-

The Sacred ness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 131The Sacred ness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 131

mersion in the waters is equivalent not to a final extinc¬ 
tion but to a temporary reincorporation into the indis¬ 
tinct, followed by a new creation, a new life, or a “new 
man,” according to whether the moment involved is cos¬ 
mic, biological, or soteriologieal./From the point of 
view of structure, the flood is comparable to baptism, 
and the funeral libation to the lustrations of the newborn 
or to the spring ritual baths that procure health and 
fertility.

In whatever religious complex we find them, the 
waters invariably retain their function; they disintegrate, 
abolish forms, “wash away sins”;!they are at qnce puri- 
fying and regenerating.|Their destiny is to precede the 
Creation and to reabsorb it, since they are incapable of 
transcending their own mode of being, incapable, that is, 
of manifesting themselves in forms . The waters cannot 
pass beyond the condition of the virtual, of germs and 
latencies. Everything that is form manifests itself above 
the waters, by detaching itself from the waters.

One point is essential here: both the sacrality of the 
waters and the structure of aquatic cosmogonies and 
apocalypses can be completely revealed only through 
aquatic symbolism , which is the only system capable of 
integrating all of the particular revelations of innumer¬ 
able hierophanies. 13 This law, moreover, holds for every 
symbolism; it is the symbolism as a whole that valorizes

13 On this symbolism, cf. Eliade* Patterns, pp. 437 especially pp.

44a s.

132 Tke Sacred and the Profane

the various significations of hierophanies. The Waters of 
Death, for example, reveal their deeper meaning only to 
the extent to which the structure of aquatic symbolism is 
known,

PARADIGMATIC HISTORY OF BAPTISMPARADIGMATIC HISTORY OF BAPTISM

The Fathers of the Church did not fail to exploit 
certain pre-Christian and universal values of aquatic 
symbolism, although enriching them with new meanings 
connected with the historical existence of Christ. For 
Tertullian water, “before all the furnishing of the world, 
[was] quiescent with God in a yet unshapen state. . . . 
Water was the first to produce that which had life, that it 
might be no wonder in baptism if waters knew how to 
give life. . . . All waters, therefore, in virtue of the 
pristine privilege of their origin, do, after invocation of 
God, attain the sacramental power of sanctification; for 
the Spirit immediately supervenes from the heavens, 
and rests over the waters, sanctifying them from Him¬ 
self; and being thus sanctified, they imbibe at the same 
time the power of sanctifying. . . . They [that] were 
wont to remedy bodily defects, now heal the spirit; they 
[that] used to work temporal salvation, now renew 
eternal” (De Baptismo , III-V; trans. S. Thelwal, in The 
Writings of . . . Tertullianus, Edinburgh, 1869, Vol. I, 
pp. 233-238.).

The “old man” dies through immersion in water, and

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 133

gives birth to a new, regenerated being. This symbolism 
is admirably expressed by John Chrysostom ( Homil . in 
Joh., XXV, 2) who, writing of the multivalence of bap¬ 
tism, says: “It represents death and burial, life and 
resurrection. . . . When we plunge our heads into the 
water as into a sepulcher, the old man is immersed, 
buried wholly; when we come out of the water, the new 
man appears at the same time.”As we see, the interpretations reached by Tertullian 
and John Chrysostom are in perfect accord with the 
structure of aquatic symbolism. However , into the Chris• 
tian valorization of the waters there enter certain new 
elements connected with a “history” specifically with 
sacred history. First of all, there is the valorization of 
baptism as a descent into the abyss of the waters for a 
combat with the marine monster. This descent has a 
model—Christ’s descent into the Jordan, which was at 
the same time a descent into the Waters of Death. As 
Cyril of Jerusalem writes: “According to Job, the dragon 
Behemoth was in the Waters and received the Jordan into 
his jaws. Now, since the heads of the dragon must be 
broken, Jesus, having gone down into the Waters, bound 
the Strong One, so that we should have the power to 
walk on scorpions and snakes.” 14

iNext comes the valorization of baptism as repetition 
of the Flood./According to Justin, Christ, a new Noah,

14 Commentary and text in J. Danielou, Bible et liturgie. Fans, 1951, pp. 
58 ft

134- The Sacred and the Profane

emerged victorious from the waters to become the head 
of another race. The Flood figures both the descent into 
the watery depths and baptism. “The Flood, then, was 
an image which baptism comes to fulfill. . . . Just as 
Noah had confronted the Sea of Death in which sinful 
humanity had been destroyed, and had emerged from 
it, so the newly baptized man descends into the baptismal 
piscina to confront the w T ater Dragon in a supreme com¬ 
bat from which he emerges victorious.” 15But in further connection with the baptismal rite, 
Christ is also placed in parallel with Adam. The parallel 
Adam-Christ already has a considerable place in the 
theology of Saint Paul. “By baptism,” Tertullian affirms, 
“man recovers the likeness of God” (De Bapt V). For 
Cyril, “baptism is not only purification from sins and 
the grace of adoption, but also antitype of the Passion of 
Christ.” Baptismal nudity too bears a meaning that is at 
once ritual and metaphysical. It is abandoning “the old 
garment of corruption and sin, which the baptized per¬ 
son takes off in imitation of Christ, the garment with 
which Adam was clothed after his sin” 16 ; but it is also 
return to primitive innocence, to Adam’s state before the 
fall. “0 admirable!” Cyril writes. “Ye were naked be¬ 
fore the eyes of all and felt no shame. Because verily ye 
bear within you the image of the first Adam, who was 
naked in Paradise, and felt no shame.” 17

15 J. Danielou, Sacramentum futuri, Paris, 1950, p. 65.

16 J. Danielou, Bible et liturgie , pp. 61, 55.

17 See also the texts in ibid., pp. 56 ff.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 13515 J. Danielou, Sacramentum futuri, Paris, 1950, p. 65.

16 J. Danielou, Bible et liturgie , pp. 61, 55.

17 See also the texts in ibid., pp. 56 ff.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 135

From these few texts, we realize the direction of the 
Christian innovations. On the one hand, the Fathers 
sought for correspondences between the two Testaments; 
on the other, they showed that Jesus had in truth fulfilled 
God’s promises to the people of Israel. But it is im¬ 
portant to note that these new valorizations of baptismal 
symbolism are nowhere in contradiction to the univer¬ 
sally disseminated aquatic symbolism. Nothing is miss¬ 
ing: Noah and the Flood have their counterpart, in 
countless traditions, in the cataclysm that put an end to 
a humanity (society) except for one man who would be¬ 
come the mythical Ancestor of a new humanity. The 
Waters of Death are a leitmotiv of palaeo-oriental, Asi¬ 
atic, and Oceanic mythologies. Water i s pre-eminently 
the slayer; it dissolves, abolishes all form. It is just for 
this reason that it is so rich in germs, so creative. No 
more is baptismal nudity the exclusive property of the 
Judaeo-Christian tradition; Paradise implies the absence 
of garments, that is, the absence of attrition, wear (arche¬ 
typal image of time). All ritual nudity implies an 
atemporal model, a paradisal image.

The monsters of the abyss recur in many traditions. 
Heroes, initiates descend into the depths to confront 
marine monsters; this is a typical initiatory ordeal. To 
be sure, variants abound in the history of religions: 
sometimes dragons mount guard over a treasure, sensory 
image of the sacred, of absolute reality; the ritual 
(= initiatory) victory over the guardian monster is

136 The Sacred and the Profane136 The Sacred and the Profane

equivalent to a conquest of immortality. 15 For the Chris¬ 
tian, baptism is a sacrament because it was instituted by 
Christ. But it none the less repeats the initiatory ritual 
of the ordeal (= fight with the monster), of symbolic 
death and resurrection (= birth of the new man). We 
do not say that Judaism or Christianity borrowed these 
or similar myths and symbols from the religions of 
neighboring peoples. They had no need to; Judaism in¬ 
herited both a religious prehistory and a long religious 
history, in which all these things already existed. It was 
not even necessary that Judaism should have preserved 
one or another myth or symbol “awake,” in its integrity. 
It was enough if a group of images survived, even though 
only obscurely, from pre-Mosaic times. Such images and 
symbols were capable of recovering a powerful religious 
currency at any moment.

UNIVERSALITY OF SYMBOLS

Certain Fathers of the primitive Church had seen 
the value of the correspondence between the symbols 
advanced by Christianity and the symbols that are the 
common property of mankind. Addressing those who 
denied the resurrection of the dead, Theophilus of Anti¬ 
och appealed to the signs (tekmeria) that God had set 
before them in the great cosmic rhythms—seasons, days, 
nights. He wrote: “Is there not a resurrection for seeds

18 On these mythico-ritual motifs, see Eiiade, Patterns , pp. 207 &, 283 fL

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 137

and fruits?” For Clement of Rome, “day and night show 
us the resurrection; night sets, day rises; day departs, 
night comes.” 1 ®The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 137

and fruits?” For Clement of Rome, “day and night show 
us the resurrection; night sets, day rises; day departs, 
night comes.” 1 ®

For the Christian apologists, symbols were pregnant 
with messages; they showed the sacred through the cos¬ 
mic rhythms. The revelation brought by the faith did 
not destroy the pre-Christian meanings of symbols; it 
simply added a new value to them. True enough, for 
the believer this new meaning eclipsed all the others; it 
alone valorized the symbol, transfigured it into revela¬ 
tion. It was the resurrection of Christ that counted, not 
the signs that could be read in cosmic life. Yet it re¬ 
mains true that the new valorization was in some sort 
conditioned by the very structure of the symbolism ; it 
could even be said that the aquatic symbol awaited the 
fulfillment of its deepest meaning through the new values 
contributed by Christianity.

The Christian faith hangs upon a historical revelation; 
it is the incarnation of God in historical time that, in the 
Christian view, guarantees the validity of symbols. But 
the universal aquatic symbolism was neither abolished 
nor dismembered by the historical (— Judaeo-Christian) 
interpretations of baptismal symbolism. In other words: 
History cannot basically modify the structure of an 
archaic symbolism. History constantly adds new mean¬ 
ings, but they do not destroy the structure of the symbol.

i&Cf. L. Beirnaert, “La dimension mythique dans le sacxazaentalisme 
chretien/* Eranos-Jahrbuch, XVII, 1950, p. 275.

138 The Sacred and the Profanei&Cf. L. Beirnaert, “La dimension mythique dans le sacxazaentalisme 
chretien/* Eranos-Jahrbuch, XVII, 1950, p. 275.

138 The Sacred and the Profane

All this is comprehensible if we bear in mind that, 
for religious man, the world always presents a super¬ 
natural valence, that is, it reveals a modality of the 
sacred. Every cosmic fragment is transparent; its own 
mode of existence shows a particular structure of being, 
and hence of the sacred. We should never forget that, 
for religious man, sacrality is a full manifestation of 
being. The revelations of cosmic sacrality are in some 
sort primordial revelations; they take place in the most 
distant religious past of humanity, and the innovations 
later introduced by history have not had power to abol¬ 
ish them.

TERRA. MATER

An Indian prophet, Smohalla, chief of the Wana* 
pum tribe, refused to till the ground. He held that it was 
a sin to mutilate and tear up the earth, mother of alL 
He said: “You ask me to plow the ground! Shall I take 
a knife and tear my mother’s bosom? Then when I die 
she will not take me to her bosom to rest You ask me 
to dig for stone! Shall I dig under her skin for her 
bones? Then when I die, I cannot enter her body to be 
bom again. You ask me to cut grass and make hay and 
sell it, and be rich like white men! But how dare I cut 
off my mother’s hair?” 20

20 Jamas Mooney, “The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak 
of 1890, n Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, XIV, 2, 
Washington, 1896, pp. 721, 724.

The Sacred ness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 139The Sacred ness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 139

These words were spoken scarcely fifty years ago. But 
they come to us from very far. The emotion that we feel 
on hearing them arises primarily from their revealing 
to us, with incomparable freshness and spontaneity, the 
primordial image of Mother Earth. The image is found 
throughout the world in countless forms and variants. It 
is the Terra Mater or Tellus Mater so familiar to Medi¬ 
terranean religions, who gives birth to all beings. “Con¬ 
cerning Earth, the mother of all, shall I sing,” we read 
in the Homeric Hym to Earth , “firm earth, eldest of 
gods, that nourishes all things in the world. . . . Thine 
it is to give or to take life from mortal men” (Iff.; 
trans. A. Lang, Homeric Hymns , p. 246). And in the 
Choephori Aeschylus celebrates the earth “who bringeth 
all things to birth, reareth them, and receiveth again 
into her womb” (127-128; trans. Verrall, *Choephori 
p. 214).

The prophet Smohalla does not tell us in what way 
men are born of the telluric mother. But North American 
myths reveal how things happened in the beginning, in 
Mo tempore . The first men lived for a certain time in the 
breast of their mother, that is, in the depths of the earth. 
There in the telluric abyss they led a half-human life; 
in some sort they were still imperfectly formed embryos. 
At least so said the Lenni-Lenape or Delaware Indians, 
who once inhabited Pennsylvania. According to their 
myths, although the Creator had already prepared on 
the surface of the earth all the things that men now enjoy

140 The Sacred and the Profane

there, he had decided that these first men should remain 
yet a while hidden in the bosom of the telluric mother, 
so that they might better develop, might ripen. Other 
American Indian myths speak of an ancient time when 
Mother Earth brought forth human beings in the same 
way that she now produces bushes and reeds. 21That human beings are bom of the earth is a uni¬ 
versally disseminated belief. 22 In a number of languages 
man is called the earthbom. It is believed that children 
“come” from the depths of the earth, from caverns, 
caves, ravines, but also from ponds, springs, rivers. In 
the form of legends, superstitions, or merely as meta¬ 
phors, such beliefs still survive in Europe. Every dis¬ 
trict, and almost every town and village, knows of a 
brook or a spring that “brings” children; they are the 
Kinderhrunnen , Kinderteiche, Bubenquellen , and so on. 
Even the European of today still preserves an obscure 
sense of mystical solidarity with his native soil. It is 
the religious experience of autochthony; the feeling is 
that of belonging to a place , and it is a cosmically struc¬ 
tured feeling that goes far beyond family or ancestral 
solidarity.

The dying man desires to return to Mother Earth, to

21 Cf. Eliade, “La terre-mere et les hierogamies cosmiquea,” Eranos- 
Jakrbuch, XXII, 1954, pp. 59 ff.; also in id-, Mytkes, reves et mysteres, 
pp. 207-252, especially pp. 208 ff.

22 A. Dieterich, Mutter Erie, 3rd ed., Leipzig-Berlin, 1925; B. Nyberg, 
Kind and Erde, Helsinki, 1931; cf- Eliade, Patterns, pp. 239 ff.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 14122 A. Dieterich, Mutter Erie, 3rd ed., Leipzig-Berlin, 1925; B. Nyberg, 
Kind and Erde, Helsinki, 1931; cf- Eliade, Patterns, pp. 239 ff.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 141

be buried in his native soil. “Crawl to the Earth, thy 
mother,” says the Rig Veda (X, 18,10). “Thou who art 
earth, I put thee in the Earth!” we read in the Atharva 
Veda (XVIII, 4, 48). “Let flesh and bones return again 
to the Earth!” is solemnly intoned at Chinese funeral 
ceremonies. And Roman sepulchral inscriptions express 
fear lest the dead man’s ashes be buried far from home 
and, above all, the joy of reincorporating them into the 
fatherland: Hie natus hie situs est (CJ.L., V, 5595: 
“Here was he bom, here is he laid”); hie situs est 
patriae (VIII, 2885: “Here he is laid in his native 
land”); hie quo natus fuerat optans erat Ulo reverti 
(V, 1703: “Here where he was bora he desired to re¬ 
turn”).

humi positio:

LAYING THE INFANT ON THE GROUND

This fundamental experience—that the human 
mother is only the representative of the telluric Great 
Mother—has given rise to countless customs. We will 
mention, as an example, giving birth on the ground 
(i humi positio ), a ritual that is found almost all over 
the world, from Australia to China, from Africa to South 
America. Among the Greeks and Romans the custom had 
disappeared by historical times, but there is no doubt 
that it existed in a more remote past; certain statues of 
birth goddesses (Eileithia, Damia, Auxeia) represented

142 The Sacred and the Profane

them on their knees, exactly in the position of a woman 
giving birth on the ground. In demotic Egyptian texts 
the expression “to sit on the ground” meant to give birth, 
childbirth. 23them on their knees, exactly in the position of a woman 
giving birth on the ground. In demotic Egyptian texts 
the expression “to sit on the ground” meant to give birth, 
childbirth. 23

The religious meaning of the custom is easy to see: 
generation and childbirth are microcosmic versions of 
a paradigmatic act performed by the earth; every human 
mother only imitates and repeats this primordial act of 
the appearance of life in the womb of the earth. Hence 
every mother must put herself in contact with the Great 
GenetriXj, that she may be guided by her in accomplish¬ 
ing the mystery that is the birth of a life, may receive 
her beneficent energies and secure her maternal pro¬ 
tection.

Still more widely disseminated is the laying of the 
infant on the ground. In some parts of Europe it is still 
the custom today to lay the infant on the ground as soon 
as it has been bathed and swaddled. The father then 
takes the child up from the ground (de terra tollere) to 
show-his gratitude. In ancient China “the dying man, 
like the newborn infant, is laid on the ground. ... To 
be bom or to die, to enter the living family or the ances¬ 
tral family (and to leave the one or the other), there is 
a common threshold, one’s native Earth. . . . When the 
newborn infant or the dying man is laid on the Earth,

23 Cf. the references in EJiade, “La terre-mere et les hierogamiea cos- 
miques,” in Mythes » reves et mysteres , p. 222, o, I.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 14323 Cf. the references in EJiade, “La terre-mere et les hierogamiea cos- 
miques,” in Mythes » reves et mysteres , p. 222, o, I.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 143

it is for her to say if the birth or the death are valid, 
if they are to be taken as accomplished and normal facts. 
. . . The rite of laying on the Earth implies a substan¬ 
tial identity between the Race and the Soil. And in fact 
this idea finds expression in the feeling of autochthony 
that is the strongest feeling among those that we can 
detect at the beginnings of Chinese history; the idea of 
an intimate connection between a country and its inhabi¬ 
tants is a belief so profound that it has remained at the 
heart of religious institutions and civil law.” 24

Just as the infant is placed on the ground immediately 
after birth so that its true Mother shall legitimize it and 
confer her divine protection on it, so, too, infants, chil¬ 
dren, and grown men are placed on the ground—or 
sometimes buried in it—in case of sickness. Symbolic 
burial, partial or complete, has the same magico-reli- 
gious value as immersion in water, baptism. The sick 
person is regenerated; he is bom anew. The operation 
has the same efficacy in wiping out a sin or in curing a 
mental malady (the latter representing the same danger 
to the collectivity as does crime or somatic sickness). 
The sinner is placed in a cask or in a trench dug in the 
ground, and when he emerges he is said to “be bom a 
second time, from his mother’s womb.” This explains the 
Scandinavian belief that a witch can be saved from eter-

24 Marcel Granet, “Le depot de I’eafant sur le sol/* Revue Arckeologique , 
1922=£tude$ sociclogiques sur la Chine , Paris, 1953, pp. 192 fL, 197 S.

144 The Sacred and the Profane

nal damnation if she is buried alive, seed is sown over 
her, and the resulting crop harvested. 25144 The Sacred and the Profane

nal damnation if she is buried alive, seed is sown over 
her, and the resulting crop harvested. 25

Initiation includes a ritual death and resurrection. 
This is why, among numerous primitive peoples, the 
novice is symbolically “killed,” laid in a trench, and 
covered with leaves. When he rises from the grave he 
is looked upon as a new man y for he has been brought 
to birth once more, this time directly by the cosmic 
Mother .

WOMAN, EARTH, AND FECUNDITY

Woman, then, is mystically held to be one with 
the earth, childbearing is seen as a variant, on the human 
scale, of the telluric fertility. All religious experiences 
connected with fecundity and birth have a cosmic struc - 
ture . The sacrality of woman depends on the holiness of 
the earth. Feminine fecundity has a cosmic model—that 
of Terra Mater, the universal Genetrix.

In some religions Mother Earth is imagined as capable 
of conceiving alone, without the assistance of a coadju¬ 
tor. Traces of such archaic ideas are still found in the 
myths of the parthenogenesis of Mediterranean god¬ 
desses. According to Hesiod, Gaia (= Earth) gave birth 
to Ouranos “a being equal to herself, able to cover her 
completely” ( Theogony, 126 f.). Other Greek goddesses

25 A. Dieterich, Mutter Erde, pp. 28 ff.; B. Nyberg, Kind and Erde, p. 
150.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 14525 A. Dieterich, Mutter Erde, pp. 28 ff.; B. Nyberg, Kind and Erde, p. 
150.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 145

likewise gave birth without the help of gods. This is a 
mythical expression of the self-sufficiency and fecundity 
of Mother Earth. Such mythical conceptions have their 
counterparts in beliefs concerning the spontaneous fe¬ 
cundity of woman and in her occult magico-religious 
powers, which exert a determining influence on plant 
life. The social and cultural phenomenon known as 
matriarchy is connected with the discovery of agriculture 
by woman. It was woman who first cultivated food 
plants. Hence it is she who becomes owner of the soil 
and crops. 2 ® The magico-religious prestige and conse¬ 
quent social predominance of woman have a cosmic 
model—the figure of Mother Earth.

In other religions the cosmic creation, or at least its 
completion, is die result of a hierogamy between the 
Sky-God and Mother Earth. This cosmogonic myth is 
quite widely disseminated. It is found especially in 
Oceania—from Indonesia to Micronesia—but it also 
occurs in Asia, Africa, and the two Americas. 27 Now, as 
we have seen, the cosmogonic myth is pre-eminently the 
paradigmatic myth; it serves as model for human be¬ 
havior. This is why human marriage is regarded as an 
imitation of the cosmic hierogamy. “I am Heaven,” tbe

J. J. Bachofen. Das Mutterrecht, Basel, 1861, 3rd ed. 1948; Wilhelm 
Schmidt, Das Mutterrecht, Vienna, 1955.

27 Cl Eliade, Patterns, pp. 240 5. But it should be noted that, although 
very widely disseminated, the myth of the cosmic hierogamy la not 
universal and does not appear in the most archaic cultures (Australians, 
Fuegians, Arctic peoples, etc.).

146 The Sacred and the Profane146 The Sacred and the Profane

husband proclaims in the Brikadaranyaka Upaniskad 
(VI, 4, 20), “thou art Earth!” Even so early as the 
Atharva Veda (XIV, 2, 71) groom and bride are assimi¬ 
lated to heaven and earth. Dido celebrates her marriage 
to Aeneas in the midst of a violent storm ( Aeneid , IV, 
165 ff ); their union coincides with that of the elements; 
the Sky embraces his wife, dispensing the fertilizing 
rain. In Greece marriage rites imitated the example of 
Zeus’s secret union with Hera (Pausanias, II, 36, 2). 
As we should expect, the divine myth is the paradigmatic 
model for the human union. But there is another aspect 
which requires emphasis— the cosmic structure of the 
conjugal ritual , and hence of human sexual behavior. 
For nonreligious man of the modem societies, this simul¬ 
taneously cosmic and sacred dimension of conjugal 
union is difficult to grasp. But as we have had occasion 
to say more than once, it must not be forgotten that 
religious man of the archaic societies sees the world as 
fraught with messages. Sometimes the messages are in 
cipher, but the myths are there to help man decipher 
them. As we shall see later, the whole of human expe¬ 
rience can be homologized to cosmic life, hence can be 
sanctified, for the cosmos is the supreme creation of the 
gods.

Ritual orgies for the benefit of crops likewise have a 
divine model—the hierogamy of the Fecundating God 
and Mother Earth. 28 The fertility of the fields is stimu- 
28 CL Eliade, Patterns , pp. 356 S,

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 147The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 147

lated by an unlimited genetic frenzy. From one point 
of view the orgy corresponds to the pre-Creation state of 
nondifferentiation. This is why certain New Year cere¬ 
monies include orgiastic rites: social confusion, sexual 
license, and saturnalia symbolize regression to the 
amorphous condition that preceded the Creation of the 
World. In the case of a creation on the level of vegetable 
life, this cosmologieo-ritual scenario is repeated, for the 
new crop is equivalent to a new creation. The idea of 
renewal —which we encountered in New Year rituals 
whose purpose was at once the renewal of time and the 
regeneration of the world—recurs in orgiastic agricul¬ 
tural scenarios. Here too the orgy is a return to the cos¬ 
mic night, the preformal, the waters, in order to ensure 
complete regeneration of life and hence the fertility of 
the earth and an abundance of crops.

SYMBOLISM OF THE COSMIC TREE

AND OF VEGETATION CULTS

As we have just seen, the myths and rites of the 
Earth-Mother chiefly express ideas of fecundity and 
abundance. These are religious ideas, for what the vari¬ 
ous aspects of universal fertility reveal is, in sum, the 
mystery of generation, of the creation of life. For reli¬ 
gious man, the appearance of life is the central mystery 
of the world. Life comes from somewhere that is not this 
world and finally departs from here and goes to the

148

The Sacred and the Profane

beyond, in some mysterious way continues in an un¬ 
known place inaccessible to the majority of mortals. 
Human life is not felt as a brief appearance in time, 
between one nothingness and another; it is preceded by 
a pre-existence and continued in a postexistence. Little is 
known about these two extraterrestrial stages of human 
life, yet they are known to exist Hence, for religious 
man, death does not put a final end to life. Death is but 
another modality of human existence.All this, moreover, is ciphered in the cosmic rhythms; 
man need only decipher what the cosmos says in its many 
modes of being, and he will understand the mystery of 
life. But one thing seems clear beyond doubt: that the 
cosmos is a living organism, which renews itself peri¬ 
odically. The mystery of the inexhaustible appearance 
of life is bound up with the rhythmical renewal of the 
cosmos. This is why the cosmos was imagined in the 
form of a gigantic tree; the mode of being of the cosmos, 
and first of all its capacity for endless regeneration, are 
symbolically expressed by the life of the tree.

We should note, however, that all this does not repre¬ 
sent a mere transposition of images from the micro- 
cosmic to the macrocosmic scale. As a natural object, 
the tree could not suggest the whole of cosmic life; on 
the level of profane experience its mode of being does 
not coincide with the mode of being of the cosmos in all 
its complexity. On the level of profane experience vege¬ 
table life displays merely a series of births and deaths.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 149

Only the religious vision of life makes it possible to 
decipher other meanings in the rhythm of vegetation, 
first of all the ideas of regeneration, of eternal youth, of 
health, of immortality. The religious idea of absolute 
reality , which finds symbolic expression in so many 
other images, is also expressed by the figure of a miracu¬ 
lous fruit conferring immortality, omniscience, and 
limitless power, a fruit that can change men into gods.The image of the tree was not chosen only to symbolize 
the cosmos but also to express life, youth, immortality, 
wisdom. In addition to cosmic trees like the Yggdrasil 
of Germanic mythology, the history of religions records 
trees of life (e.g., in Mesopotamia), of immortality 
(Asia, Old Testament), of knowledge (Old Testament), 
of youth (Mesopotamia, India, Iran), and so on. 20 In 
other words, the tree came to express everything that 
religious man regards as pre-eminently real and sacred 9 
everything that he knows the gods to possess of their own 
nature and that is only rarely accessible to privileged 
individuals, the heroes and demigods. This is why myths 
of the quest for youth or immortality give prominent 
place to a tree with golden fruit or miraculous leaves, a 
tree growing “in the distant land” (really in the other 
world) and guarded by monsters (griffins, dragons, 
snakes). He who would gather its fruits must confront 
and slay the guardian monster. This in itself tells us

20 Cf. ibid*, pp. 273 ff.; G. Widen gren, The King and the Tree of Life 
in Ancient Near Eastern Religion, Uppsala, 1951.

150 The Sacred and the Profane

that we here have an initiatory ordeal of the heroic type ; 
it is by violence that the victor obtains the superhuman, 
almost divine condition of eternal youth, invincibility, 
and unlimited power.that we here have an initiatory ordeal of the heroic type ; 
it is by violence that the victor obtains the superhuman, 
almost divine condition of eternal youth, invincibility, 
and unlimited power.

It is in such symbols of a cosmic tree, or tree of im¬ 
mortality or knowledge, that the religious valences of 
vegetation are expressed with the greatest force and 
clarity. In other words, the sacred tree or sacred plants 
display a structure that is not to be seen in the various 
concrete vegetable species. As we noted before, it is 
sacrality that unveils the deepest structures of the world. 
The cosmos appears as a cipher only in the religious 
perspective. It is for religious man that the rhythms of 
vegetation simultaneously reveal the mystery of life and 
creation and the mystery of renewal, youth, and immor¬ 
tality. It could be said that all trees and plants that are 
regarded as sacred (e.g., the ashvatha tree in India) 
owe their privileged situation to the fact that they incar¬ 
nate the archetype, the paradigmatic image of vegetation. 
On the other hand, what causes a plant to be noticed and 
cultivated is its religious value. According to some 
writers, all of the plants that are in cultivation today 
were originally regarded as sacred plants. 30

What are called vegetation cults do not depend on a 
profane, “naturistdc” experience, connected, for exam¬ 
ple, with spring and the reawakening of vegetation. On

30 A. G. Haudricourt and L. Hedin, Uhomme et les plantcs cultivees, 
Paris, 1946, p. 90.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 15130 A. G. Haudricourt and L. Hedin, Uhomme et les plantcs cultivees, 
Paris, 1946, p. 90.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 151

the contrary, the religious experience of renewal (= re¬ 
beginning, re-creation) of the world precedes and justi¬ 
fies the valorization of spring as the resurrection of 
nature. It is the mystery of the periodical regeneration 
of the cosmos that is the basis for the religious signifi¬ 
cance of spring. Then, too, in vegetation cults the empha¬ 
sis is not always on the natural phenomenon of spring 
and the appearance of vegetation but on the prophetic 
sign of the cosmic mystery. Bands of young men pay 
ceremonial visits to the houses of their village and show 
a green branch, a bunch of flowers, a bird. 81 It is the 
sign of the imminent resurrection of vegetable life , 
testimony that the mystery has been accomplished, that 
spring will soon come. The majority of these rituals take 
place before the natural phenomenon of spring.

DESACRALIZATION OF NATURE

As we have said before, for religious man nature 
is never only natural. Experience of a radically desacral- 
ized nature is a recent discovery; moreover, it is an 
experience accessible only to a minority in modem socie¬ 
ties, especially to scientists. For others, nature still 
exhibits a charm, a mystery, a majesty in which it is 
possible to decipher traces of ancient religious values. 
No modem man, however irreligious, is entirely insensi¬ 
ble to the charms of nature. We refer not only to the

31 Cf. EHade, Patterns, pp. 316 2.

152 The Sacred and the Profane

esthetic, recreational, or hygienic values attributed to 
nature, but also to a confused and almost indefinable 
feeling, in which, however, it is possible to recognize the 
memory of a debased religious experience.A definite example of these changes and deteriorations 
in the religious values of nature will not be without 
value. We have taken our example from China, for two 
reasons. (1) In China, as in the West, the desacralization 
of nature is the work of a minority, especially of the 
literati; (2) nevertheless in China and in the entire Far 
East, the process of desacralization has never been car* 
ried to its final extreme. Even for the most sophisticated 
men of letters, “esthetic contemplation” still retains an 
aura of religious prestige.

From the seventeenth century, arranging gardens in 
pottery howls became the fashion among Chinese schol¬ 
ars. 02 The bowls were filled with water, out of which rose 
a few stones bearing dwarf trees, flowers, and often 
miniature models of houses, pagodas, bridges, and 
human figures; they were called “Miniature Mountains” 
in Annamese and “Artificial Mountains” in Sino-Anna* 
mese. These names themselves suggest a cosmological 
signification; for, as we have seen, the mountain is a 
symbol of the universe.

But these miniature gardens, which became objects

82 Oa the following, cf. Rolf Stein, “Jardins en miniature d’Extreme 
Orient,” Bulletin de CBcole Franqaise d*Extreme Orient , 42, 1943, pp, 
26 if. and passim.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 153The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 153

valued by esthetes, had a long history, or even a pre¬ 
history, which reveals a profound religious feeling for 
the world. Their ancestors were bowls whose perfumed 
water represented the sea and their cover the mountain. 
The cosmic structure of these objects is obvious. The 
mystical element was also present, for the mountain in 
the midst of the sea symbolized the Isles of the Blessed, 
a sort of Paradise in which the Taoist Immortals lived. 
So that we have here a world apart, a world in miniature, 
which the scholar set up in his house in order to partake 
in its concentrated mystical forces, in order , through 
meditation , to re-establish harmony with the world . The 
mountain was ornamented with grottoes, and the folklore 
of caves played an important role in the construction of 
these miniature gardens. Caves are secret retreats, dwell¬ 
ings of the Taoist Immortals and places of initiation. 
They represent a paradisal world and hence are difficult 
to enter (symbolism of the “narrow gate,” to which we 
shall return in the next chapter).

But this whole complex—water, trees, mountain, 
grotto—which had played such a considerable role in 
Taoism was only the development of a still older reli¬ 
gious idea: that of the perfect place , combining com- 
pleteness (mountain and water) with solitude , and thus 
perfect because at once the world in miniature and Para¬ 
dise, source of bliss and place of immortality. But the 
perfect landscape—mountain and water—was only the 
immemorial sacred place where, in China, at every re-

154 The Sacred and the Profane154 The Sacred and the Profane

turning spring, youths and girls met to intone alternating 
ritual chants and for amorous encounters. It is possible 
to divine the successive valorizations of the primordial 
sacred place. In the earliest times it was a privileged 
space, a closed, sanctified world, where the youths and 
girls met periodically to participate in the mysteries of 
life and cosmic fecundity. The Taoists took over this 
archaic cosmological schema—mountain and water— 
and elaborated it into a richer complex (mountain, 
water, grotto, trees), but reduced to the smallest scale; 
it was a paradisal universe in miniature, which was 
charged with mystical forces because apart from the 
profane world and in contemplation of which the Taoists 
sank into meditation.

The sanctity of the closed world is still discernible in 
the covered bowls of perfumed water symbolizing the 
sea and the Isles of the Blessed. This complex still 
served for meditation, just as the miniature gardens did 
in the beginning, before the fashion for them among 
scholars in the seventeenth century transformed them 
into art objects.

Yet it is worth noting that in this example we never 
witness a complete desacralization of the world, for in 
the Far East what is called the “esthetic emotion” still 
retains a religious dimension, even among intellectuals. 
But the example of the miniature gardens shows us in 
what direction and by what means the desacralization 
of the world is accomplished. We need only imagine

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 155

what an esthetic emotion of this sort could become in a 
modem society, and we shall understand how the expe¬ 
rience of cosmic sanctity can be rarefied and transformed 
until it becomes a purely human emotion—that, for 
example, of art for art’s sake.

OTHER COSMIC HIEROPHANIESOTHER COSMIC HIEROPHANIES

Considerations of space have obliged us to dis¬ 
cuss only a few aspects of the sacrality of nature. Many 
cosmic hierophanies have necessarily been passed over. 
Thus, for example, we have not been able to discuss 
solar and lunar symbols and cults, nor the religious 
significance of stones, nor the religious role of animals, 
and so on. Each of these groups of cosmic hierophanies 
reveals a particular structure of the sacrality of nature; 
or, more precisely, a modality of the sacred expressed 
through a specific mode of existence in the cosmos. For 
example, we need only analyze the various religious 
values attributed to stones to understand what stones, as 
hierophanies, are able to show to man; they reveal 
power, hardness, permanence. The hierophany of a stone 
is pre-eminently an ontophany; above all, the stone is, it 
always remains itself, it does not change—and it strikes 
man by what it possesses of irreducibility and absolute¬ 
ness and, in so doing, reveals to him by analogy the 
irreducibility and absoluteness of being. Perceived by 
virtue of a religious experience, the specific mode of

156 The Sacred and the Profane

existence of the stone reveals to man the nature of an 
absolute existence , beyond time, invulnerable to be* 
coming. 38156 The Sacred and the Profane

existence of the stone reveals to man the nature of an 
absolute existence , beyond time, invulnerable to be* 
coming. 38

In the same way a rapid analysis of the many and 
various religious valorizations of the moon shows all that 
men have deciphered in the lunar rhythms. It is through 
the moon’s phases—that is, its birth, death, and resur¬ 
rection—that men came to know at once their own mode 
of being in the cosmos and the chances for their survival 
or rebirth. It is through lunar symbolism that religious 
man was led to compare vast masses of apparently un¬ 
related facts and finally to integrate them in a single 
system. It is even probable that the religious valorization 
of the lunar rhythms made possible the first great an* 
thropo-cosmic syntheses of the primitives. It was lunar 
symbolism that enabled man to relate and connect such 
heterogeneous things as: birth, becoming, death, and 
resurrection; the waters, plants, woman, fecundity, and 
immortality; the cosmic darkness, prenatal existence, 
and life after death, followed by a rebirth of lunar type 
(“light coming out of darkness”); weaving, the symbol 
of the “thread of life,” fate, temporality, and death; and 
yet others. In general most of the ideas of cycle, dualism, 
polarity, opposition, conflict, but also of reconciliation 
of contraries, of coincidentia oppositorum, were either 
discovered or clarified by virtue of lunar symbolism. We

83 On sacred stones, cf. Eliade, Patterns, pp. 216*238.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 15783 On sacred stones, cf. Eliade, Patterns, pp. 216*238.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 157

may even speak of a metaphysics of the moon, in the 
sense of a consistent system of “truths” relating to the 
mode of being peculiar to living creatures, to everything 
in the cosmos that shares in life, that is, in becoming, 
growth and waning, death and resurrection. For we must 
not forget that what the moon reveals to religious man 
is not only that death is indissolubly linked with life 
but also, and above all, that death is not final , that it is 
always followed by a new birth?*

The moon confers a religious valorization on cosmic 
becoming and reconciles man to death. The sun, on the 
contrary, reveals a different mode of existence. The sun 
does not share in becoming; although always in motion, 
the sun remains unchangeable; its form is always the 
same. Solar hierophanies give expression to the religious 
values of autonomy and power, of sovereignty, of intelli¬ 
gence. This is why, in certain cultures, we witness a 
process of solarization of the supreme beings. As we saw, 
the celestial gods tend to disappear from current reli¬ 
gion, but in some cases their structure and prestige still 
survive in the solar gods, especially in the highly devel¬ 
oped civilizations that have played an important role 
in history (Egypt, the Hellenistic East, Mexico).

Many heroic mythologies are solar in structure. The 
hero is assimilated to the sun; like the sun, he fights 
darkness, descends into the realm of death and emerges

*4 a. ibid^ pp. 154-187.

158 The Sacred and the Profane*4 a. ibid^ pp. 154-187.

158 The Sacred and the Profane

victorious. Here darkness is no longer, as it is in lunar 
mythologies, one of the modes of being of divinity; 
instead, it symbolizes all that the god is not , hence the 
adversary par excellence. Darkness is no longer valor¬ 
ized as a necessary phase in cosmic life; in the perspec¬ 
tive of solar religion, it is opposed to life, to forms, and 
to intelligence. In some cultures the luminous epiphanies 
of solar gods become the sign of intelligence. In the end 
sun and intelligence will be assimilated to such a degree 
that the solar and syncretistic theologies of the end of 
antiquity become rationalistic philosophies; the sun is 
proclaimed to be the intelligence of the world, and 
Macrobius sees in the sun all the gods of the Graeco¬ 
oriental world, from Apollo and Jupiter to Osiris, Horus, 
and Adonis {Saturnalia, I, ch. 17-23). In the Emperor 
Julian’s treatise On the Sun King , as in Proelus’ Hymn 
to the Sun , solar hierophanies give place to ideas , and 
religious feeling almost completely disappears after this 
long process of rationalization. 35

This desacralization of solar hierophanies is only one 
among many other similar processes through whose 
operation the entire cosmos is finally emptied of its reli¬ 
gious content. But, as we said, the complete seculariza¬ 
tion of nature is a fact only for a limited number of 
modems—those devoid of all religious feeling. Despite 
the deep and sweeping changes that Christianity made

*5 Cf. ibid., pp. 124-153.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 159*5 Cf. ibid., pp. 124-153.

The Sacredness of Nature and Cosmic Religion 159

in the religious valorization of the cosmos and life, it 
did not reject them. That the whole of cosmic life can 
still be felt as a cipher of the divinity is shown by a 
Christian author such as Leon Bloy, when he writes: 
“Whether life is in men, in animals, or in plants, it is 
always Life, and when the minute, the inapprehensible 
point that is called death comes, it is always Jesus who 
departs, alike from a tree and from a human being.” 36

36 Ze mendumt ingrat, II, p. 196.

Human Existence 
and Sanctified Life

EXISTENCE OPEN TO THE WOULD

The ultimate aim of the historian of religions 
is to understand, and to make understandable to others, 
religious man’s behavior and mental universe. It is not 
always an easy undertaking. For the modern world, 
religion as form of life and Weltanschauung is repre¬ 
sented by Christianity. By making a considerable effort, 
a Western intellectual has at most some chance of famil¬ 
iarizing himself with the religious vision of classical 
antiquity and even with certain great oriental religions 
—for example, Hinduism or Confucianism. But such an 
effort to broaden his religious horizon, praiseworthy 
though it may be, does not take him far enough; Greece, 
India, China do not take the Western intellectual beyond 
the sphere of complex and highly developed religions 
with a large written sacred literature. To know some

162162

part of these sacred literatures, to become familiar with 
some oriental or classical mythologies and theologies 
does not yet suffice for a comprehension of the mental 
universe of homo religiosus. These mythologies and 
theologies are already only too clearly marked by the 
long labor of scholars; even if, strictly speaking, they 
are not “religions of the Book” {as are Judaism, Zoroas¬ 
trianism, Christianity, and Islam), they possess sacred 
books (India, China) or at least have ben influenced by 
revered writers of genius (e.g., in Greece, Homer).

To gain a broader religious perspective, it is more 
useful to become familiar with the folklore of European 
peoples; in their beliefs and customs, their attitude to¬ 
ward life and death, many archaic religious situations 
are still recognizable. Studying the rural societies -of

163

164 The Sacred and the Pro jane

Europe provides some basis for understanding the reli¬ 
gious world of the neolithic cultivators. In many cases 
the customs and beliefs of European peasants represent 
a more archaic state of culture than that documented in 
the mythology of classic Greece. 1 It is true that most of 
these rural European populations have been Christian¬ 
ized for over a thousand years. But they succeeded in 
incorporating into their Christianity a considerable part 
of their pre-Christian religious heritage, which was of 
immemorial antiquity. It would be wrong to suppose 
that for this reason European peasants are not Chris¬ 
tians. But we must recognize that their religion is not 
confined to the historical forms of Christianity, that it 
still retains a cosmic structure that has been almost en¬ 
tirely lost in the experience of urban Christians. We 
may speak of a primordial, ahistorical Christianity; 
becoming Christians, the European cultivators incor¬ 
porated into their new faith the cosmic religion that 
they had preserved from prehistoric times.But for the historian of religions who would under¬ 
stand and make understandable all of the existential 
situations of homo religiosity, the problem is more com¬ 
plex. A whole world stretches beyond the frontiers of 
the agricultural cultures—the truly “primitive” world 
of nomadic herdsmen, of totemistic hunters, of peoples 
still at the stage of gathering and small-game hunting.

1 This is. for example, the finding of Leopold Schmidt’s study. Gestalt * 
heiligkeit im bduerlichen Arbeitsmythos, Vienna, 1952.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 165

To come to know the mental universe of homo religiosus 9 
we must above all take into account the men of these 
primitive societies. Now, to us in this day their culture 
seems eccentric if not positively aberrant; in any case 
it is difficult to grasp. But there is no other way of under¬ 
standing a foreign mental universe than to place oneself 
inside it, at its very center, in order to progress from 
there to all the values that it possesses.

What we find as soon as we place ourselves in the 
perspective of religious man of the archaic societies is 
that the world exists because it was created by the gods 9 
and that the existence of the world itself “means” some¬ 
thing, “wants to say” something, that the world is neither 
mute nor opaque, that it is not an inert thing without 
purpose or significance. For religious man, the cosmos 
“lives” and “speaks.” The mere life of the cosmos is 
proof of its sanctity, since the cosmos was created by the 
gods and the gods show themselves to men through 
cosmic life.This is why, beginning at a certain stage of culture, 
man conceives of himself as a microcosm. He forms part 
of the gods’ creation; in other words, he finds in himself 
the same sanctity that he recognizes in the cosmos. It 
follows that his life is homologized to cosmic life; as a 
divine work, the cosmos becomes the paradigmatic image 
of human existence. To cite a few examples: We have 
seen that marriage is valorized as a hiexogamy of heaven 
and earth. But among the cultivators, the homology

166 The Sacred and the Profane

earth-woman is still more complex. Woman is assimi* 
lated to the soil, seed to the semen virile , and agricul¬ 
tural work to conjugal union. “This woman has come 
like living soil: sow seed in her, ye men!” says the 
Atharva Veda (XIV, 2,14). “Your women are as fields 
for you” (Koran, II, 225). A sterile queen laments, “I 
am like a field where nothing grows!” On the contrary, 
in a twelfth-century hymn the Virgin Mary is glorified 
as “ground not to be plowed, which brought forth fruit” 
(terra non arabilis quae fraction parturiit ).Let us attempt to understand the existential situation 
of one for whom all these homologies are experiences 
and not simply ideas . Clearly, his life has an additional 
dimension; it is not merely human, it is at the same time 
cosmic, since it has a transhuman structure. It could be 
termed an open existence, for it is not strictly confined 
to man’s mode of being. (We know too that the primitive 
places his model for himself on the transhuman plane 
revealed by myths). The existence of homo religiosus, 
especially of the primitive, is open to the world; in 
living, religious man is never alone, part of the world 
lives in him. But we cannot say, as Hegel did, that primi¬ 
tive man is “buried in nature,” that he has not yet found 
himself as distinct from nature, as himself. The Hindu 
who, embracing his wife, declares that she is Earth and 
he Heaven is at the same time fully conscious of his 
humanity and hers. The Austroasiatic cultivator who 
uses the same word, lak , to designate phallus and spade

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 167

and, like so many other agriculturalists, assimilates seed 
to the semen virile knows perfectly well that his spade 
is an instrument that he made and that in tilling his field 
he performs agricultural work involving knowledge of a 
certain number of techniques. In other words, cosmic 
symbolism adds a new value to an object or action, with¬ 
out affecting their peculiar and immediate values. An 
existence open to the world is not an unconscious exist¬ 
ence “buried in nature.” Openness to the world enables 
religious man to know himself in knowing the world— 
and this knowledge is precious to him because it is reli¬ 
gious, because it pertains to being.

SANCTIFICATION OF LIFESANCTIFICATION OF LIFE

The above example helps us to understand the 
perspective adopted by the man of the archaic societies; 
for him, the whole of life is capable of being sanctified. 
The means by which its sanctification is brought about are 
various, but the result is always the same: life is lived 
on a twofold plane; it takes its course as human exist¬ 
ence and, at the same time, shares in a transhuman life, 
that of the cosmos or the gods. Probably, in a very dis¬ 
tant past, all of man’s organs and physiological expe¬ 
riences, as well as all his acts, had a religious meaning. 
This is understandable, for all human behavior was 
established by the gods or culture heroes in Mo tempore ; 
they instituted not only the various kinds of work and

168 The Sacred and the Pro jane168 The Sacred and the Pro jane

the various ways of obtaining and eating food, of making 
love, of expressing thought and feeling, ahd so on, but 
even acts apparently of no importance. In the myth of 
the Australian Karadjeri the two culture heroes took a 
particular position to urinate, and the Karadjeri still 
imitate this paradigmatic gesture today. 2 Needless to say, 
there is nothing corresponding to this on the level of the 
profane experience of life. fFor nonreligious man, all 
vital experiences—whether sex or eating, work or play 
—have been desacralized. This means that all these 
physiological acts are deprived of spiritual significance, 
hence deprived of their truly human dimension. S 
But aside from this religious meaning that physiologi¬ 
cal acts receive as imitation of divine models, the organs 
and their functions were given religious valorization by 
being assimilated to the various cosmic regions and 
phenomena. We have already seen a classic example— 
woman assimilated to the soil and to Mother Earth, the 
sexual act assimilated to the hierogamy Heaven-Earth 
and to the sowing of seed. But the number of such 
homologies established between man and the universe is 
very large. Some of them seem to force themselves on 
the mind spontaneously, as, for example, the homology 
between the eye and the sun, or of the two eyes to sun 
and moon, or of the cranium to the full moon; or again,

2 Cf. Ralph Piddington, “Karadgeri Initiation,” Oceania, HI, 1932-1933, 
pp. 46-87.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 169

of breath to the winds, of bones to stones, of hair to 
grass, and so on.2 Cf. Ralph Piddington, “Karadgeri Initiation,” Oceania, HI, 1932-1933, 
pp. 46-87.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 169

of breath to the winds, of bones to stones, of hair to 
grass, and so on.

But the historian of religions encounters other homol¬ 
ogies that presuppose a more developed symbolism, a 
whole system of micro-macrocosmic correspondences. 
Such, for example, is the assimilation of the belly or the 
womb to a cave, of the intestines to a labyrinth, of 
breathing to weaving, of the veins and arteries to the 
sun and moon, of the backbone to the axis mundi, and 
so on. Of course all these homologies between the human 
body and the macrocosm are not documented among 
primitives. Some systems of man-universe correspond¬ 
ences were fully elaborated only in the higher cultures 
(India, China, the ancient Near East, Central America). 
Yet their point of departure is already present in 
archaic cultures. Primitive peoples have revealed to the 
investigator systems of anthropo-cosmic homologies of 
extraordinary complexity, which bear witness to an in¬ 
exhaustible capacity for speculation. Such is the case, 
for example, with the Dogon in French West Africa.®

These anthropo-cosmic homologies concern us particu¬ 
larly in so far as they are ciphers of various existential 
situations. We said that religious man lives in an open 
world and that, in addition, his existence is open to the 
world. This means that religious man is accessible to an 
infinite series of experiences that could be termed cos-

3 CL Marcel Griaule, Dieu d'eau,. Entretiens avec Ogotemmeli, Faria, 
1948.

170 The Sacred and the Profane3 CL Marcel Griaule, Dieu d'eau,. Entretiens avec Ogotemmeli, Faria, 
1948.

170 The Sacred and the Profane

mic. Such experiences are always religious, for the world 
is sacred. If we would understand them, we must remem¬ 
ber that the principal physiological functions can 
become sacraments. Eating is a ritual, and food is vari¬ 
ously valorized by various religions and cultures. Food¬ 
stuffs are regarded as sacred, or as gifts of divinity, or 
as an offering to the gods of the body (for example, in 
India). Sexual life, as we saw, is also ritualized and 
hence also homologized to divine acts (Heaven-Earth 
hierogamy). Sometimes marriage is valorized on a three¬ 
fold plane—individual, social, and cosmic. For example, 
among the Omahas, the village is divided into two halves, 
respectively named Heaven and Earth. Marriages can 
be contracted only between the two exogamic halves, and 
each new marriage repeats the primordial hieros gamos , 
the union of Heaven and Earth. 4

Such drawing of anthropo-cosmic homologies and, 
especially, the sacramentalization of physiological life 
that ensues have preserved all their vitality even in 
highly evolved religions. For but one example, we need 
only think of the prestige that sexual union as ritual 
acquired in Indian tantrism. India strikingly illustrates 
how a physiological act can be transformed into ritual 
and how, when the ritualistic period has ended, the same 
act can be valorized as mystical technique. The hus¬ 
band's exclamation in the Brihaddranyaka Upmishad,

4 Cl Werner Miiller, Die blaue Hutu> Wiesbaden, 1954, pp. 115 g.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 1714 Cl Werner Miiller, Die blaue Hutu> Wiesbaden, 1954, pp. 115 g.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 171

“I am Heaven, thou art Earth,” follows the transfigura¬ 
tion of the wife into the Vedic sacrificial altar (VI, 4, 3). 
But in tantrism woman ends by incarnating Prakriti 
(— nature) and the cosmic goddess, Shakti, while the 
male is identified with Shiva, the pure, motionless, serene 
spirit. Sexual union (maithimo) is above all an integra¬ 
tion of these two principles, cosmic nature-energy and 
spirit. As a tantric text expresses it: ‘The true sexual 
union is the union of the supreme Shakti with the Spirit 
(atman) ; other unions represent only carnal relations 
with women” ( Kiildrnava Tantra, V, 111-112). There 
is no longer any question of a physiological act, there 
is a mystical rite; the partners are no longer human 
beings, they are detached and free, like the gods. The 
tantric texts never tire of emphasizing that a transfigura¬ 
tion of carnal experience occurs. “By the same acts that 
cause some men to burn in hell for thousands of years, 
the yogin gains his eternal salvation.” 5 The Brihadaran- 
yaka Upanishad already declared: “He who knows this, 
though he seem to commit sin, is pure, clean, ageless, 
immortal” (V, 14, 8). In other words, “he who knows” 
has at command an entirely different experience from 
that of the profane man. This is as much as to say that 
every human experience is capable of being transfigured, 
lived on a different, a transhuman plane.

B See the texts in Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, New York, 
Pantheon Books, Bolimgen Series LVX, 1953, pp. 252*263, 411-412. Cited 
hereafter as Yoga.

172 The Sacred and the Pro janeB See the texts in Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, New York, 
Pantheon Books, Bolimgen Series LVX, 1953, pp. 252*263, 411-412. Cited 
hereafter as Yoga.

172 The Sacred and the Pro jane

The Indian example shows to what a degree of mysti¬ 
cal refinement sacramentalization of the organs and of 
physiological life can be brought—a sacramentalization 
that is already amply documented on all the archaic 
levels of culture. We should add that the valorization 
of sexuality as a means of participating in the sacred 
(or, in India, of gaining the superhuman state of abso¬ 
lute freedom) is not without its dangers. In India itself, 
tantrism has provided the occasion for aberrant and 
infamous ceremonies. In the primitive world too, ritual 
sexuality has been accompanied by many orgiastic 
forms. Nevertheless, the example still retains its sugges¬ 
tive value, for it reveals an experience that is no longer 
accessible in a desacralized society—the experience of 
a sanctified sexual life.

BODY-HOUSE-COSMOS

We have seen that religious man lives in an open 
cosmos and that he is open to the world. This means 
(a) that he is in communication with the gods; ( b ) that 
he shares in the sanctity of the world. That religious man 
can live only in an open world, we saw when we analyzed 
the structure of sacred space; man desires to dwell at a 
center, where there is the possibility of communicating 
with the gods. His dwelling is a microcosm; and so too 
is his body. The homology house-body-cosmos presents 
itself very early. We shall dwell on this example a little.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 173

for it shows how the values of archaic religious feeling 
and practice can be reinterpreted by later religions and 
even philosophies.Human Existence and Sanctified Life 173

for it shows how the values of archaic religious feeling 
and practice can be reinterpreted by later religions and 
even philosophies.

Indian religious thought made ample use of this tra¬ 
ditional homology, house-cosmos-human body. And the 
reason is clear: in the last analysis, the body, like the 
cosmos, is a “situation,” a system of conditioning influ¬ 
ences that the individual assumes. The spinal column 
is assimilated to the cosmic pillar (skambha) or to 
Mount Meru; the breaths are identified with the Winds; 
the navel or heart with the Center of the World, and so 
on. But homologies are also established between the 
human body and the entire ritual; the place of sacrifice, 
the sacrificial utensils and gestures are assimilated to the 
various physiological functions and organs. The human 
body, ritually homologized to the cosmos or the Vedic 
altar (which is an imago mundi), is also assimilated to a 
house. A hatha-yogic text refers to the human body as 
“a house with a pillar and nine doors” (Goraksha 
Shataka , 14).

All this amounts to saying that by consciously estab¬ 
lishing himself in the paradigmatic situation to which 
he is, as it were, predestined, man cosmicizes himself; 
in other words, he reproduces on the human scale the 
system of rhythmic and reciprocal conditioning influ¬ 
ences that characterizes and constitutes a world, that, in 
short, defines any universe. The homology also applies 
in the reverse direction; in their turn the temple or the

174 The Sacred and she Profane174 The Sacred and she Profane

house are regarded as a human body. The “eye” of the 
dome is a term that occurs in several architectural tradi¬ 
tions. 6 A fact to be emphasized is that each of these 
equivalent images—cosmos, house, human body—dis¬ 
plays, or is capable of receiving, an upper opening that 
makes passage to another world possible. The upper 
opening of an Indian tower bears, among other names, 
that of brahmarandhra . This term designates the opening 
at the top of the skull, which plays a primary role in 
yogico-tantric techniques and through which the soul 
takes flight at the moment of death. In this connection 
we may mention the custom of breaking the skulls of 
dead yogins, to facilitate the departure of the soul. 7

This Indian custom has counterparts in beliefs that 
are widely disseminated in Europe and Asia—that the 
soul of the dead person departs through the chimney 
(= smoke hole) or the roof and especially through the 
part of the roof that lies above the “sacred area.” 8 In 
cases of prolonged death agony, one or more boards are 
removed from the roof, or the roof is even broken. The 
meaning of this custom is patent: the soul will more

«Ct Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, “Symbolism of the Dome,** Indian His¬ 
torical Quarterly, XIV, 1938, pp. 34 ff.

7 Eliade, Yoga, p. 423; see also A. &. Coomaraswamy, loc. du, p. 53, 
n. 6a

8 That part of the sacred space which, in certain types of Enrasiatic 
habitations, corresponds to the central post and therefore plays the role 
of a Center of the World. See S. G. Rank, Die heilige Hinterecke im 
Hanskult der VoUcer Nordostearopas and Nordasiens, Helsinki, 1949.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 175Human Existence and Sanctified Life 175

easily quit its body if the other image of body-cosmos , 
the house , is broken open above . Obviously all these 
experiences are inaccessible to nonreligious man, not 
only because, for him, death has become desacralized, 
but also because he no longer lives in a cosmos in the 
proper sense of the word and is no longer aware that 
having a body and taking up residence in a house are 
equivalent to assuming an existential situation in the 
cosmos (see below).

It is noteworthy that the mystical vocabulary of India 
has preserved the homology man-house and especially 
the assimilation of the skull to the roof or dome. The 
fundamental mystical experience—that is, transcending 
the human condition—is expressed in a twofold image, 
breaking the roof and flight. Buddhistic texts refer to 
Arhats who “fly through the air and break the roof of 
the palace,” who, “flying by their own will, break and 
pass through the roof of the house and travel through 
the air,” and so on. 0 These vivid formulas are capable 
of a twofold interpretation: on the plane of mystical 
experience there is an “ecstasy” and hence the flight of 
the soul through the brahmarandhra; on the metaphysi¬ 
cal plane there is abolition of the conditioned world. 
But both the meanings of the Arhat’s flight express a 
break in ontological level and passage from one mode 
of being to another, or, more precisely, passage from

®Cf. Eliade, Mythes, reves et mysteres, pp. 133 3.

176 The Sacred and the Profane

conditioned existence to an unconditioned mode of being, 
that is, to perfect freedom.®Cf. Eliade, Mythes, reves et mysteres, pp. 133 3.

176 The Sacred and the Profane

conditioned existence to an unconditioned mode of being, 
that is, to perfect freedom.

In the majority of archaic religions, flight signifies 
access to a superhuman mode of being (god, magician, 
spirit)—in the last analysis, freedom to go wherever 
one will, hence an appropriation of the condition of the 
spirit. For Indian thought, the Arhat who “breaks the 
roof of the house” and flies away through the air shows 
figuratively that he has transcended the cosmos and 
attained a paradoxical and even inconceivable mode of 
being, that of absolute freedom (by whatever name it 
may be called: nirvana , asamskrita , samddhi , sahajaj 
etc.). On the mythological plane the paradigmatic ges¬ 
ture of transcending the world is illustrated by Buddha 
proclaiming that he has “broken” the cosmic egg, the 
“shell of ignorance,” and has obtained “the blessed, 
universal dignity of Buddha.” 10

This example shows the importance of the perennial 
life of the archaic symbolisms connected with the human 
habitation. These symbolisms express primordial reli¬ 
gious situations, but they are capable of altering their 
values, can be enriched with new meanings and enter 
increasingly complex systems of thought Man inhabits 
the body in the same way that he inhabits a house or the

WSuttavibfumgOr "Parajika,” I, I, 4, discussed in Paul Mua, “La notion 
du temps reversible dans la mythologie bouddhique/* Annumre de VEcole 
pratique dcs Hantes £tndes f Section des Sciences Religieitses,- Melun, 
1989, p. 13.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 177Human Existence and Sanctified Life 177

cosmos that he has himself created (cf. Chapter 1). 
Every lawful and permanent situation implies location 
in a cosmos, in a universe perfectly organized and hence 
imitated from the paradigmatic model, the Creation. 
Inhabited territory, temple, house, body are all, as we 
have seen, cosmoses. But each of these cosmoses keeps 
an opening, however this idea may be expressed in 
different cultures (the eye of the temple, chimney, smoke 
hole, brahmarandhra , etc.). In one way or another, the 
cosmos that one inhabits—body, house, tribal territory, 
the whole of this world—communicates above with a 
different plane that is transcendent to it

It can come about that in a noncosmic religion, such 
as that of India after Buddhism, the opening to the higher 
plane no longer represents passage from the human to 
the superhuman condition, but instead expresses tran¬ 
scendence, abolition of the cosmos, absolute freedom. 
There is an immense difference between the philosophi¬ 
cal meaning of the Buddha’s broken egg or the roof 
shattered by the Arhats and the archaic symbolism of 
passage from earth to heaven along the axis mundi or 
through the smoke hole. Yet the fact remains that, among 
symbols capable of expressing ontological break¬ 
through and transcendence, both Indian philosophy and 
Indian mysticism chose this primordial image of shat¬ 
tering the roof. This means that passing beyond the 
human condition finds figural expression in the destruc¬ 
tion of the “house,” that is, of the personal cosmos that

178 The Sacred and the Profane

one has chosen to inhabit. Every fixed abode in which 
one has settled is, on the philosophical plane, equivalent 
to an existential situation that one has assumed. The 
image of shattering the roof signifies that one has abol¬ 
ished all situation, has rejected settling in the world and 
chosen absolute freedom, which, for Indian thought, 
implies annihilation of any conditioned world.Without entering into any lengthy analysis of the 
values that one of our nonreligious contemporaries at¬ 
tributes to his body, his house, and his universe, we can 
already sense the vast distance that separates him from 
men belonging to the primitive and oriental cultures 
that we have been discussing. Just as a modern man’s 
habitation has lost its cosmological values, so too his 
body is without religious or spiritual significance. In a 
summary formula we might say that for the nonreligious 
men of the modern age, the cosmos has become opaque, 
inert, mute; it transmits no message, it holds no cipher. 
The feeling of the sanctity of nature survives today in 
Europe chiefly among rural populations, for it is among 
them that a Christianity lived as a cosmic liturgy still 
exists.

As for the Christianity of the industrial societies and 
especially the Christianity of intellectuals, it has long 
since lost the cosmic values that it still possessed in the 
Middle Ages. We must add that this does not necessarily 
imply that urban Christianity is deteriorated or inferior, 
but only that the religious sense of urban populations is

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 179

gravely impoverished. The cosmic liturgy, the mystery 
of nature’s participation in the Christological drama, 
have become inaccessible to Christians living in a mod¬ 
ern city. Their religious experience is no longer open 
to the cosmos. In the last analysis, it is a strictly private 
experience; salvation is a problem that concerns man 
and his god; at most, man recognizes that he is responsi¬ 
ble not only to God but also to history. But in these man- 
God-history relationships there is no place for the cosmos. 
From this it would appear that, even for a genuine 
Christian, the world is no longer felt as the work of God.

PASSING THROUGH THE NARROW GATEPASSING THROUGH THE NARROW GATE

All that we have just said concerning the body- 
house symbolism and the anthropo-cosmic homologies 
that are bound up with it is far from having exhausted 
the extraordinary richness of the subject; we have had 
to confine ourselves to only a few of its many aspects. 
The “house”—since it is at once an imago mundi and a 
replica of the human body—plays a considerable role 
in rituals and mythologies. In some cultures (e.g., proto- 
historic China, Etruria, etc.) funerary urns are made in 
the shape of a house; they have an opening above to per¬ 
mit the dead man’s soul to enter and leave. 11 The urn-

11 C. Hentze, Bronzegerdt y Kuilbaulen, Religion im altesten China dsr 
Chang’Zeit, Antwerp, 1951, pp. 49 id. in Sinologies Ill, 1953, pp» 
229-239 and Figs. 2*3.

180 The Sacred and the Profane

house in some sort becomes the dead man’s new “body.’* 
But it is also from a house (in this case cap-shaped) that 
the mythical Ancestor comes; and it is always in such a 
house-um-cap that the sun hides at night to come forth 
again in the morning. 12 Thus there is structural corre¬ 
spondence between the different modes of passage —from 
darkness to light (sun), from a human race’s pre- 
existence to its manifestation (mythical Ancestor), from 
life to death and to the new existence after death (the 
soul;.We have more than once stressed the fact that all 
forms of cosmos—universe, temple, house, human body 
—-have an “opening” above. The meaning of this sym¬ 
bolism now becomes still clearer; the opening makes 
possible passage from one mode of being to another, 
from one existential situation to another. Passage is pre¬ 
destined for every cosmic existence. Man passes from 
pre-life to life and finally to death, just as the mythical 
Ancestor passed from pre-existence to existence and the 
sun passes from darkness to light. We must note that this 
type of passage is part of a more complex system, the 
chief characteristics of which we examined in discussing 
the moon as archetype of cosmic becoming, vegetation as 
symbol of universal renewal, and especially the many 
ways of ritually repeating the cosmogony—that is, the 
paradigmatic passage from virtual to formal. All these

13 C. Hentze, Tod, Auferslekung, Weltordmmg. Das my this eke Bild m 
dltesten China, Zurich, 1955, pp. 47 S. and Figs. 24*25,

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 181

rituals and symbolisms of passage, we must add, express 
a particular conception of human existence: when 
brought to birth, man is not yet completed; he must be 
bom a second time, spiritually; he becomes complete 
man by passing from an imperfect, embryonic state to a 
perfect, adult state. In a word, it may be said that human 
existence attains completion through a series of “passage 
rites,” in short, by successive initiations.We shall discuss the meaning and function of initia¬ 
tion further on. Here we will dwell for a moment on the 
symbolism of “passage” as religious man reads it in his 
familiar surroundings and his daily life—in his house, 
for example, in the paths that he takes to go to his work, 
in the bridges he crosses, and so on. This symbolism is 
present even in the structure of his habitation. As we saw, 
the upper opening signifies the ascending direction to 
heaven, the desire for transcendence. The threshold 
concentrates not only the boundary between outside and 
inside but also the possibility of passage from one zone 
to another (from the profane to the sacred; cf. Chapter 
1). But it is especially the images of the bridge and the 
narrow gate which suggest the idea of a dangerous pas¬ 
sage and which, for this reason, frequently occur in 
initiatory and funerary rituals and mythologies. Initia¬ 
tion, death, mystical ecstasy, absolute knowledge, “faith” 
in Judaeo-Christianity—all these are equivalent to pas¬ 
sage from one mode of being to another and bring about 
a veritable ontological mutation. To suggest this para-

182 The Sacred and the Profane

doxical passage (for it always implies a break and a 
transcendence), the various religious traditions have 
made plentiful use of the symbolism of the Perilous 
Bridge or the Narrow Gate. In Iranian mythology the 
Cinvat Bridge is traversed by the dead in their post 
mortem journey; it is nine lance-lengths wide for the 
just, but for the wicked it becomes as narrow as “the 
blade of a razor” ( Dlnkart , IX, 20,3). Under the Cinvat 
Bridge lies the mouth of the deep pit of hell ( Videvdat, 
3, 7), The mystics always pass over this bridge on their 
ecstatic journeys to heaven; over it, for example, passed 
the spirit of Arda Viraf. 1 *The Vision of St. Paul presents a bridge “narrow as 
a hair” connecting our world with Paradise. The same 
image is found in Arabic writers and mystics; the bridge 
is “narrower than a hair,” and links the earth to the astral 
spheres and Paradise. Just as in Christian traditions, 
sinners cannot cross it and are cast down into helL 
Medieval legends tell of a “bridge under water,” and of 
the sword bridge which the hero (Lancelot) has to cross 
barefoot and with bare hands; it is “sharper than a 
scythe” and is crossed in “pain and agony,” In Finnish 
tradition a bridge covered with needles, nails, and razor 
blades crosses hell; the dead, as well as shamans in 
ecstasy, use it in their journeys to the other world. 
Similar descriptions are found practically all over the

13 Cf. Eliade, Le Chamanume, pp. 357 ff.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 183

world. 14 But it is important to note that the same imagery 
was still used when it became a question of expressing 
the difficulty of metaphysical knowledge and, in Christi¬ 
anity, of faith. “A sharpened edge of a razor, hard to 
traverse, a difficult path is this—poets declare” (Katha 
Upanishad, III, 14; tr. Hume, The Thirteen Principal 
Upanishads , p* 353). “Strait is the gate, and narrow is 
the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there he that 
find it” (Matthew, 7, 14).These few examples of the initiatory, funerary, and 
metaphysical symbolism of the bridge and the gate have 
shown in what way ordinary life and the “little world” 
that it implies—the house with its utensils, the daily 
routine with its acts and gestures, and so on—can be 
valorized on the religious and metaphysical plane. It is 
his familiar everyday life that is transfigured in the ex¬ 
perience of religious man; he finds a cipher everywhere. 
Even the most habitual gesture can signify a spiritual 
act. The road and walking can be transfigured into 
religious values, for every road can symbolize the “road 
of life,” and any walk a “pilgrimage,” a peregrination 
to the Center of the World. 15 If possessing a house im¬ 
plies having assumed a stable situation in the world, 
those who have renounced their houses, the pilgrims and 
ascetics, proclaim by their “walking,’’ by their constant

14 Cf. ibid., pp. 419 if.; Maarti Haavio, Vdindmoinen, Eternal Sage, Hel¬ 
sinki, 1952, pp. 112 ff.

15 Cf. Eliade, Patterns , pp. 430 ff.

184 The Sacred and the Profane

movement, their desire to leave the world, their refusal 
of any worldly situation. The house is a “nest,” and, as 
the Pancavimsha Brahmana says (XI, 15,1), the “nest” 
implies flocks, children, and a “home”; in a word, it 
symbolizes the world of the family, of society, of getting 
a living. Those who have chosen the Quest, the road that 
leads to the Center, must abandon any kind of family 
and social situation, any “nest,” and devote themselves 
wholly to “walking” toward the supreme truth, which, in 
highly evolved religions, is synonymous with the Hid* 
den God, the Deus absconditus . 10

RITES OF PASSAGERITES OF PASSAGE

It was long ago observed that “rites of passage” 
play a considerable part in the life of religious man. 1T 
Certainly, the outstanding passage rite is represented by 
the puberty initiation, passage from one age group to 
another (from childhood or adolescence to youth). But 
there is also a passage rites at birth, at marriage, at 
death, and it could be said that each of these cases always 
involves an initiation, for each of them implies a radical 
change in ontological and social status. When a child is 
bom, he has only a physical existence; he is not yet 
recognized by his family nor accepted by the community.

An an da K. Coomaraswamy, “The Pilgrim’s Way.” Journal of the 
Bikar and Orissa Oriental Research Society p XXIII, 1937, Part IV, pp. 
1 - 20 .

17 Cl. Arnold van Gcnnep, Les rites de passage , Paris, 1909.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 185

It is the rites performed immediately after birth that 
give the infant the status of a true “living person”; it is 
only by virtue of those rites that he is incorporated into 
the community of the living.

At marriage there is also a passage from one socio¬ 
religious group to another. The young husband leaves the 
group of bachelors and is thenceforth part of the group 
of heads of families. Every marriage implies a tension 
and a danger and hence precipitates a crisis; this is why 
it is performed by a rite of passage. The Greeks called 
marriage telos , consecration, and the marriage ritual 
resembled that of the mysteries.In regard to death, the rites are all the more complex 
because there is not only a “natural phenomenon” (life 
—or the soul—leaving the body) but also a change in 
both ontological and social status; the dead person has to 
undergo certain ordeals that concern his own destiny in 
the afterlife, but he must also be recognized by the com¬ 
munity of the dead and accepted among them. For some 
peoples, only ritual burial confirms death; he who is not 
buried according to custom is not dead. Elsewhere a 
death is not considered valid until after the funerary cere¬ 
monies have been performed, or until the soul of the 
dead person has been ritually conducted to its new dwell¬ 
ing in the other world and there been accepted by the 
community of the dead. For nonreligious man, birth, 
marriage, death are events that concern only the indi¬ 
vidual and his family; or occasionally—in the case of

186 The Sacred and the Profane

heads of governments or political leaders—events that 
have political repercussions. In a nonreligious view of 
life, all these “passages” have lost their ritual character; 
that is, they signify no more than is visible in the con¬ 
crete act of a birth, a death, or an officially recognized 
sexual union. However, we must repeat that a drastically 
nonreligious experience of the whole of life is seldom 
found in the pure state, even in the most secularized 
societies. Possibly such a completely nonreligious ex¬ 
perience will become commoner in a more or less distant 
future; for the present, it is still rare. What is found in 
the profane world is a radical secularization of death, 
marriage, and birth; but, as we shall soon see, there re¬ 
main vague memories of abolished religious practices 
and even a nostalgia for them.As for initiatory rituals proper, a distinction must be 
made between puberty initiations (age group) and cere¬ 
monies for entrance into a secret society. The most im¬ 
portant difference lies in the fact that all adolescents are 
obliged to undergo an age initiation, whereas only a 
certain number of adults enter the secret societies. It 
seems certain that the institution of puberty initiation is 
older than that of the secret society; it is more widely 
disseminated and is documented on the most archaic 
levels of culture, as, for example, among the Australians 
and the Fuegians. We need not here describe initiation 
ceremonies in all their complexity. What concerns us is 
to show that, even in the archaic stages of culture, initia*

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 187

tion plays a leading role in the religious formation of 
man, and more especially that in essence it consists in a 
complete change in the novice’s ontological status. This 
fact seems to us of the greatest importance for an under¬ 
standing of religious man; it shows that the man of the 
primitive societies does not consider himself “finished” 
as he finds himself “given” on the natural level of 
existence. To become a man in the proper sense he must 
die to this first (natural) life and be reborn to a higher 
life, which is at once religious and cultural.In other words, the ideal of humanity that the primi¬ 
tive wishes to attain he sets on a superhuman plane. This 
means: (1) one does not become a complete man until 
one has passed beyond, and in some sense abolished, 
“natural” humanity, for initiation is reducible to a para¬ 
doxical, supernatural experience of death and resurrec¬ 
tion or of second birth;' (2) initiation rites, entailing 
ordeals and symbolic death and resurrection, were insti¬ 
tuted by gods, culture heroes, or mythical ancestors; 
hence these rites have a superhuman origin, and by per¬ 
forming them the novice imitates a superhuman, divine 
action. It is important to note this, for it shows once 
again that religious man wants to be other than he finds 
himself on the “natural” level and undertakes to make 
himself in accordance with the ideal image revealed to 
him by myths. Primitive man undertakes to attain a 
religious ideal of humanity , and his effort already con¬ 
tains the germs of all the ethics later elaborated in

188 The Sacred and the Profane

evolved societies. Obviously, in modem nonreligious 
societies initiation no longer exists as a religious act 
But, as we shall see later, the patterns of initiation still 
survive, although markedly desacralized, in the modem 
world.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF INITIATIONPHENOMENOLOGY OF INITIATION

Initiation usually comprises a threefold revela¬ 
tion: revelation of the sacred, of death, and of sex¬ 
uality. 18 The child knows nothing of these experiences; 
the initiate knows and assumes them, and incorporates 
them into his new personality./We must add that, if the 
novice dies to his infantile, profane, nonregenerate life 
to be reborn to a new, sanctified existence, he is also 
reborn to a mode of being that makes learning, knowl¬ 
edge , possible./The initiate is not only one newborn or 
resuscitated; he is a man who knows , who has learned 
the mysteries, who has had revelations that are meta¬ 
physical in nature. During his training in the bush he 
Ieams the sacred secrets: the myths that tell of the gods 
and the origin of the world, the true names of the gods, 
the role and origin of the ritual instruments employed in 
the initiation ceremonies (the bull-roarers, the flint 
knives for circumcision, etc.). Initiation is equivalent to 
a spiritual maturing. And in the religious history of

18 On the following, see Eliade, Birth and Rebirth. The Religions Mean¬ 
ings of Initiation in Human Culture , New York. Harper, 1958.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 189

humanity we constantly find this theme: the initiate, he 
who has experienced the mysteries, is he who knows .Human Existence and Sanctified Life 189

humanity we constantly find this theme: the initiate, he 
who has experienced the mysteries, is he who knows .

The ceremony everywhere begins with the separation 
of the candidate from his family and a period of retire¬ 
ment in the bush. Here already there is a symbol of 
death; the forest, the jungle, darkness symbolize the be¬ 
yond, the “infernal regions.” In some places it is 
believed that a tiger comes and carries the candidates 
into the jungle on his back; the feline incarnates the 
mythical Ancestor, the master of the initiation, who con¬ 
ducts the boys to the underworld. Elsewhere the novice 
is believed to be swallowed by a monster. In the mon¬ 
ster’s belly there is cosmic night; it is the embryonic 
mode of existence, both on the cosmic plane and the 
plane of human life. In many places *here is an initia¬ 
tory hut in the bush. Here the young candidates undergo 
part of their ordeals and are instructed in the secret 
traditions of the tribe. Now, the initiatory hut symbolizes 
the maternal womb 19 ; the novice’s symbolic death signi¬ 
fies a regression to the embryonic state. But this is not 
to be understood only in terms of human physiology but 
also in cosmological terms; the fetal state is equivalent 
to a temporary regression to the virtual, precosmic mode.

Other rituals illuminate the symbolism of initiatory 
death. Among some peoples candidates are buried, or 
laid in newly dug graves. Or they are covered with

19 R. Tburnwald, “Primitive Initiations- und Wiedergehtmsritea,” Ers- 
nos-Jahrbuchy VII, 1950, p. 393.

190 The Sacred and the Profane19 R. Tburnwald, “Primitive Initiations- und Wiedergehtmsritea,” Ers- 
nos-Jahrbuchy VII, 1950, p. 393.

190 The Sacred and the Profane

branches and lie motionless like dead men. Or they are 
daubed with a white powder to make them look like 
ghosts. In addition, the novices imitate the behavior of 
ghosts; they do not use their fingers to eat but take food 
directly with their teeth, as the souls of the dead are be¬ 
lieved to do. Finally, the tortures that they undergo— 
which, of course, have many meanings—have this mean¬ 
ing too: the tormented and mutilated novice is believed 
to be tortured, cut to pieces, boiled or roasted by the 
demons who are masters of the initiation, that is, by the 
mythical ancestors. These physical sufferings correspond 
to the situation of one who is “eaten” by the feline 
demon, is cut to pieces in the maw of the initiatory mon¬ 
ster, is digested in its belly. The mutilations (knocking 
out of teeth, amputation of fingers, etc.) also carry a 
symbolism of death. Most of them are connected with 
lunar divinities. The moon periodically disappears— 
that is, dies—to he reborn three nights later. The lunar 
symbolism emphasizes the conception that death is the 
preliminary condition for any mystical regeneration.

In addition to specific operations—such as circum¬ 
cision and subincision—and to Initiatory mutilations, 
other external signs, such as tattooing or scarring, indi¬ 
cate death and resurrection. As for the symbolism of 
mystical rebirth, it appears in many forms. Candidates 
are given new names, which will be their true names 
thenceforth. Among some tribes the young initiates are 
supposed to have forgotten their former lives com-

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 191Human Existence and Sanctified Life 191

pletely; immediately after the initiation they are fed 
like infants, led about by the hand, and reinstructed in 
all forms of behavior, like babies. Usually they learn a 
new language in the bush, or at least a secret vocabulary, 
kept from all but the initiate. It is clear that with initia¬ 
tion everything begins anew. Sometimes the symbolism 
of the second birth is expressed by concrete gestures. 
Among some Bantu peoples, before being circumcised 
the boy is the object of a ceremony called “being bom 
again.” 20 His father sacrifices a ram and three days later 
wraps the boy in the animal’s stomach membrane and 
skin. Just before this is done, the boy must get into bed 
and cry like an infant. He remains in the ramskin for 
three days. The same peoples bury their dead in ram- 
skins and in the fetal position. The symbolism of mysti¬ 
cal rebirth by ritually donning the skin of an animal is 
also attested in highly evolved cultures (India, ancient 
Egypt)

In the scenarios of initiations the symbolism of birth 
is almost always found side by side with that of death. 
In initiatory contexts death signifies passing beyond the 
profane, unsanctified condition, the condition of the 
“natural man,” who is without religious experience, who 
is blind to spirit. The mystery of initiation gradually 
reveals to the novice the true dimensions of existence; by 
introducing him to the sacred, it obliges him to assume

20 M. Canney, **The Skin of Rebirth,” Man , No. 91, July 1939, pp. 
104-105.

192

The Sacred and ihe Profane

the responsibility that goes with being a man. Here we 
have a fact of the first importance: for all archaic socie¬ 
ties, access to spirituality finds expression in a symbol¬ 
ism of death and a new birth.

men’s societies and women’s societiesmen’s societies and women’s societies

Rites for entrance into men’s societies employ the 
same ordeals and the same initiatory scenarios. But, as 
we said, membership in a men’s society already implies 
a choice; not all those who have undergone the puberty 
initiation will enter the secret society, though they may 
all wish to. 21

To cite one example: Among the Mandja and the 
Banda of Africa, there is a secret society named Nga- 
kola. According to the myth told to the candidates during 
their initiation, Ngakola was a monster who had the 
power of swallowing men and then disgorging them 
renewed. The candidate is put in a hut that symbolizes the 
monster s body. There he hears Ngakola’s eerie voice, 
there he is whipped and tortured, for he is told that he 
is now in Ngakola’s belly and is being digested. More 
ordeals follow; then the master of the initiation pro¬ 
claims that Ngakola, who had devoured the candidate, 
has disgorged him. 22

21 CL H. Schurtz. Altersklassen und Mannerbunde, Berlin, 1902; 0. 
Hofler, Kultische Geheimbiinde der Germanen t I, Frankfurt-am-Main, 
1934; R. Wolfram, Schwerttanz und Manner bund y I-III, Kassel, 1936 fir.; 
W. E. Peuckert, Geheimkulte t Heidelberg, 1951.

22 E. Andersson, Contribution d Vethnographic des Kuta, I, Uppsala, 
1953, pp. 264 ff.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 193

This is another instance of the symbolism of death by 
being swallowed into the belly of a monster, a symbolism 
that plays so great a role in puberty initiations. We may 
note again that the rites for entrance into a secret society 
correspond in every respect to puberty initiations—• 
seclusion, initiatory ordeals and torture, death and res¬ 
urrection, bestowal of a new name, instruction in a secret 
language, and so on.There are also initiations for girls and women. In 
these feminine rites and mysteries we must not expect to 
find the same symbolism, or, more precisely, the same 
symbolic expressions, as those found in men’s initiations 
and confraternities. But it is easy to discern a common 
element: the foundation for all these rites and mysteries 
is always a deep religious experience. It is access to 
$acrality 9 as it is revealed to her who assumes the condi¬ 
tion of womanhood, that constitutes the goal both of 
feminine initiation rites and of women’s secret societies.

Initiation begins at the first menstruation. This physio¬ 
logical symptom imposes a break, the girl’s forcible 
removal from her familiar world; she is immediately 
isolated, separated from the community. The segregation 
takes place in a special cabin, in the bush, or in a dark 
corner of the house. The catamenial girl is obliged to 
remain in a particular and quite uncomfortable position, 
and must avoid exposing herself to the sun or being 
touched hy anyone. She wears a special dress, or a sign 
or color allotted to her, and must eat only raw foods.

Segregation and seclusion out of daylight—in a dark

194 The Sacred and the Profane

hut, in the bush—suggest the symbolism of the initiatory 
death of boys isolated in the forest or shut up in huts. 
Yet there is a difference: among girls, segregation occurs 
immediately after the first menstruation, hence it is in¬ 
dividual; whereas boys are segregated in a group. But 
the difference is explained by the fact that in girls the 
end of childhood has a physiological manifestation. 
However, in the course of time the girls make up a 
group, and they are then initiated collectively by old 
women who act as their instructors.As for the women’s societies, they are always con¬ 
nected with the mystery of birth and fertility. The mys¬ 
tery of childbearing, that is, woman’s discovery that she 
is a creator on the plane of life , constitutes a religious 
experience that cannot be translated into masculine 
terms. This makes it clear why childbirth has given rise 
to secret feminine rituals, which sometimes attain the 
complex organization of real mysteries. Traces of such 
mysteries are still preserved even in Europe. 23

As in the case of men’s societies, women’s associations 
are found in various forms, in which secrecy and mys¬ 
tery progressively increase. To begin, there is the general 
initiation that every girl and every young married 
woman undergoes; this eventually produces the institu¬ 
tion of the women’s societies. Next come the women’s 
mystery associations, as in Africa or, in antiquity, the

23 Cf. R. Wolfram, “Weiberbiinde,” Zeitschrift fur Volkskundc, 42, 1933, 
pp. 143 ff.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 195

closed groups of the Maenads. Women’s mystery asso¬ 
ciations of this type were long in disappearing. We need 
only think of the witches of the Middle Ages and their 
ritual meetings.

DEATH AND INITIATIONDEATH AND INITIATION

The initiatory symbolism and ritual of being 
swallowed by a monster has played a considerable role 
both in initiations and in heroic myths and the mythology 
of death. The symbolism of return to the ventral cavity 
always has a cosmological valence. It is the entire world 
that symbolically returns, with the candidate, into cosmic 
night, in order that it may be created anew, that is, regen¬ 
erated. As we saw (Chapter 2), the cosmogonic myth is 
recited for therapeutic purposes. To be cured, the vic¬ 
tim of an illness must be brought to a second birth , and 
the archetypal model of birth is the cosmogony. The 
work of time must be undone, the auroral moment im¬ 
mediately preceding the Creation must be reintegrated; 
on the human plane, this is as much as to restore the 
“blank page” of existence, the absolute beginning, when 
nothing was yet sullied, nothing spoiled.

Entering the belly of the monster—or being sym¬ 
bolically “buried,” or shut up in the initiatory hut—is 
equivalent to a regression to the primordial nondistinc¬ 
tion, to cosmic night. To emerge from the belly or the 
dark hut or the initiatory “grave” is equivalent to a cos-

196 The Sacred and the Profane

mogony. Initiatory death reiterates the paradigmatic 
return to chaos, in order to make possible a repetition of 
the cosmogony—that is, to prepare the new birth. Re¬ 
gression to chaos is sometimes literal—as, for example, 
in the case of the initiatory sicknesses of future shamans, 
which have often been regarded as real attacks of in¬ 
sanity. There is, in fact, a total crisis, which sometimes 
leads to disintegration of the personality. 34 This psychic 
chaos is the sign that the profane man is undergoing 
dissolution and that a new personality is on the verge of 
birth.We understand why the same initiatory schema—com¬ 
prising suffering, death, and resurrection {= rebirth)— 
is found in all mysteries, no less in puberty rites than in 
the rites for entrance into a secret society, and why the 
same scenario can be deciphered in the overwhelming 
inner experiences that precede a mystical vocation 
(among primitives, the “initiatory sicknesses” of future 
shamans). Above all, we understand this: the man of the 
primitive societies has sought to conquer death by trans¬ 
forming it into a rite of passage . In other words, for the 
primitives, men die to something that was not essential \ 
men die to the profane life. In short, death comes to be 
regarded as the supreme initiation, that is, as the begin¬ 
ning of a new spiritual existence. Nor is this all. Genera¬ 
tion, death, and regeneration (= rebirth) were under¬ 
let. Eliade, Le Chamanisme, pp. 36 ff.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 197

stood as three moments in a single mystery, and the 
entire spiritual effort of arctiaic man was exerted to 
show that there must be no intervals between these mo¬ 
ments. One cannot stay in one of the three. Movement, 
regeneration continue perpetually. Man constantly re¬ 
performs the cosmogony—the paradigmatic making—in 
order to be sure that he is making something well—a 
child, for example, or a house, or a spiritual vocation. 
This is why rites of initiation always present a cosmo¬ 
gonic valence.

“second birth”

AND SPIRITUAL GENERATION“second birth”

AND SPIRITUAL GENERATION

The scenario of initiation—death to the profane 
condition, followed by rebirth to the sacred world, the 
world of the gods—also plays an important role in 
highly evolved religions. A celebrated example is the 
Indian sacrifice. Its purpose is to obtain heaven after 
death, residence among the gods or the quality of a god 
( devdtma ). In other words, through the sacrifice the 
celebrant creates a superhuman condition for himself, a 
result that may be homologized to that of archaic initia¬ 
tions. Now the sacrifice? must first be consecrated by the 
priests, and this preliminary consecration (diksha) car¬ 
ries an initiatory symbolism obstetric in structure; 
strictly speaking, the diksha ritually transforms the sacri¬ 
fice? into an embryo and causes him to be bom a second 
time.

198 The Sacred and the Profane

The texts dwell at length on the system of homologies 
by virtue of which the sacrificer undergoes a “return to 
the womb,” regressus ad uterum, followed by a new 
birth. 25 The relevant passage in the Aitareya Brahmana, 
for example, runs: “Him whom they consecrate (with the 
diksha) the priests make into an embryo again. With 
waters they sprinkle; the waters are seed.... They con¬ 
duct him to the hut of the consecrated; the hut of the 
consecrated is the womb of the consecrated; verily thus 
they conduct him to his womb.... With a garment they 
cover him; the garment is the caul.... Above that is the 
black antelope skin; the placenta is above the caul... . 
He closes his hands; verily closing its hands the embryo 
lies within; with closed hands the child is bom. 2 ® . . . 
Having loosened the black antelope skin, he descends to 
the final bath; therefore embryos are bom freed from 
the placenta; with the garment he descends; therefore a 
child is bom with a caul” (1,3; trans. A. B. Keith, Rig- 
veda Brahmanas , pp. 108-109).Sacred knowledge and, by extension, wisdom are con¬ 
ceived as the fruit of an initiation, and it is significant 
that obstetric symbolism is found connected with the 
awakening of consciousness both in ancient India and in 
Greece. Socrates had good reason to compare himself to

25 Sylvain Levi, La doctrine dit sacrifice dans les Brahmanas, Paris, 1898, 
pp. 104 ff.; H. Lommel, “Wiedergeburt aus embryonalem Zustand in der 
Symbolik des altindischen Rituals” in C. Hentze, Tod, Auferstekung, 
Weltordnung, pp. 107-130; Eliade, Birth and Rebirth, pp. 53 ff.

26 On the cosmological symbolism of the closed band, see C. Hentze, 
Tod, Auferstekung , eltordnung, pp. 96 fL and passim.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 199

a midwife, for in fact he helped men to be bom to con¬ 
sciousness of self; he delivered the “new man.” The same 
symbolism is found in the Buddhist tradition. The monk 
abandoned his family name and became a “son of the 
Buddha” ( sakya-putto ), for he was “bom among the 
saints” ( ariya ). So Kassapa said of himself: “Natural 
Son of the Blessed One, bom of his mouth, bom of the 
Dhamma [the Doctrine], fashioned by the Dhamma,” 
etc. (Samyutta Nikdya, II, 221, trans. in A. K. Coom- 
araswamy, “Some Pali Words,” p. 147).This initiatory birth implied death to profane exist¬ 
ence. The schema was maintained in Hinduism as well 
as in Buddhism. The yogin “dies to this life” in order to 
be reborn to another mode of being, that represented by 
liberation. The Buddha taught the way and the means of 
dying to the profane human condition—that is, to slavery 
and ignorance—in order to be reborn to the freedom, 
bliss, and nonconditionality of nirvana . The Indian 
terminology of initiatory rebirth is sometimes remi¬ 
niscent of the “new body” that the novice obtains 
through initiation. The Buddha himself proclaims it: 
“Moreover, I have shown my disciples the way whereby 
they call into being out of this body (composed of the 
four elements) another body of the mind’s creation 
(rupim manomayam ), complete in all its limbs and 
members and with transcendental faculties (abhinindri- 
yam). 9927

^ Majjkima-Nikaya, II, 17 (trans. Lord Chalmers, Pl II, p. 10); cl also 
Eliade, Yoga, pp. 165 if.

200 The Sacred and the Profane

The symbolism of the second birth or of generation as 
access to spirituality was adopted and valorized by Alex¬ 
andrian Judaism and by Christianity. Philo freely uses 
the theme of generation to refer to birth to a higher life, 
the life of the spirit (cf., for example, Abraham, 20,99). 
In his turn. Saint Paul speaks of “spiritual sons ” of 
sons whom he has procreated by faith. “Titus, mine own 
son after the common faith” (Epistle to Titus, 1, 4). “I 
beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begot¬ 
ten in my bonds” (Epistle to Philemon, 10).There is no need to insist on the differences between 
the “sons” that Saint Paul “begot” “after the faith” and 
the “sons of the Buddha” or those whom Socrates “deliv¬ 
ered” or the “newborn” of primitive initiations. The 
differences are obvious. It was the power of the rite 
itself that “killed” and “resuscitated” the candidate in 
archaic societies, just as the power of the rite trans¬ 
formed the Hindu sacrificer into an “embryo.” The 
Buddha, on the contrary, “engendered” by his “mouth,” 
that is, by imparting his doctrine ( dhamma ); it was by 
virtue of the supreme knowledge revealed by the 
dhamma that the disciple was bom to a new life that 
could lead him to the threshold of nirvana. Socrates, for 
his part, claimed’ to do no more than exercise the art of 
the midwife; he helped to “deliver” the true man that 
each man bore deep within him. For Saint Paul, the 
situation is different; he engendered “spiritual sons” by 
the faith, that is, by virtue of a mystery established by 
Christ.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 201

From one religion to another, from one gnosis or one 
wisdom to another, the immemorial theme of the second 
birth is enriched with new values, which sometimes pro¬ 
foundly change the content of the experience. Neverthe¬ 
less, a common element, an invariable, remains. It could 
be defined as follows: faccess to spiritual life always 
entails death to the profane condition> followed by a new 
birth . f

SACRED AND PROFANE

IN THE MODERN WORLDSACRED AND PROFANE

IN THE MODERN WORLD

Although we have dwelt on initiation and rites 
of passage, the subject is far from exhausted; we have 
done scarcely more than to suggest a few of its essential 
aspects. And yet, by deciding to discuss initiation at 
some little length, we have had to pass over a whole 
series of socio-religious situations that are of consider¬ 
able interest for an understanding of homo religiosus. 
For example, we have not discussed the sovereign, the 
shaman, the priest, the warrior, and so on. The fact is 
that this little book is necessarily summary and incom¬ 
plete; it represents only a rapid introduction to a vast 
subject.

It is a vast subject because, as we have said, it con¬ 
cerns not only the historian of religions, the ethnologist, 
the sociologist, but also the political and social historian, 
the psychologist, the philosopher. To know the situations 
assumed by religious man, to understand his spiritual

202 The Sacred and she Profane

universe, is, in sum, to advance our general knowledge 
of man. It is true that most of the situations assumed 
by religious man of the primitive societies and archaic 
civilizations have long since been left behind by history. 
But they have not vanished without a trace; they have 
contributed toward making us what we are today, and 
so, after all, they form part of our own history.As we said before, religious man assumes a particular 
and characteristic mode of existence in the world and, 
despite the great number of historico-religious forms, 
this characteristic mode is always recognizable. What* 
ever the historical context in which he is placed, homo 
religiosity always believes that there is an absolute 
reality; the sacred, which transcends this world but mani¬ 
fests itself in this world, thereby sanctifying it and 
making it real. He further believes that life has a sacred 
origin and that human existence realizes all of its poten¬ 
tialities in proportion as it is religious—that is, partici¬ 
pates in reality. The gods created man and the world, 
the culture heroes completed the Creation, and the his¬ 
tory of all these divine and semidivine works is pre¬ 
served in the myths. By reactualizing sacred history, by 
imitating the divine behavior, man puts and keeps him¬ 
self close to the gods—that is, in the real and the signifi¬ 
cant.

It is easy to see all that separates this mode of being 
in the world from the existence of a nonreligious man. 
First of all, the nonreligious man refuses transcendence.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 203Human Existence and Sanctified Life 203

accepts the relativity of “reality,” and may even come to 
doubt the meaning of existence. The great cultures of the 
past too have not been entirely without nonreligious 
men, and it is not impossible that such men existed even 
on the archaic levels of culture, although as yet no testi¬ 
mony to their existence there has come to light. But it is 
only in the modem societies of the West that nonreligious 
man has developed fully.' Modem nonreligious man 
assumes a new existential situation; he regards himself 
solely as the subject and agent of history, and he refuses 
all appeal to transcendence.' In other words,-he accepts 
no model for humanity outside the human condition as 
it can be seen in the various historical situations. Man 
makes himself, and he only makes himself completely in 
proportion as he desacralizes himself and the world. The 
sacred is the prime obstacle to his freedom. He will be¬ 
come himself only when he is totally demysticszed. He 
will not be truly free until he has killed the last god.

It does not fall to us to discuss this philosophical posi¬ 
tion. We will only observe that, in the last analysis, 
modem nonreligious man assumes a tragic existence and 
that his existential choice is not without its greatness. 
But this nonreligious man descends from homo religiosus 
and, whether he likes it or not, he is also the work of 
religious man; his formation begins with the situations 
assumed by his ancestors. In short, he is the result of a 
process of desacralization. Just as nature is the product 
of a progressive secularization of the cosmos as the work

204 The Sacred and the Profane204 The Sacred and the Profane

of God, profane man is the result of a desacralization of 
human existence. But this means that nonreligious man 
has been formed by opposing his predecessor, by at¬ 
tempting to “empty” himself of all religion and all trans¬ 
human meaning. He recognizes himself in proportion as 
he “frees” and “purifies” himself from the “supersti¬ 
tions” of his ancestors. In other words, profane man can¬ 
not help preserving some vestiges of the behavior of 
religious man, though they are emptied of religious 
meaning. Do what he will, he is an inheritor. He cannot 
utterly abolish his past, since he is himself the product 
of his past. He forms himself by a series of denials and 
refusals, but he continues to be haunted by the realities 
that he has refused and denied. To acquire a world of 
his own, he has desacralized the world in which his an¬ 
cestors lived; but to do so he has been obliged to adopt 
the opposite of an earlier type of behavior, and that be¬ 
havior is still emotionally present to him, in one form or 
another, ready to be reactualized in his deepest being.

For, as we said before, nonreligious man in the pure 
state is a comparatively rare phenomenon, even in the 
most desacralized of modem societies. The majority of 
the “irreligious” still behave religiously, even though 
they are not aware of the fact. We refer not only to the 
modem man’s many “superstitions” and “tabus,” all of 
them magico-religious in structure. But the modem man 
who feels and claims that he is nonreligious still retains 
a large stock of camouflaged myths and degenerated

Bunion Existence and Sanctified Life 205Bunion Existence and Sanctified Life 205

rituals. As we remarked earlier, the festivities that go 
with the New Year or with taking up residence in a new 
house, although laicized, still exhibit the structure of a 
ritual of renewal. The same phenomenon is observable 
in the merrymaking that accompanies a marriage or the 
birth of a child or obtaining a new position or a social 
advancement, and so on.

A whole volume could well be written on the myths of 
modem man, on the mythologies camouflaged in the 
plays that he enjoys, in the hooks that he reads. The 
cinema, that “dream factory,” takes over and employs 
countless mythical motifs—the fight between hero and 
monster, initiatory combats and ordeals, paradigmatic 
figures and images (the maiden, the hero, the paradisal 
landscape, hell, and so on). Even reading includes a 
mythological function, not only because it replaces the 
recitation of myths in archaic societies and the oral liter¬ 
ature that still lives in the rural communities of Europe, 
but particularly because, through reading, the modem 
man succeeds in obtaining an “escape from time” com¬ 
parable to the “emergence from time” effected by myths. 
Whether modem man “kills” time with a detective story 
or enters such a foreign temporal universe as is repre¬ 
sented by any novel, reading projects him out of his 
personal duration and incorporates him into other 
rhythms, makes him live in another “history.”

Strictly speaking, the great majority of the irreligious 
are not liberated from religious behavior, from theolo*

206 The Sacred and the ProfaneStrictly speaking, the great majority of the irreligious 
are not liberated from religious behavior, from theolo*

206 The Sacred and the Profane

gies and mythologies. They sometimes stagger under a 
whole magico-religious paraphernalia, which, iowever, 
has degenerated to the point of caricature and hence is 
hard to recognise for what it is. The process of desacrali¬ 
zation of human existence has sometimes arrived at 
hybrid forms of black magic and sheer travesty of reli¬ 
gion. We do not refer to the countless “little religions” 
that proliferate in all modem cities, to the pseudo-occult, 
neospiritualistic, or so-called hermetic churches, sects, 
or schools; for all these phenomena still belong to the 
sphere of religion, even if they almost always present 
the aberrant aspects of pseudomorphs. Nor do we allude 
to the various political movements and social utopian¬ 
isms whose mythological structure and religious fanati¬ 
cism are visible at a glance. For but one example we 
need only refer to the mythological structure of com¬ 
munism and its eschatological content. Marx takes over 
and continues one of the great eschatological myths of 
the Asiatico-Mediterranean world—the redeeming role 
of the Just (the “chosen,” the “anointed,” the “inno¬ 
cent,” the “messenger”; in our day, the proletariat), 
whose sufferings are destined to change the ontological 
status of the world. In fact, Marx’s classless society and 
the consequent disappearance of historical tensions find 
their closest precedent in the myth of the Golden Age 
that many traditions put at the beginning and the end of 
history. Marx enriched this venerable myth by a whole 
Judaeo-Christian messianic ideology: on the one hand.

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 207Human Existence and Sanctified Life 207

the prophetic role and soteriologicai function that he 
attributes to the proletariat; on the other, the final battle 
between Good and Evil, which is easily comparable to 
the apocalyptic battle between Christ and Antichrist, 
followed by the total victory of the former. It is even 
significant that Marx takes over for his own purposes the 
Judaeo-Christian eschatological hope of an absolute end 
to history ; in this he differs from other historicistic phi¬ 
losophers (Croce and Ortega y Gasset, for example), for 
whom the tensions of history are consubstantial with the 
human condition and therefore can never be completely 
done away with.

But it is not only in the “little religions” or in the 
political mystiques that we find degenerated or camou¬ 
flaged religious behavior. It is no less to be seen in 
movements that openly avow themselves to be secular or 
even antireligious. Examples are nudism or the move¬ 
ments for complete sexual freedom, ideologies in which 
we can discern traces of the “nostalgia for Eden,” the 
desire to re-establish the paradisal state before the Fall, 
when sin did not yet exist and there was no conflict be¬ 
tween the pleasures of the flesh and conscience.

Then, too, it is interesting to observe to what an extent 
the scenarios of initiation still persist in many of the acts 
and gestures of contemporary nonreligious man. We 
shall, of course, disregard the situations in which a cer¬ 
tain type of initiation survives in degenerate form. A 
good example is war, and especially individual combats

208 The Sacred and the Profane208 The Sacred and the Profane

(particularly between aviators)—exploits that involve 
“ordeals” that can be homologized to those of traditional 
military initiations, even if in our day the combatants 
are no longer aware of the deeper significance of their 
“ordeals” and hence scarcely benefit by their initiatory 
meaning. But even specifically modern techniques, such 
as psychoanalysis, still preserve the initiatory pattern. 
The patient is asked to descend deeply into himself, to 
make his past live, to confront his traumatic experiences 
again; and, from the point of view of form, this danger¬ 
ous operation resembles initiatory descents into hell, the 
realm of ghosts, and combats with monsters. Just as 
the initiate was expected to emerge from his ordeals vic¬ 
torious—in short, was to “die” and be “resuscitated” in 
order to gain access to a fully responsible existence, 
open to spiritual values—so the patient undergoing 
analysis today must confront his own “unconscious,” 
haunted by ghosts and monsters, in order to find psychic 
health and integrity and hence the world of cultural 
values.

But initiation is so closely linked to the mode of being 
of human existence that a considerable number of mod¬ 
em man’s acts and gestures continue to repeat initiatory 
scenarios. Very often the “struggle for life,” the “or¬ 
deals” and “difficulties” that stand in the way of a 
vocation or a career, in some sort reiterate the ordeals of 
initiation; it is after the “blows” that are dealt him, the 
moral and even physical “suffering” and “torture” he

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 209Human Existence and Sanctified Life 209

undergoes, that a young man “proves” himself, knows 
his possibilities, grows conscious of his powers, and 
finally becomes himself, spiritually adult and creative 
(the spirituality is, of course, what is understood as such 
in the modem world). For every human existence is 
formed by a series of ordeals, by repeated experience of 
“death” and “resurrection.” And this is why, in a reli¬ 
gious perspective, existence is established by initiation; 
it could almost be said that, in so far as human existence 
is fulfilled, it is itself an initiation.

In short, the majority of men “without religion” still 
hold to pseudo religions and degenerated mythologies. 
There is nothing surprising in this, for, as we saw, pro¬ 
fane man is the descendant of homo religiosus and he 
cannot wipe out his own history—that is, the behavior of 
his religious ancestors which has made him what he is 
today. This is all the more true because a great part of 
his existence is fed by impulses that come to him from 
the depths of his being, from the zone that has been 
called the “unconscious.” A purely rational man is an 
abstraction; he is never found in real life. Every human 
being is made up at once of his conscious activity and 
his irrational experiences. Now, the contents and struc¬ 
tures of the unconscious exhibit astonishing similarities 
to mythological images and figures. We do not mean to 
say that mythologies are the “product” of the uncon¬ 
scious, for the mode of being of the myth is precisely 
that it reveals itself as myth, that is, it announces that

210 The Sacred and the Profane

something has been manifested in a paradigmatic man- 
ner . A myth is “produced” by the unconscious in the 
same sense in which we could say that Madame Bovary 
is the “product” of an adultery.something has been manifested in a paradigmatic man- 
ner . A myth is “produced” by the unconscious in the 
same sense in which we could say that Madame Bovary 
is the “product” of an adultery.

Yet the contents and structures of the unconscious are 
the result of immemorial existential situations, especially 
of critical situations, and this is why the unconscious has 
a religious aura. For every existential crisis once again 
puts in question both the reality of the world and man’s 
presence in the world. This means that the existential 
crisis is, finally, “religious,” since on the archaic levels 
of culture being and the sacred are one. As we saw, it is 
the experience of the sacred that founds the world, and 
even the most elementary religion is, above all, an 
ontology. In other words, in so far as the unconscious is 
the result of countless existential experiences, it cannot 
but resemble the various religious universes. For religion 
is the paradigmatic solution for every existential crisis. 
It is the paradigmatic solution not only because it can be 
indefinitely repeated, but also because it is believed to 
have a transcendental origin and hence is valorized as a 
revelation received from an other , transhuman world. 
The religious solution not only resolves the crisis but at 
the same time makes existence “open” to values that are 
no longer contingent or particular, thus enabling man 
to transcend personal situations and, finally, gain access 
to the world of spirit.

This is not the place to develop all the consequences

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 211This is not the place to develop all the consequences

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 211

of this close relation between the content and structures 
of the unconscious on the one hand and the values of 
religion on the other. We were led to refer to it in order 
to show in what sense even the most avowedly nonreli¬ 
gious man still, in his deeper being, shares in a 
religiously oriented behavior. But modem man’s “pri¬ 
vate mythologies”—his dreams, reveries, fantasies, and 
so on—never rise to the ontological status of myths, 
precisely because they are not experienced by the whole 
man and therefore do not transform a particular situa¬ 
tion into a situation that is paradigmatic. In the same 
way, modem man’s anxieties, his experiences in dream 
or imagination, although “religious” from the point of 
view of form, do not, as in homo religiosus, make part of 
a Weltanschauung and provide the basis for a system of 
behavior. An example will show the differences between 
these two categories of experiences. The unconscious 
activity of modem man ceaselessly presents him with 
innumerable symbols, and each of them has a particular 
message to transmit, a particular mission to accomplish, 
in order to ensure or to re-establish the equilibrium of 
the psyche. As we have seen, the symbol not only makes 
the world “open” but also helps religious man to attain 
to the universal. For it is through symbols that man finds 
his way out of his particular situation and “opens him¬ 
self 9 to the general and the universal. Symbols awaken 
individual experience and transmute it into a spiritual 
act, into metaphysical comprehension of the world. la

212 The Sacred and the Profane212 The Sacred and the Profane

the presence of any tree, symbol of the world tree and 
image of cosmic life, a man of the premodern societies 
can attain to the highest spirituality, for, by understand¬ 
ing the symbol, he succeeds in living the universal . It is 
the religious vision of the world, and the concomitant 
ideology, that enable him to make this individual expe¬ 
rience bear fruit, to “open” it to the universal. The image 
of the tree still quite frequently appears in the imaginary 
universes of modern nonreligious man; it is a cipher of 
his deeper life, of the drama that is played out in his 
unconscious and that concerns the integrity of his psy¬ 
chomental life and hence his own existence. But as long 
as the symbol of the tree does not awaken his total con¬ 
sciousness and “open” it to the universe, it cannot be said 
to have completely fulfilled its function. It has only 
partly “saved” him from his individual situation—for 
example, by enabling him to resolve a deep crisis and 
restoring his temporarily threatened psychic equilib¬ 
rium; but it has not yet raised him to spirituality—that 
is, it has not succeeded in revealing one of the structures 
of the real to him.

This example, it seems to us, suffices to show in what 
way the nonreligious man of modem societies is still 
nourished and aided by the activity of his unconscious, 
yet without thereby attaining to a properly religious 
experience and vision of the world. The unconscious 
offers him solutions for the difficulties of his own life, 
and in this way plays the role of religion, for, before

Human Existence and Sanctified Life 213Human Existence and Sanctified Life 213

making an existence a creator of values, religion ensures 
its integrity. From one point of view it could almost be 
said that in the case of those moderns who proclaim that 
they are nonreligious, religion and mythology are 
“eclipsed” in the darkness of their unconscious—which 
means too that in such men the possibility of reintegrat¬ 
ing a religious vision of life lies at a great depth. Or, 
from the Christian point of view, it could also be said 
that nonreligion is equivalent to a new “fall” of man— 
in other words, that nonreligious man has lost the capac¬ 
ity to live religion consciously, and hence to understand 
and assume it; but that, in his deepest being, he still 
retains a memory of it, as, after the first “fall,” his 
ancestor, the primordial man, retained intelligence 
enough to enable him to rediscover the traces of God 
that are visible in the world. After the first “fall,” the 
religious sense descended to the level of the “divided” 
consciousness”; now, after the second, it has fallen even 
further, into the depths of the unconscious; it has been 
“forgotten.”

Here the considerations of the historian of religions 
end. Here begins the realm of problems proper to the 
philosopher, the psychologist, and even the theologian.

The “History of Religion 99 
as a Branch 
of KnowledgeThe “History of Religion 99 
as a Branch 
of Knowledge

The science of religions, as an autonomous dis¬ 
cipline devoted to analyzing the common elements of the 
different religions and seeking to deduce the laws of 
their evolution, and especially to discover and define 
the origin and first form of religion, is a very recent 
addition to the sciences. It dates from the nineteenth 
century and was founded at almost the same time as the 
science of language. Max Miiller gave it the name “sci¬ 
ence of religions” or “comparative study of religions” 
in the Preface to the first volume of his Chips from a 
German Workshop (London, 1867). It is true that the 
term “science of religions” had been sporadically used 
earlier (in 1852 by the Abbe Prosper Leblanc, in 1858 
by Stiefelhagen, etc.), but not in the strict sense given 
it by Max Miiller, which then passed into current usage.

216

The first university chair of the History of Religions 
was founded at Geneva in 1873; in 1876, four were 
established in Holland. In 1879 a chair was instituted at 
the College de France, and in 1885 a special Section of 
Religious Sciences was organized at the ficole des Hautes 
fitudes at the Sorbonne. The Free University of Brussels 
instituted a chair of the History of Religions in 1884. 
Germany followed in 1910, with the first chair at Berlin 
and others later at Leipzig and Bonn. The other Euro¬ 
pean countries fell in with the trend.

In 1880 the Revue de VHistoire des Religions was 
founded at Paris by M. Vemes; in 1898 the Archiv filr 
Religionswissenschaft at Freiburg-im-Breisgau by Dr. 
Achelis; in 1905 Anthropos , a journal devoted chiefly to 
primitive religions, at St. Gabriel-Modling, near Vienna,

217

218 The Sacred and the Pro jane217

218 The Sacred and the Pro jane

by Wilhelm Schmidt; in 1925 Studi e Materiali di 
Storia delle Religion i, by R. Pettazoni. American jour¬ 
nals in the field are The Journal of Religion (University 
of Chicago, from 1921) and The Review of Religion 
(Columbia University, from 1936). In Germany the 
place of the Archiv fur Religion$wissenschaft 9 which 
ceased publication after the end of the Second World 
War, has been taken by the Zeitschrift fur Religions- und 
Geistesgeschickte (from 1948). Zalmoxis : Revue des 
ttudes Religieuses 9 founded by Mircea Eliade in 1938, 
ceased publication after its third volume (Paris-Bucha- 
rest, 1938-1942). Numen , International Review for the 
History of Religions , issued by the International Asso¬ 
ciation for the History of Religions and edited by R. 
Pettazoni, has been published at Leiden since 1954. The 
same association has brought out the International Bibli- 
ography of the History of Religions , for the years 1952 
fL (published since 1954).

The First International Congress for the Sciences of 
Religion was held in 1897, at Stockholm. In 1900 the 
Congres d’Histoire des Religions opened at Paris; its 
name was intended to exclude theology and the so-called 
philosophy of religion from its deliberations. The Ninth 
International Congress was held at Tokyo in 1958.

Gradually bibliographies, dictionaries, encyclopedias 
multiplied; publication of sources also increased. Par¬ 
ticularly noteworthy are Encyclopaedia of Religion and 
Ethics (13 vols., Edinburgh, 1908-1923), edited by J.

Chronological Survey 219Chronological Survey 219

Hastings; Die Religion in Geschickte und Gegenwart, 
Handworterbuch fur Theologie und Religionswissen- 
schaft (5 vols., Tubingen, 1909-1913; a third edition is 
in course of publication); Religionsgesckichtliche Lese - 
buck, edited by A. Berthoiet (Tubingen, 1908 ff.; 2nd 
ed., 1926 ff.); Textbuck zur Religionsgeschichte, edited 
by E. Lehmann (Leipzig, 1912), later by £. Lehmann 
and H. Haas; Fontes historiae religionum ex auctoribus 
graecis et latinis, edited by C. Clemen (Bonn, 1920 ff.); 
H. Haas (and others), Bilderatlas zur Religionsgesckichte 
(Leipzig, 1924 ff.); J. B. Pritchard, Ancient Near East¬ 
ern Texts relating to the Old Testament (Princeton, 
1950), and The Ancient Near East in Pictures relating 
to the Old Testament (Princeton, 1954).

But though the science of religions as an autonomous 
discipline had its beginning only in the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, interest in the history of religions goes back much 
further into the past (On the following, see H. Pinard 
de la Boullaye, Uetude comparee des religions, Paris, 
1922,2 vols., third edition revised and corrected, 1929; 
Gustav Mensching, Geschickte der Religionswissen- 
schaft , Bonn, 1948.) We find it documented for the first 
time in classic Greece, particularly from the fifth cen¬ 
tury. The interest was manifested in two ways: by travel¬ 
ers’ accounts that included descriptions of foreign cults 
and comparisons with Greek religious practices, and by 
philosophic criticism of the traditional religion. Herod¬ 
otus (c. 484c. 425 B.c.) already presented surprisingly

220 The Sacred and ike Profane220 The Sacred and ike Profane

accurate descriptions of several barbarian and exotic 
religions (Egypt, Persia, Thrace, Scythia, etc.) and even 
advanced hypotheses concerning their origin and their 
relations to the cults and mythologies of Greece. The 
pre-Socratic thinkers inquired into the nature of the gods 
and the value of myths and founded rationalistic criticism 
of religion. Thus, for example, for Parmenides (bom 
c . 520) and Empedocles (c. 495-435) the gods were 
personifications of natural forces. Democritus (c. 460- 
370) even seems to have been curiously interested in 
foreign religions, which he knew at the source from his 
numerous journeys; a book on the Sacred Writings of 
Babylon was attributed to him, as well as a Chaldean 
Treatise and a Phrygian Treatise . Plato (429-347) made 
frequent use of comparisons with the religions of the 
barbarians. As for Aristotle (384-322), he first sys¬ 
tematically formulated the theory of the religious degen¬ 
eration of humanity (Metaphysics, XII, ch. 7), an idea 
that would often be revived in later times. Theophrastus 
(372-287), who succeeded Aristotle as head of the 
Lyceum, may be considered the first Greek historian of 
religions; according to Diogenes Laertius (V, 48), he 
composed a history of religions in si* books.

But it was especially after the conquests of Alexander 
the Great (356-323) that Greek writers had the oppor¬ 
tunity to obtain direct knowledge of the religious tradi¬ 
tions of the oriental peoples and to describe them. Under 
Alexander, Berosus, a priest of Bel, published his Baby•

Chronological Survey 221Chronological Survey 221

loniaca . Megasthenes who, between 302 and 297, was 
several times sent as ambassador to the Indian King 
Sandrakottos (= Chandragupta) by Seleucus Nicator, 
published his Indica. Hecataeus of Abdera or Teos (365- 
270/275) wrote on the Hyperboreans and devoted his 
Aegyptica to the theology of the Egyptians. Manetho 
(3rd century), an Egyptian priest, dealt with the same 
subject in a work published under the same title. The 
Alexandrian world thus came to know a considerable 
number of exotic myths, rites, and religious customs.

At Athens in the beginning of the third century, 
Epicurus (341-270) undertook a radical criticism of 
religion; in his view, the “universal consensus” proves 
that the gods exist, but he regards them as superior and 
distant beings who have no relation to man. His theses 
became especially popular in the Latin world of the first 
century b.c., due largely to the genius of Lucretius 
(c. 98-c. 53).

But it was the Stoics who deeply influenced the whole 
of late antiquity by developing the method of allegorical 
interpretation, which enabled them to preserve and at 
the same time to revalorize the mythological heritage. 
According to the Stoics, myths reveal either philosophi¬ 
cal views on the basic nature of things or ethical doc¬ 
trines. The many names of the gods designate one sole 
divinity, and all religions express the same fundamental 
truth—only the terminology varies. The Stoic allegorical 
method made it possible to translate any ancient o i

222 Tke Sacred and the Profane

exotic tradition into a universal and easily understand* 
able language. The method gained wide acceptance, and 
it was frequently employed later.222 Tke Sacred and the Profane

exotic tradition into a universal and easily understand* 
able language. The method gained wide acceptance, and 
it was frequently employed later.

The idea that some gods were kings or heroes deified 
for the services that they had rendered to humanity had 
found proponents from the time of Herodotus. But it was 
Euhemerus (c. 330-c. 260) who popularized this pseudo* 
historical interpretation of mythology in his treatise The 
Sacred Scripture . Euhemerism found many adherents, 
due chiefly to the fact that the poet Ennius (239*169) 
translated Tke Sacred Scripture into Latin and that the 
Christian polemicists later took over Euhemerus’s argu¬ 
ments. Proceeding with a far stricter historical method, 
the historian Polybius (c. 210/205-c. 125) and the geog¬ 
rapher Strabo (c. 60-c. a.d. 25) attempted to discover 
the possible historical elements in certain myths.

Among the Roman eclectics, Cicero (106-43) and 
Varro (116-27) deserve particular mention for the-his- 
torico-religious value of their work. The forty books of 
Varro’s Roman Antiquities were a storehouse of erudi¬ 
tion. In his On tke Nature of the Godsj Cicero gave a 
quite accurate description of the state of rites and beliefs 
in the last century of the pagan era.

The spread of oriental cults and mystery religions 
in the Roman Empire and the religious syncretism that 
resulted, especially in Alexandria, were favorable to a 
knowledge of exotic religions and to study of the reli¬ 
gious antiquities of various countries. During the first

Chronological Survey 223Chronological Survey 223

two centuries of the Christian era, the euhemerist Heren- 
nius Pfailon published his Phoenician History , Pausamas 
his Description of Greece —an inexhaustible mine for the 
historian of religions—and the pseudo Apollodorus his 
Library , a work on mythology. Neo-Pythagoreanism and 
Neo-Platonism applied themselves to revalorizing the 
spiritual interpretation of myths and rites. A typical 
representative of this school of exegesis is Plutarch 
(45/50-c. 125), especially in his treatise On Isis <md 
Osiris . In his view the diversity of religious forms was 
only apparent; symbols revealed the fundamental unity 
of religions. The Stoic thesis was brilliantly restated by 
Seneca (2-66): the many divinities were aspects of one 
God. Meanwhile descriptions of foreign religions and 
esoteric cults multiplied. Julius Caesar (104-44 b.c.) 
and Tacitus (ca. 55-120) furnished valuable information 
concerning the religions of the Gauls and the Germans; 
Apuleius (2nd century A.D.) described the ceremony 
of initiation into the mysteries of Isis; Lucian gave an 
account of the Syrian cult in his On the Syrian Goddess 
(c. a.d. 120).

For the Christian apologists and heresiarchs, the 
problem presented itself on a different plane, for they 
opposed the one God of the revealed religion to the 
many gods of Paganism. Hence they were compelled, on 
the one hand, to demonstrate the supernatural origin and 
consequent superiority of Christianity, and, on the other, 
to account for the origin of the pagan gods and especially

224 The Sacred and the Profane224 The Sacred and the Profane

to explain why the pre-Christian world had been ldola- 
trous. They also had to explain the resemblances between 
the mystery religions and Christianity. Several theses 
were advanced: (1) the demons, born from intercourse 
between the fallen angels and the “daughters of men” 
(Genesis, 6, 2), had driven mankind to idolatry; (2) 
plagiarism (the evil angels, knowing the prophecies, had 
introduced certain resemblances to Judaism and Chris¬ 
tianity into the pagan religions, to trouble believers; the 
pagan philosophers had borrowed their doctrines from 
Moses and the Prophets); (4) human reason can attain 
to knowledge of truth by its own power, hence the pagan 
world could have a natural knowledge of God.

The pagan reaction took various forms. It is mani¬ 
fested by the violent attack (c. 178) of the Neo-Pytha¬ 
gorean Celsus on the originality and spiritual value of 
Christianity; by the Life of Apollonius of Tyana (by the 
sophist Philostratus, c. 175-c. 249), in which the reli¬ 
gious conceptions of the Indians, Greeks, and Egyptians 
are compared and which expounds a pagan ideal of 
piety and tolerance; by the Neo-Platonist Porphyry 
(c. 233-c. 305), disciple and editor of Plotinus, who 
skillfully attacks Christianity by employing the allegori¬ 
cal method; by Iamblichus (c. 280-c. 330), who urges 
an ideal of syncretism and tolerance.

The outstanding figures in the Christian counterattack 
were the Africans Minucius Felix, Lactantius, Tertullian, 
and Firmicius Matemus, and the great Alexandrian

Chronological Survey 225The outstanding figures in the Christian counterattack 
were the Africans Minucius Felix, Lactantius, Tertullian, 
and Firmicius Matemus, and the great Alexandrian

Chronological Survey 225

scholars Clement of Alexandria and Origen. Eusebius 
of Caesarea in his Chronicle , Saint Augustine in the City 
of God, and Paulus Orosius in his Histories dealt out 
the last refutations to paganism. They agree with the 
pagan writers in maintaining the thesis of the increasing 
degeneration of religions. Their writings, like those of 
their opponents and of other Christian authors, have 
preserved much historico-religious material in regard 
to the myths, rites, and customs of nearly all the peoples 
of the Roman Empire as well as to the Gnostics and 
the heretical Christian sects.

Interest in foreign religions was awakened in the West 
during the Middle Ages by the threatening presence of 
Islam. In 1141 Peter the Venerable had the Koran 
translated by Robert de Retines, and schools for the 
study of Arabic were founded in 1250. By that date, 
Islam had already produced important works on the 
subject of pagan religions. Al-Birunl (973-1048) had 
given a remarkable description of Indian religions and 
philosophies; ShahrastanI (d. 1153) was the author of 
a treatise on the Islamic schools; Ibn Hazm (994-1064) 
had compiled a voluminous and erudite Book of Decisive 
Solutions concerning Religions , Sects, and Schools , in 
which he discussed Mazdean and Manichaean dualism. 
Brahmans, Jews, Christians, atheists, and several Islamic 
sects. But it was especially Averroes (ibn-Rushd, 1126- 
1198) who, after profoundly influencing Islamic think¬ 
ing, was destined to give the first impulse to a whole

226 The Sacred and the Profane226 The Sacred and the Profane

intellectual trend in the West. In interpreting religion, 
Averroes employed the symbolical and allegorical 
method. He concluded that all the monotheistic religions 
were true, but he shared Aristotle’s opinion that, in an 
eternal world, religions appear and disappear again and 
again.

Among the Jewish scholars of the Middle Ages, two 
demand particular mention: Saadia (892-942), in his 
Book of Beliefs and Convictions (c. 933), expounded 
the religions of the Brahmans, the Christians, and the 
Muslims in the framework of a religious philosophy. 
Maimonides (1135-1204) undertook a comparative 
study of religions, scrupulously avoiding the syncretistic 
position. He attempted to explain the imperfections of 
the first revealed religion, Judaism, by the doctrine of 
divine condescension and human progress, theses that 
had also been advanced by the Fathers of the Church.

The appearance of the Mongols in Asia Minor and 
their hostility to the Arabs led the Popes to send missions 
to inquire into their religions and customs. In 1244 
Innocent IV despatched two Dominicans and two Fran¬ 
ciscans, one of whom, Jean du Plan de Carpin, made his 
way as far as Karakorum, in Central Asia, and on his 
return wrote his History of the Mongols. In 1258 Louis 
IX sent William Ruysbroek to Karakorum, where, be 
tells us, he withstood the Maniehaeans and Saracens in 
debate. Finally, in 1274, the Venetian Marco Polo pub¬ 
lished his Book, in which, among countless other oriental

Chronological Survey 227Chronological Survey 227

wonders, he told of the life of the Buddha. All these 
books were immensely successful. On the basis of this 
new documentation, Vincent of Beauvais, Roger Bacon, 
and Raymond Lully expounded the beliefs of the “idola¬ 
ters,” Tartars, Jews, and Saracens in various works. The 
theses of the earliest Christian apologists were taken up 
again—notably the doctrine of spontaneous knowledge 
of God and the theses of degeneration and of demonic 
influence in the spread of polytheism.

The Renaissance rediscovered and revalorized pagan¬ 
ism, primarily because of the fashion for Neo-Platonic 
allegorical interpretation. Marsilio Fieino (1433-1499) 
edited Porphyry, the pseudo Iamblichus, and Hermes 
Trismegistus, and composed a Platonic Theology, he 
considered Plotinus’ last disciples to be the most authori¬ 
tative interpreters of Plato. The Humanists believed that 
there was a tradition common to all religions, that knowl¬ 
edge of it sufficed for salvation, and that in the last 
analysis all religions were equal in value. The year 1520 
saw the appearance of the first general history of reli¬ 
gions: The Customs , Laws , and Rites of all Peoples , by 
Jean Boem, of the Teutonic Order; it contained descrip- 
tions of African, Asian, and European beliefs.

The geographical discoveries of the fifteenth and six- 
teeth centuries opened new horizons for a knowledge of 
religious man. The narratives of the first explorers were 
brought together in collections of Voyages and had an 
enormous vogue among the educated European public.

228 The Sacred and the Profane228 The Sacred and the Profane

They were followed by the Letters and Relations pub* 
lished by missionaries to America and China. A first 
attempt to compare the religions of the New World with 
those of antiquity was made by the missionary J. F. 
Lafitau in his Customs of the American Savages come 
pared to the Customs of the Earliest Ages , published at 
Paris in 1724. In 1757 Charles De Brosses produced an 
essay On the Cult of Fetish Gods , or Parallel between 
the Ancient Egyptian Religion and the Present Religion 
of Nigritia and presented it to the French Academy of 
Inscriptions, but the Academy considered it too daring, 
to publish and it appeared anonymously in 1760. An¬ 
swering Lafitau and following Hume, De Brosses main* 
tained that it was an error to believe that mankind had 
first possessed a pure idea of God, which later degen¬ 
erated; on the contrary, “since the human mind rises 
by degrees from the lower to the higher,’* the first form 
of religion could only have been crude, that is, “fetish¬ 
ism,” a term that De Brosses used in the vague sense 
of the cult of animals, plants, and inanimate objects.

The English Deists, especially Hume, the French 
“philosophers” and encyclopedists—Rousseau, Voltaire, 
Diderot, d’Alembert—and the Germans of the Enlight¬ 
enment (particularly F. A. Wolf and Lessing) vigor¬ 
ously continued the discussion of the problem of natural 
religion. But it was the scholarly investigators who made 
a positive contribution to the interpretation of exotic, 
pagan, or primitive religions. Certain authors exercised

Chronological Survey 229Chronological Survey 229

a great influence, both by the hypotheses that they ad¬ 
vanced and by the reactions that their works produced. 
Fontenelle. in his Discourse on the Origin of Fables 
(published in 1724, but composed between 1680 and 
1699), exhibited a penetrating historical sense and an¬ 
ticipated the animistic theories of the nineteenth century. 
In 1794 Francois Dupuis published The Origin of all 
Cults , in which he sought to show that the history of the 
gods, and even the life of Christ, are only allegories of 
the motions of the stars, a thesis that was revived by the 
Pan-Babylonians at the end of the nineteenth century. 
Friedrich Creuzer, in his Symbolism and Mythology of 
Ancient Peoples , especially the Greeks (1810-1812), 
attempted to reconstruct the primordial phases of 
“Pelasgian” and oriental religions, and to show the role 
of symbols. (His theses were demolished by the rational¬ 
ist Christian August Lobeck, in an immense work pub¬ 
lished in 1829, Aglaophamus .)

As a result of the discoveries made in all branches of 
oriental studies during the first half of the nineteenth 
century, as well as of the establishment of Indo-European 
philology and comparative linguistics, the history of 
religions first really entered into its own with Max 
Miiller (1823-1900). His Essay on Comparative Mythol¬ 
ogy (1856) is the first of a long series of studies by 
himself and the disciples of his theory. Max Muller 
found the genesis of myths in natural phenomena, espe¬ 
cially in solar epiphanies, and explained the birth of the

230 The Sacred and the Profane230 The Sacred and the Profane

gods as a “disease of language”—what had originally 
been but a name, nomen , became a divinity, numen. His 
theses met with considerable success and lost their popu¬ 
larity only toward the end of the nineteenth century, as 
the result of the work of W. Mannhardt (1831-1880) 
and of Edward Burnett Tylor (1832-1917). In his prinr 
cipal book, Cults of Forest and Field (1875-77), Mann¬ 
hardt showed the importance of the “lower mythology” 
still surviving in the rites and beliefs of peasants; in his 
view, these beliefs represented an earlier stage of reli¬ 
gion than the naturalistic mythologies studied by Max 
Muller. Mannhardt’s theses were adopted and popular¬ 
ized by Sir James George Frazer in The Golden Bough 
(1890 ; 3rd ed. 1907-1913, twelve volumes). In 1871 
appeared E. B. Tylor’s Primitive Culture , which was 
epoch-making in that it launched a new vogue, that of 
animism. According to Tylor’s animistic theory, primi¬ 
tive man believed that everything was endowed with a 
soul, and this fundamental and universal belief ex¬ 
plained not only the cult of the dead and of ancestors 
but also the genesis of the gods. A new theory, that of 
pre-animism, was developed from 1900 by R. R. Mar- 
rett, K. T. Preuss, and other scholars. According to this 
theory the origin of religion was to he sought in the 
experience of an impersonal force ( mana ). A critique 
of animism, but from a different point of view, was 
advanced by Andrew Lang (1844-1912); he had ob¬ 
served the belief in supreme beings (“All Fathers”) on

Chronological Survey 231

archaic levels of culture, and could not explain it by a 
belief in spirits. Wilhelm Schmidt (1868-1954) took 
up this idea and, developing it from the standpoint of the 
methodology of “cultural history” {Kulturgeschichte ), 
attempted to demonstrate the existence of a primordial 
monotheism (cf. Der Ur sprung der Gottesidee [The 
Origin of the Idea of God], 12 vols., 1912-1955).Other movements appeared toward the end of the 
nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. 
Emile Durkheim (1858-1917) believed that he had 
found the sociological explanation for religion in totem- 
ism. (Among the Ojibwa Indians of North America the 
term totem designates the animal whose name a c lan 
bears and which is regarded as their ancestor.) As early 
as 1869, J. F. MacLennan had asserted that totemism 
represented the original form of religion. But later in¬ 
vestigations, especially the work of Frazer, showed that 
totemism is not universally disseminated and that it 
cannot be regarded as the earliest form taken by religion. 
Lucien Levy-Bruhl sought to prove that religious be¬ 
havior could be explained by the prelogical mentality 
of primitives—a hypothesis that he renounced toward 
the end of his life. But these sociological hypotheses 
had no lasting influence on historico-religious studies. A 
certain number of ethnologists attempted to approach 
their science as a historical discipline, and their studies 
indirectly made an important contribution to the history 
of religions. Among these historically oriented ethnolo-

232 The Sacred and the Profane

gists, we may cite: F. Graebner, Leo Frobenius, W. W. 
Rivers, and Wilhelm Schmidt in Europe, and Fran 2 
Boas and his school in America. Psychological explana¬ 
tions for religion were proposed by Wilhelm Wundt 
(1832-1920), William James (1842-1910), and Sig¬ 
mund Freud (1856-1939). The phenomenology of reli¬ 
gion had its first authoritative representative in Gerardus 
van der Leeuw (1890-1950).

At present, historians of religions are divided between 
two divergent but complementary methodological orien¬ 
tations. One group concentrate primarily on the charac¬ 
teristic structures of religious phenomena, the other 
choose to investigate their historical context . The former 
seek to understand the essence of religion , the latter to 
discover and communicate its history .BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND INDEX

Selected

Bibliography

INTRODUCTION

Caillois, R., Uhomme et le saere, 2nd e<L, Paris, 1953 
Chantepie de la Saussaye, P. D., Lehrbuch der Religions* 
geschichte, 4th ed., rev. A. Bertholet and E. Lehmann, 
2 vols., Tubingen, 19241925 
Clemen, C., el alDie Religionen der Erde, Munich, 1927

-, Urgeschichtliche Religion. Die Religionen der Stein-,

Bronze - und Eisenzeit, I-II, Bonn, 1932-1933 
Durkheim, E., Les formes elementaires de la vie religieuse, 
Paris, 1912

Eliade, M., Traite (Thistoire des religions, Paris, 1949 (~ Pat¬ 
terns in Comparative Religion, New York, 1958) 
Firth, R*, “The Analysis of Mana: An Empirical Approach,” 
The Journal of the Polynesian Society, 49, 1940, pp. 
483-510

Gorce, M., R. Mortier, et al., Histoire generate des religions* 
I-V, Paris, 19441951

Haekel, J., “Zum heutigen Forschungsstand der historischen 
Ethnologic,” Wiener Schule der Volkerkunde , Vienna, 
1955

234

Kdnig, F., et uL, Christas und die Religionen der Erde, 1*111, 
Freiburg im Breisgau, 1951

Koppers, W., Urmensch und Urreligion, Olten, 1944; 2nd ed., 
1946. (Primitive Man and His World Picture, London,

1925)

■, “Ethnologic und Geschichte,” Anthropos , 50, 1955, pp. 
943*948

Leeuw, G. van der, Phdnomenologie der Religion, Tubingen, 
1933 ; 2nd ed., 1955

■ , Uhomme primitif et la religion , Paris, 1940

Levy-Bruhl, L., Le surnaturel et la nature dans la mentcdiie 
primitive , Paris, 1931

—-, La mytkologie primitive , Paris, 1935

. — — L 9 experience mystique et les symboles chez les primitif s,

Paris, 1938

Lewie, R. H., Primitive Religion, New York, 1924 
de Martino, E., Naturalismo e storicismo neW etnologia, Bari,

1941

, Jl mondo magico, Torino, 1948

235

236 The Sacred and the Profane

Mauss, M., and H. Hubert, Melanges tThisloire des religions, 
Paris, 1909

Mensching, G., Vergleichende Religionswissenjckaft, Leipzig, 
1938; 2nd ed., revised, Heidelberg, 1949

-, AUgemeine Religions geschichte, Leipzig, 1940Mensching, G., Vergleichende Religionswissenjckaft, Leipzig, 
1938; 2nd ed., revised, Heidelberg, 1949

-, AUgemeine Religions geschichte, Leipzig, 1940

-, Geschichte der Religionswissenschaft, Bonn, 1948

Mithlmann, W. E., Geschichte der Anthropologic, Bonn, 1948

-“Etbnologie und Geschichte,” Stadium Generale, 1954,

pp. 165-177

Otto, R., Das Heilige, Breslau, 1917; new ed., Munich, 1947. 
(The Idea of the Holy , London, 1923, rev. ed., 1929)

-, Aufsdtze das Numinose betreffend, Gotha, 1923

-, W. F., Theophania—Der Geist der altgriechischen

Religion, Hamburg, 1956

Pinard de la Bouilaye, H., Vetude comparee des religions, 2 
vols., Paris, 1922; 3rd ed., rev. and enlarged, 1929 
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., Tabu, Cambridge (England), 1940 
Radin, P., Gott und Mensch in der primitiven Welt, Zurich, 
1953. (The World of Primitive Man , New York, 1953) 
Schmidt, W., Hand buck der vergleichenden Religionsgeschickte, 
Ursprung und Wesen der Religion, Munster, 1930. (See 
also F. Bornemann, “W. Schmidts Vorarbeiten fur 
eine Neuauflage des Handbuchs der Religionsges- 
chichte,” Anthropos, 50, 1955, pp. 937-941)

Tacchi Venturi, P., et al., Storia delle Religions, 2 vols., 3rd e<L, 
Torino, 1949

Widengren, G., Religionens vdrld, Stockholm, 1945, 2nd ed., 
1953

-/‘Evolutionism and the Problem of the Origin of

Religion,” Ethnos, 10, 1945, pp. 57*96

CHAPTER 1

AUcrofi, A. H., The Circle and the Cross, I-II, London, 1927 
1930

Selected Bibliography 237

Bertling, C. Vierzahi, Kreuz und Mandala in Asien, Amster¬ 
dam, 1954

Bogoras, W., “Ideas of Space and Time in the Conception of 
Primitive Religion,” American Anthropologist, N. S., 
1917, pp. 205-266

Coomaraswamy, A. K., “Symbolism of the Dome,” Indian His - 
torical Quarterly, XIV, 1938, pp. 1-56

-, Figures of Speech and Figures of Thought, London,

1946

Corbin, H., “Terre celeste et corps de resurrection d’apres 
quelques traditions iraniennes,” Eranos-Jahrbuch 
XXII, 1954, pp. 97-194-, Figures of Speech and Figures of Thought, London,

1946

Corbin, H., “Terre celeste et corps de resurrection d’apres 
quelques traditions iraniennes,” Eranos-Jahrbuch 
XXII, 1954, pp. 97-194

Cuillandre, J n La droite et la gauche dans les poemes home - 
riques, Paris, 1941

Deffontaines, P., Geographic et religions, Paris, 1948 
Deubner, L., “Mundus,” Hermes , 58, 1933, pp. 276-287 
Dombart, T., Der Sahralturm. I: Zigurat, Munich, 1920 
Dumezii, G., Rituels indo-europeens d Rome, pp. 27-43 
(=Aedes Rotunda Vestae), Paris, 1954 
Eliade, M., The Myth of the Eternal Return, New York, 1954, 
Chapters I and II

--, Patterns in Comparative Religion, New York, pp. 367-

387

-, Images et symboles, Paris, 1952, pp. 33-72

Gaerte, W., “Kosmische Vorstellungen im Bilde Prahistor- 
ischer Zeit: Erdberg, Himmelsberg, Erdnabel und 
Weltstrome,” Anthropos, 9, 1914, pp. 956-979 
Hentze, C, Bronzegerdt, Kultbauten, Religion im dltesten China 
der Chang-Zeil, Antwerp, 1951 
Muller, W., Kreis und Kreuz, Berlin, 1938

-, Die blaue HiUte , Wiesbaden, 1954

Mus, P., Barabudur: Esquisse (Tune histoire du bouddhisme 
fondee sur la critique archeologique des testes, I-II, 
Hanoi, 1935

238 The Sacred and the Pro jane

Nissen, H., Orientatio: Studien zur Geschichte der Religion, 
Mil, Berlin, 1906-1910

Rank, G., Die heilige Hinlerecke im Haushull der Vother Nor • 
dosteuropas und Nordasiens , Helsinki, 1949 
Roscher, W. H«, “Neue Omphalosstudien,” Abh. der Konigl.

Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss., Phil.-hist. Klasse, 31, 1, 1915 
Sedlmayr, H., “Architektur als abbildende Kunst.” Osterr. 
AJcad. d. Wiss., Phil.-hist. Klasse, Sitzungsber. 225/3, 
Vienna, 1948

-, Die Entstehung der Kaihedrale , Zurich, 1950

Tucci, G., Mc’od rten e Ts* a-ts’a nel Tibel Indiana ed Occident 
tale . Contribute alio studio delT arte religiosa tibetano 
nel suo significato. Indo-Tibetica 1, Rome, 1932

-, II Simbolismo archittectonico dei tempi di Tibet Occi--, II Simbolismo archittectonico dei tempi di Tibet Occi-

deni-ale. Indo-Tibetica III-IV, Rome, 1938 
Weinstock, S., “Templum,” Mitt. d. Deutsehen Archdol. Inst., 
Romische Abt 45, 1930, pp. 111-123 
Wensinck, A. J., The Ideas of the Western Semites Concerning 
the Navel of the Earth , Amsterdam, 1916

CHAPTER 2

SACRED TIME

Coomaraswamy, A. K., Time and Eternity, Ascona, 1947 
Corbin, H., “Le temps cyclique dans le mazdeisme et dans 
Fismaelisme,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 1952, pp. 149-218 
Culmann, 0., Christus und die Zeit, Basel, 1946 
Dumezil, G.,“Temps et mythes,” Recherches philosophiques, V, 
1935-1936, pp. 235-251

Eliade, M., The Myth of the Eternal Return, New York, 1954, 
Chapters II and III

-, “Le temps et 1’etemite dans la pensee indie line,”

Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 1951, pp. 219-252; Images et 
symboles , Paris, 1952, pp. 73-119

Selected Bibliography 239

Goodenough, E. R., “The Evaluation of Symbols Recurrent in 
Time, as illustrated in Judaism,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, 
XX, 1952, pp. 285-320

Leeuw, G. Van der, “Urzeit und Endzeit,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, 
XVII, 1950, pp. 11-51

Marquart, J., “The Nawroz, its History and Significance,” 
Journal of the Coma Oriental Institute, No. 31, Bom¬ 
bay, 1937, pp. 1-51

Mauss, M. and H. Hubert, “La representation du temps dans la 
religion et la magie” in Melanges d’histoire des reli¬ 
gions, 1909, pp. 190-229

Mus, P., “La notion de temps reversible dans la mythologie 
bouddhique.” Annuaire de VEcole pratique des Hautes 
Etudes, Section des Sciences Religieuses, Melun, 1939 
Nilsson, M. P., Primitive Time Reckoning, Lund, 1920 
Pallis, S. A., The Babylonian akitu Festival, Copenhagen, 1926 
Puech, H. C., “La gnose et le temps,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 
1952, pp. 57-114

Quispel, G., “Zeit und Geschichte im antiken Chxistentum” 
Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 1952, pp. 115-140 
Reuter, H., Die Zeit. Eine religionswissenschafdiche Unier- 
suchung, Diss., Bonn, 1941Quispel, G., “Zeit und Geschichte im antiken Chxistentum” 
Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 1952, pp. 115-140 
Reuter, H., Die Zeit. Eine religionswissenschafdiche Unier- 
suchung, Diss., Bonn, 1941

Scheftelowitz, J., Die Zeit ah Schicksalsgottheit in der indischen 
und iranischen Religion , Stuttgart, 1929 
Wensinck, A. J., “The Semitic New Year and the Origin of 
Eschatology,” Acta Orientalia, I, 1923, pp. 158-199 
Werblowsky, R. J. Zwi, “Hanouca et Noel ou Judaisme et 
Christianisme,” Revue de Vhistoire des religions 9 Jan.- 
Mar. 1954, pp. 30-68

Wilhelm, H., “Der Zeitbegriff im Buch der Wandlungen,” 
Eranos-Jahrbuch, XX, 1952, pp. 321-349 
Zimmern, H., “Zum babylonischen Neujahrsfest,” 1-2, Leipzig, 
1906, 1918: Berichte iiber die Verhandl. d. KgL Sachs. 
Ges. d. Wiss., 58, 3; 70, 5

240 The Sacred and the Profane 
MYTHS

Baumann, H., Sckopfung und Urzeit des Menscken im My thus 
der afrikanischen V biker, Berlin, 1936 
Caillois, R., Le my the el Fhomme, Paris, 1938 
Ehrenreich, P., Die allgemeine Mytkologie und ihre ethnolo- 
gischen Grundlagen, Leipzig, 1910 
Gusdorf, G., Mythe et metaphysique, Paris, 1953 
Hooke, S. H. (ed.), Myth and Ritual , London, 1934 
-, The Labyrinth , London, 1935

Jensen, A. E., Das religiose Weltbild einer friiken Kultur, Stutt¬ 
gart, 1948

-, Mythos und Kult bei Naturvolkern , Wiesbaden, 1951

Jung, C. G., and K. Kerenyi, Einfuhrung in das Wesen der 
Mytkologie, Amsterdam-Zurich, 1941 
Kluckhohn, C., “Myths and Rituals. A General Theory,” 
Harvard Theological Review, 35, 1942, pp. 45-79 
Levy-Bruhl, L., La mytkologie primitive, Le monde mythique 
des Australians el des Papons, Paris, 1936 
Malinowski, B,, Myth in Primitive Psychology, London, 1926 
Pettazzoni, R., “Die Wahrheit des Mythos,” Paideuma, IV, 
1950, pp. 1-10

-, “Myths of Beginnings and Creation-Myths,” Essays on-, “Myths of Beginnings and Creation-Myths,” Essays on

the History of Religion , Leiden, 1954, pp. 24-36 
Preuss, K. T., Der religiose Gehalt der Mythen, Tubingen, 1933 
Untersteiner, M., La fisiologia del mito, Milan, 1946

CHAPTER 3

Altheim, F., Terra Mater, Giessen, 1931 
Bachofen, J. J., Das Mutterrecht, Basel, 1861; 3rd ed., 1948 
Beirnaert, L., “La dimension mythique dans le sacramentalisme 
chretien,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, XVII, 1950, pp. 255-286 
Danielou, J., Sacramentum futuri, Paris, 1950

Selected Bibliography 241 
-, Bible et liturgie, Paris, 1951

-, Les Saints paiens de FAuden Testament, Paris, 1956

Dieterich, A., Mutter Erde, 3rd ed., Leipzig-Berlin, 1925 
Ehrenreicb, P., Die Sonne im Mythos, Leipzig, 1915 
Eliade, M., Patterns in Comparative Religion, New York, pp. 
38-366

-, “La terre-mere et les hierogamies cosmiques,” Eranos-

Jahrbuch, XXII, 1954, pp. 57-95 (Mythes, reves et 
mysteres, Paris, 1957, pp. 206-252)

Frazer, Sir J., The Golden Bough, I-XII, 3rd ed., London, 1911- 
1918

-, The Worship of Nature, I, London, 1926

Haekel, J., “Zum Problem des Mutterrechtes,” Paideuma, V, 
1953-54, pp. 298-322 ; 481-508

Hatt, G., “The Corn Mother in America and Indonesia,” 
Antkropos, 46, 1951, pp. 853-914 
Hentze, C., Mythes et symboles lunaires, Antwerp, 1932 
Holmberg, U., “Der Baum des Lebens ” Helsinki. Annales Aca- 
demiae Scientiarum Fennicae , Series B, Vol. XVI, 
1922-23

Kuhn, H., “Das Problem des Urmonotheismus,” Wiesbaden, 
Akad, d. Wiss, u, d. Lit,, Abh . d. geistes- «. sozialwiss . 
Klasse , 1951, pp. 1639-1672

Mannhardt, W., Wald - und Feldkulte, I-II, 2nd ed., Berlin, 
1904-1905

Meyer, J. J., Trilogie altindischer Mdchte und Feste der Vege¬ 
tation, I-III, Zurich-Leipzig, 1937 
Nyberg, B., Kind und Erde, Helsinki, 1931 
Pettazzoni, R., Dio, VEssere celeste neUe credenze dci popoli 
primitivi, Rome, 1922

__, “Allwissende hochste Wesen bei primitivsten Volkern,”

Archiv fur Religionswissenschaft, 29, 1930, pp. 109- 
129; 209-243__, “Allwissende hochste Wesen bei primitivsten Volkern,”

Archiv fur Religionswissenschaft, 29, 1930, pp. 109- 
129; 209-243

-, L*onniscienza di Dio, Turin, 1955

242 The Sacred and the Profane

Schmidt, W., Ursprung der Gottesidee, I-XII, Munster in West¬ 
falen, 1926-1955

-, Das Mutterrecht, Vienna, 1955

Wensinck, A. J., Tree and Bird as Cosmological Symbols in 
Western Asia, Amsterdam, 1921

CHAPTER 4

Coomaraswamy, A. K., “ ‘Spiritual Paternity’ and the Puppet- 
Complex,’ ” Psychiatry, 8, No. 3, August 1945, pp. 
25-35

Dumezil, G., Jupiter , Mars, Quirinus, Paris, 1941

-—, Horace et les Curiaces, Paris, 1942

-, Servius et la Fortune, Paris. 1943

-, Naissance de Rome, Paris, 1944

-, Naissance d 9 Archanges, Paris, 1945

-, Tarpeia, Paris, 1947

-, Mitra-Varuna, 2nd ed., Paris, 1948

- ,Loki, Paris, 1948

_ . y Les Dieux des Indo-Europeens, Paris, 1952

Eliade, M., “Cosmical Homology and Yoga,” Journal of the 
Indian Society of Oriental Art, Calcutta, 1937, pp. 188- 
203

-, “Mystere et regeneration spirituelle dans les religions

extra-europeennes,” Eranos-jahrbuch, XXIII, 1955, 
pp. 57-98 ( Mythes, reves, et mysteres, Paris, 1957, 
pp. 254-305)

Grassi, E., Reisen ohne anzukommen. Sudamerikanische Medi~ 
tationen, Hamburg, 1955

Hentze, C., Tod, Auferstehung , Weltordnung ,. Das mythische 
Bild im dltesten China, Zurich, 1955 
Hofler, 0., Kultische Geheimbunde der Germanen, I, Frankfurt- 
am-Main, 1934

- y Germanisches Sakralkomgtum, I, Munich-Cologne,

1953

Selected Bibliography 243

Jensen, A. £., Besckneidung und Reifezeremomen bei Natur* 
volkern, Stuttgart, 1932- y Germanisches Sakralkomgtum, I, Munich-Cologne,

1953

Selected Bibliography 243

Jensen, A. £., Besckneidung und Reifezeremomen bei Natur* 
volkern, Stuttgart, 1932

Kerenyi, K. ? Prometheus . Das griechiscke Mythologem von der 
menschlichen Existenz, Zurich, 1946 
Loeb, E. M., Tribal Initiation and Secret Society . Univ. of 
California Publications in American Archaeology and 
Ethnology, 25, 3, pp. 249-288, 1929 
Nyberg, H. S., Die ReUgionen des alien Iran, Leipzig, 1938 
Peuckert, W. E., Geheimkulte, Heidelberg, 1951 
Schurtz, H., Altersklassen und M(innerbiinde, Berlin, 1902 
Slawik, A., “Kultische Geheimhiinde des Japaner und Ger¬ 
manen,” Wiener Beilrdge zur Kulturgeschickte und 
Linguistik, IV, Vienna, 1936, pp. 675-764 
de Vries, J., Altgermanische Religionsgeschichte, Vol. I, 2nd 
ed., Berlin, 1956, Vol. II, 2nd ed., Berlin, 1957 
Wach, J., Sociology of Religion, Chicago, 1944 
Webster, H., Primitive Secret Society, New York, 1908 
Weiser, L., Altgermanische Junglingsweiken und Mdnnerbunde, 
Leipzig, 1927

Widengren, G., Hockgottglaube im alien Iran, Uppsala, 1938

-, The King and ike Tree of Life in Ancient Near Eastern

Religion, Uppsala, 1951

—- Sakrales Konigtum im Alien Testament und im Juden •

turn, Stuttgart, 1955

Wikander, S., Der arische Mdnnerbund, Lund, 1938

- Vayu, I, Uppsala, Leipzig, 1941

Wolfram. R., Schwerttanz und Mdnnerbund, I-III, Kassel, 
1936 ff.

-, “Weiberbiinde,” Zeitsckrift fur Volhshunde, 42, 1933,

pp. 143 ff.

Index

A

abkinindriyam , 199 
Abraham, 10, 26 
Aehelis, 217

AchiJpa, 33-34,43-44, 53, 62 
Adam, 61,134 
Adonis, 158 
Aeneas, 146 
Aeneid, 146 
Aeschylus, 139 
Agnl, 30-31 
Agni altar, 30-31, 74 
agriculture, farmer, 17, 51-52, 
96, 125-56 
Ahura-Mazda, 122 
Airyanam VaejaJi, 40 
Aitercya Brdhmana , 198 
Akitu ceremony, 77

244

Akposo, 119 
al-Blrunl, 78,225 
alcheringa , 86 
Alembert, J. L. d\ 228 
Alexander the Great, 220 
Algonquin Indians, 46, 73-74 
Allah, 122

allegorical interpretation, 
221-22244

Akposo, 119 
al-Blrunl, 78,225 
alcheringa , 86 
Alembert, J. L. d\ 228 
Alexander the Great, 220 
Algonquin Indians, 46, 73-74 
Allah, 122

allegorical interpretation, 
221-22

Altaic peoples, 62 
amorphous, the, 42,49-50, 55, 
see also chaos 
anakuklosis 9 110 
ancestors, mythical, 86, 122, 
135

Andaman Islanders, 120, 123 
animism, 230-31

;■

Annamese, 152 
anthropology, 15 
anthropophagy, 102-03 
Antichrist, 207 
Anu, 84,120 
Aori, 98

apocalypses, aquatic, 131-32 
Apollo, 158 
Apollodorus, 223 
apologists, Christian, 137, 
223, 227 
Apophis, 48 
apsil 9 41 
Apuleius, 223 
aquatic symbolism, 129-32 
Arabs, 225

archaic society, 13-14, 32,94,

146,164-67, see also 
primitive societies 
cultures, 75-76 
civilization, 202 
Arda Vlraf, 182 
Arhats, 175-77 
Aristotle, 220 ,226 
Arunta, 33,85-86 
ascension rites, 118-19 
ashvatha tree, 150 
Assyrians, 84 
Ashtaroth, 126 
Astartes, 126-27 
Atkarva Veda, 141,146,166 
Atlantis myths, 130 
dtman, 171 
Augustine, 225

245

246 The Sacred and the Profane

Australia, 32-33,141,186 bridge as symbol, 181 
Auxeia, 141 Brihadaranyaka Upanishad,

Averroes, 225 146,170-71

axis mundi , 33, 35-37,44, 52- British Columbia, 35 
54.169.177, see also Center Brosses, C. de, 228

of the World and cosmic 
pillar

B

Baal, Baalim, 126-27 
bob apsl, 41

Babylon, Babylonians, 25,40, 
77,120 
Bali, 45 
ballads, 56 
Balts, 120 
Banda, 192 
Bantu, 124,191 
baptism, 130-41,143 
II Baruch, 61 
basilica, 61 
Behemoth, 133 
Berosos, 220 
Bertholet, A., 219 
Beth-el, 26 
birth goddesses, 141 
birth, second, 198-201, see 
also resurrection 
blood sacrifice, 100 
Boas, F., 232 
Boem, J., 227 
Borobudur, 41 
Brahma, 108

brahmarandhra 9 174-75, 177

Bubenquellen , 140 
Buddha, Buddhism, 176-77, 
199-201,227

building rituals, 52-53, 54-58 
Bundjil, 122 
burial, 133,143-44

C

Caesar, 223 
Canary Islanders, 35 
cannibalism as ritual, 102-04, 
106Bubenquellen , 140 
Buddha, Buddhism, 176-77, 
199-201,227

building rituals, 52-53, 54-58 
Bundjil, 122 
burial, 133,143-44

C

Caesar, 223 
Canary Islanders, 35 
cannibalism as ritual, 102-04, 
106

Carpin, Jean du Plan de, 226 
cathedral, 61 
cave legends, 153 
Cels us, 224 
Celts, 35,120 
Center of the World, 36-47 
passim , 57,64-65, 75, 91, 
128,173,183, see also 
cosmic pillar 
Ceram, 46

chaos, 29-32,47-50, 55,64, 
77,116, see also the 
amorphous 
Charlemagne, 35 
China, Chinese, 15, 39,83, 
120,141-43,152-55,162, 
179

Index

247

chemistry, 51

Choephori (Aeschylus), 139 
Christ, see Jesus Christ 
Christianity, 111-12,158-64, 
178-79,181, 200, 223-25 
II Chronicles, 60 
Ckronicum Laurissense breve , 
35

Chrysostom, John, 133 
church, 25-26, 61-62, see also 
temple 
Cicero, 222 
Cinvat Bridge, 182 
Clemen, C., 219 
Clement of Alexandria, 225 
Clement of Rome, 137 
Confucianism, 162 
Conquistadors, 32 
consecration, 32-33 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 174 
n.1-2,184 n.l, 199 
II Corinthians, 32 
cosmicization, 30-34, 52 
cosmic pillar, 34-36,44, 53- 
54,169,177, see also axis 
mundi

cosmos, cosmogony, 29-36, 39, 
42,44-50, 51,54-58,63-64, 
83-85.104-05,117-19,130- 
31,145-46,165,180-81, 
197, see also creation 
creation, 30-31, 50-55,65, 77- 
80,97,122,126,131, see 
also cosmos 
Creuzer, F., 229

Croce, B., 207 
Cross, 32

crypto-religious behavior, 24 
Cyril of Jerusalem, 133-34

D

Dakota Indians, 74 
Damia, 141 
Dante, 16 
Darius, 48 
David, 60

death, 130,133,136,148,184- 
88,197 
decans, 75 
del otiosi, 122,125 
Deists, English, 228 
Delaware Indians, 139 
demos , 101 
demiurge, 122 
Democritus, 220 
demons, 29,49 
deus abscondilus, see Hidden 
God

devatma, 197 
Dhamma, 199 
Diderot, D., 228 
Dido, 146 
Dieus, 120 
dingir, 120 
dikska, 197-98 
Dlnkart, 182 
Diogenes Laertius, 220 
Dogon, 169

doors as symbols, see threshold

248 The Sacred and the Profane

dragon, 48 
Dupius, F., 229 
Dur-an-ki, 41 
Durkheim, E., 231 
Dyaus , 120 
Dzingbe, 124

E

Ea, 84doors as symbols, see threshold

248 The Sacred and the Profane

dragon, 48 
Dupius, F., 229 
Dur-an-ki, 41 
Durkheim, E., 231 
Dyaus , 120 
Dzingbe, 124

E

Ea, 84

Easter Canon, 61 
ecstasy, 175 
Eden, 207

Egypt, Egyptians, 25,58, 77, 
142,191,224 
Eileithia, 141 
Ei-Hamel, 27 
embryo, 198-201 
Ennius, 222 
Enuma disk , 77 
Epicurus, 221 
epiphany, 121 
Epistle to Philemon, 200 
Epistle to Titus, 200 
Erasmus of Rotterdam, 8 
Eresburg, 35

eternal return, 75*76,107-10, 
113

ethnologist, ethnology, 15-16, 
56, 201,231 '

Etruria, 179 
Euhemerus, 222 
Eusebius of Caesarea, 225 
Ewe, 124 
Exodus, 20,60

F

fall of man, 134, 207 
Fang peoples, 125 
Fathers of the Church, 61, 
132,135-36,226 
female, as Mother Earth, 138- 
41,166

female societies, 194-95 
festivals, 69-70, 85-91,104-05 
Ficino, M., 227 
Fiji, 82

Firmicius Maternus, 224 
Flavius Josephus, 43, 75 
flight as symbol, 175-76 
Flood, the, 38-39,130-35 
passim

Flores Island, 35 
folklore, 56,163 
Fontenelle, B., 229 
Frazer, Sir J. G., 16,124 
n.1-2,125 n.3,230-31 
Freud, S., 232 
Frobenius, L., 232 
fruit as symbol, 149 
Fuegians, 186

G

Gaia, 144

ganz andere , 9,10,12 
garden as symbol, 152-53 
Gate of Heaven, 26 
gate as symbol, 181 
Genesis, 10,26,129

Index

24!

Germans, 35,47 
gnomon, 39 
Gogoltha, 38 
Goraksha Shataka, 173 
Gorion, Rabbi ben, 44 
Graebner, F., 232 
Greece, Greeks, 56,110,113, 
141,144-45,163-64,198- 
99,224

Gudea, King, 59 
Gyriama, 124

H

Haas, H., 219 
Hamitic, 54 
Hamitoid, 54 
Haraberezaiti, 38 
Haran, 26 
Hastings, J., 219 
Haudricourt, A. G., 150 
heaven, see paradise 
Hebrews, 41,126-27 
Hecataeus of Abdera, 221 
Hegel, G. F. W., 66,166 
Hentze, C., 178-79,198 n.2 
Hera, 146

Herennius Philo, 223 
Herero, 124

Hermes Trismegistos, 227 
Herodotus, 219, 222 
Hesiod, 144 
Hidden God, 184 
hierogamy, 89,145-46,165, 
170Herennius Philo, 223 
Herero, 124

Hermes Trismegistos, 227 
Herodotus, 219, 222 
Hesiod, 144 
Hidden God, 184 
hierogamy, 89,145-46,165, 
170

hierophany, 11-12, 20-24, 26- 
28, 36, 63-64,117,125-28, 
131,155-58 
highest gods, 118-25 
Hinduism, 162,199-200 
history, 17-18,111*12 
bistoricism, 112-13 
Hittites, 77 
Holy Land, 39,44 
Holy Spirit, 132 
Homer, 16,139,163 
homologies, 166-180 
Horace, 35 
Horus, 158 
Hubert, H., 88 
Humanists, 227 
human sacrifice, 100,102 
Hume, D., 183 
humi positio, 141-44 
hylogenies, 130 
Hym to Earth (Homer), 139

/

Iamblichus, 224, 227 
ibn-Rushd, see Averroes 
Ibn Hazm, 225 
Iceland, 31

ideology, Jewish-Christian,

110

Iho, 119

Ikxareyavs, 99

illud tempos, see time of

onsms

250 The Sacred and the Profane

imago mundij 42-43,45,52* 
53,57-59, 74,173,179 
imitatio dei, 100,106 
India, Indians, 15, 35, 49, 54, 
58,62-63,74,107,113,173* 
76,191,197-99 
Indo-Europeans, 120 
Indonesia, 35-36,145 
Indra, 54

industrial society, 24, 50-51, 
178

initiation, 36,46, 135-36,144, 
150,181-84,186-96,197- 
201,207-08 
Innocent IV, 226 
Intichiuma, see Anrnta 
Io, 82

Iran, 38,40 
Inninsul, 35 
Islam, 38,163, 225 
Israel, 25, 60,135 
Italy, 47 
Iviri, 98

/

Jacob, 26

Jacob’s ladder, 26, 37 
James, W., 232 
Jeremiah, 48

Jerusalem, 42-45, 60-61,110 
Jesus Christ, 11, 31, 61,72, 
111-12,132-37,159,200, 
207

Judaism, Jews, 58,110,136, 
163,181,200 
Job, 133 
Justin, 133 
Jupiter, 120,158 
Julian, Emperor, 158

K

Ka’aba, 38 
kalpa, 108

Katka Upanishad , 183 
Kamui, 120 
Karadgeri, 168 
Karma , 109 
Karuk, 99 
Kassapa, 199 
kauwa-auwa, 33 
Keith, A. B., 198 
Kinderbrunnen , 140 
Kinderteicke , 140 
Kingu, 77 
Kivavia, 98 
Koran, 166 
Koryaks, 120 
Kosmas Indikopleustes, 62 
Kuldrnava Tantra, 171 
Kulin, 122

Kwakiutls, 15,35-36, 62 
L

Lactantius, 224

Lafitau, J. F., 228

land, the taking of the, 30-32

IndexKwakiutls, 15,35-36, 62 
L

Lactantius, 224

Lafitau, J. F., 228

land, the taking of the, 30-32

Index

Lang, A., 230-31 
languages, archaic, 13 
linguistics, 229 
Lancelot, 182 
Leblanc, Abbe P., 216 
Le Corbusier, 50 
Leeuw, G. van der, 232 
Lehmann, E., 219 
leimon , 130

Lenni-Lanape, see Delaware 
Indians

Lessing, G. E., 228 
Levy-Bruhl, L., 98 n.. 99 n., 
231

Lobeck, C. A*, 229 
Lord, the, 20,26 
Louis IX, 226 
Lucian, 223 
Lucretius, 221 
Luther, M., 8 
Lully, R., 227

M

MacLennen, J. F., 231 
Macrobius, 158 
Madame Bovary, 210 
Maenads, 195 
mahayuga, 108 
Maimonides, 226 
majestas, 9-10,121 
Majjhima Nikdya, 199 
Mandja, 192 
Manetho, 221

manifestation of the snper< 
natural, see hierophany 
Mannhardt, W., 230 
Manu, 108 
manvantara, 108 
Maori, 111 
marabout, 27 
Marco Polo, 226 
Marduk, 48, 55, 77, 79 
Marett, R. R., 230 
marriage, 146,170-71 
Marxism as myth, 206-07 w 
Mary, Virgin, 97 
Matthew, 183 
Mauss, M., 88 
mays, 109 
Megasthenes, 221 
men’s house, see sanctuary 
men’s societies, 192-93 
Mesopotamia, Mesopotamians, 
15, 58,62 
Micronesia, 145 
Milky Way, 35 
Mimcius, Felix, 224 
moksha, 109 
Mongols, 120,226 
moon as symbol, 156-57,180 
Moses, 20,60

Mother Earth, 17,122,141- 
42, see also Terra Mater 
mother-goddesses, 122,126 
mountains as symbols, 37-41, 
173

mouth of the tehom , 41

252 The Sacred and the Profane

Muller, M., 36 n.l, 46 n.3,47 
n.1-2,74 n., 75 m2,170 n., 
226, 229-30 
Mulugu, 124 
mundus, 47

mysterium fascinans , 9-10 
mysterium tremendum, 9-10, 
121

myth, 95-104,106,139-40, 
205-13

N

e

Nad’a, 35-36 
Nagas, 83 
Na-khi, 83

nature as sacred, 116-21 
naturism, 118,121 
nature mythology, 229*30 
Narrow Gate, see gate as 
symbol

navel of the earth, 38,40,44- 
45,47 
Nawroz, 78 
Ndyambi, 124 
Nebuchadnezzar, 48 
Negritos, 125

Negroes of West Africa, 124 
neo-Platonisis, 223,227 
neo-Pythagoreanism, 223 
Netsilik-Eskimos, 95 
New Guinea, 98 
New Year’s ritual, 78-80,104- 
OS, 147 
Ngakola, 192

Nidaba, 59Negroes of West Africa, 124 
neo-Platonisis, 223,227 
neo-Pythagoreanism, 223 
Netsilik-Eskimos, 95 
New Guinea, 98 
New Year’s ritual, 78-80,104- 
OS, 147 
Ngakola, 192

Nidaba, 59

Nicholas von Thverva, 40 
Nineveh, 59 
nirvana, 176,199 
Njankupon, 124 
Noah, 133-35 
nomads, 34

noncosmic religion, 177 
North American Indians, 73- 
74

Num, 120 
Numhakula, 33-34 
numinous, the, 9 
Nzame. 125

O

obstetric symbolism, 198-99 
Obtala, 123 
Oceania, 145 
Olorun, 120,123-24 
Omahas, 170 
Omphale, see navel of the 
earth

Onesimus, 200 
ontology, 42,95 
ontophany, 97,117,155 
openings as symbols, 57 
orbis terrarum, 47 
oriental studies, 229 
Oraons, 125 
Origen, 225 
Ortega y Gasset, J^ 207 
Osiris, 158

Otto, R., 8-10 
Ouranos, 144

P

P’an-ku, 55

Palestine, 26, see also Holy 
Land

Pahcavimska Brahmana, 184 
paradigmatic model, 45, 76, 
82, 86-87,106,180 
paradise, 60, 92-93,134-35, 
153*54,207 
Parmenides, 69 
parthenogenesis, 144 
Pennsylvania, 139 
Perkunas, 120 
Perun, 121

Peter the Venerable, 225 
Pharoah, 48 
phenomenology, 15 
Philo, 200 
Philostratas, 224 
physics, 51

Pillars of the World, see 
cosmic pillar 
Plato, 220 
Platonists, 110 
Plotinus, 224,227 
Plutarch, 223 
Pole Star, 38 
political mystiques, 207 
Polybius, 222 
Polynesia, 82,86

Pompey, 48 
Pontius Pilate, 111 
Porphyry, 224, 227 
post-existence, 148 
Prakriti, 171 
pralaya , 108 
pre-existence, 148 
pre-Mosaic religions, 105 
Preuss, K. 1\, 230 
primitive societies, 29, 37, 43, 
51-54, 90-93,100-02,106- 
07,202, 231-32, see also 
archaic societies 
Proclus, 158 
Psalms of Solomon, 48 
psychologist, psychology, 15, 
201

Puluga, 120,122-23 
Purusha, 55 
Pythagoreans, 110

R

Rahab, 48 
Ras Shamra, 77 
Re, 48

religions, archaic, 106,112 
responsibility, 93 
resurrection, baptism as, 133, 
136-37

revelation, historic, 137-38 
Rig Veda , 35,44,54-55,141 
Rigveda Brahmanas , 198

254 The Sacred and the Pro janerevelation, historic, 137-38 
Rig Veda , 35,44,54-55,141 
Rigveda Brahmanas , 198

254 The Sacred and the Pro jane

ritual cleansing, 77-78 
dying, 144 
nudity, 135 
orgies, 146-47 
resurrection, 144 
sexuality, 170-72 
spring baths, 131 
see also baptism, building, 
cannibalism, death, humi 
positio , initiation, mar¬ 
riage, rites of passage. 
New Year’s ritual, Vedic 
rites of passage, 181,18488 
Rivers, W. W., 232 
Robert de Retines, 225 
Romania, 56 
Romans, 35,141 
Roma quadrata, 47 
Rousseau, J. J., 228 
Rudolf of Fulda, 35 
rupirn manomayam, 199 
Ruysbroek, W., 226

S

Saadia, 226

sacrament, 14,136,170-72 
Sad-dar, 40 n.2 
Samoyed, 120 
Samuel, 126 
Samyutta Nikaya, 199 
sanctuary, 46-47 
Sandrakottos, 221 
Saturnalia , 79,158 
Saxons, 35

Scandinavians, 31,143-44

Schmidt, W., 54 m2,121 m, 
145 ml, 218,231-32 
secret societies, 186 
Selk’nam, 119,123 
Sennacherib, 59 
Seneca, 223 
Seleucus Nicator, 221 
Shakti, 171

shaman, 53-54, 83,196 
Shamash, 84

Shatapatha Brdhmana, 31, 74, 
98

Sharastani, 225 
Shiva, 171 
Shiz, 40 
signs, 2429 
Sino-Annamese, 152 
Sioux, 46, 73-74 
skambha, 35 
Smohalla, 138-39 
Socrates, 110,198-200 
Solomon, 60 
Soma, 54

sociologists, sociology, 15,201 
South America, 141 
space, 20-65 
amorphous, 20, 24 
geometric, 22,57 
homogeneity of, 20-24,28, 
37

aonhomogeneity of, 20,21, 
2425

relativity, 23

sacred, 1415,20-24,26-29, 
58,68

Index 255

Stiefelhagen, f216 
Stoic, 110,221-22 
storm gods, 120-22 
Strabo, 222 
Sumerians, 120 
summer solstice, 39-40 
sun gods, 158 
superstition, 204 
Suttavibhanga, 176 n. 
symbol, universality of, 136- 
38

syncretism, religious, 222-26

T

tabus, 14,86,102,204 
Tacitus, 223

Taitdrlya Brdhmana , 98 
Tantrism, 170-72 
Taoism, 153-55 
Taranis, 120 
tehom , 41-42

tellus mater , see Mother Earth 
and Terra Mater 
telos 785

tempie, 26,40-43,58-65, 75 
Terra Mater, 138-41,142-47 
passim, see abo Mother 
Earthtellus mater , see Mother Earth 
and Terra Mater 
telos 785

tempie, 26,40-43,58-65, 75 
Terra Mater, 138-41,142-47 
passim, see abo Mother 
Earth

Tertullian, 132-34,224 
Tengri, 120 
theophanies, 2429, 111 
Theopbilus of Antioch, 136-37 
Theophrastus, 220 
therapy, archaic, 83-85

Thraetaona, 48 
threshold as symbol, 25-27, 
181

Tiamat, 48,55, 77, 79 
Tien, 120 
Tikopia, 86 
time, 68-95 
cosmic, 73,75-76 
festival, see festivals 
homogeneity of, 68 
liturgical, 69, 71 
mythological, 72, 92,112 
of origins, 80-113 passim 
profane, 68-72 passim 
renewal of, see eternal 
return 
Titus, 200 
totemism, 231 
totem ceremony, 85-86 
traditional society, see primi¬ 
tive societies and archaic 
societies

transparency of the earth, 117 
transcendency, 116-19,176 
transitional rites, .see rites of 
passage

Tsbi-speaking Negroes, 124 
Tumbuka, 124 
Tylor, E. B., 16,230

U

Uito cannibals, 103 
underworld, the, 36,130

256 The Sacred end the Profane 
universal column, see cosmic Wisdom, 60

pillar

Upaniskads, the 13 Principal, 
183

Uwoluwu, 119 
V

Varro, 222

Vedic ritual, 30,171,173 
vegetation cults, 150-51 
Vergil, 16 
Vernes, M., 217 
Videvdat, 182 
Vincent of Beauvais, 227 
Vision of St. Paul , 182 
Voltaire, 228

W

Wanapum tribe, 138 
Waropen, 46

water, see aquatic symbolism 
Weltanschauung, 51-52, 162

witch, 143-44 
Wolf, F. A., 228 
Wundt, W., 232

Y

Yahweh, 48,60,110,122,126

yajusmati bricks, 74

Yggdrasil, 149

Ymir, 55

Yogin, 174,199

Yokuts, 73

Yoma , 44

Yoruba, 120, 123

Yugoslavia, 56

Yuki, 73

yurt, 53, 65

Z

Zaraihustra, 40 
Zeus, 120,146 
ziggurat, 40 
Zoroastrianism, 163