The  Senator  Gravel  Edition


Pentagon
Papers


The  Defense  Department
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on

VIETNAM


VOLUME  ONE


Gravel  Edition  /  Pentagon  Papers  /  Volume  I


"^3


A.  O-


.■3


r


!^
I  at)

lit


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2013


http://archive.org/details/pentagonpapersdeOObeac


The  Senator  Gravel  Edition

The  Pentagon  Papers

The  Defense  Department
History  of  United  States
Decisionmaking  on  Vietnam


Volume  I


Beacon  Press  Boston


Introduction  copyright  ©  1971  by  Mike  Gravel
The  contents  of  this  volume  are  drawn  from  the
official  record  of  the  U.S.  Senate  Subcommittee
on  Public  Buildings  and  Grounds.  No  copyright  is  claimed
in  the  text  of  this  official  Government  document.
Library  of  Congress  catalog  card  number:  75-178049
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-8070-0526-6  (hardcover)

0-8070-0527-4  (paperback)

Beacon  Press  books  are  published  under  the
auspices  of  the  Unitarian  Universalist  Association
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


Contents


VOLUME  I

Introduction  by  U.S.  Senator  Mike  Gravel
Letter  of  Transmittal  by  Leslie  H.  Gelb

1.  Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950

2.  U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954

3.  The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954

4.  U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956

5.  Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960

VOLUME  II

1.  The  Kennedy  Commitments  and  Programs,  1961

2.  The  Strategic  Hamlet  Program,  1961-1963

3.  Phased  Withdrawal  of  U.S.  Forces,  1962-1964

4.  The  Overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  May-November  1963

5.  US-GVN  Relations,  1964-1967

6.  The  Advisory  Build-up,  1961-1967

7.  Re-emphasis  on  Pacification:  1965-1967

VOLUME  III

1.  U.S.  Programs  in  South  Vietnam,  November  1963-April  1965

2.  Military  Pressures  Against  North  Vietnam,  February  1964-January  1965

3.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam:  Rolling  Thunder  Begins,  February-June,  1965

4.  American  Troops  Enter  the  Ground  War,  March-July,  1965

VOLUME  IV

1.  The  Air  War  in  North  Vietnam,  1965-1968

2.  U.S.  Ground  Strategy  and  Force  Deployments,  1965-1968

[At  the  end  of  each  volume  is  a  collection  of  documents,  a  section  entitled
"Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements,"  and  a  Glossary]


vi


Contents  of  Volume  I


Introduction  by  U.S.  Senator  Mike  Gravel  ix

Preface  xiii

Letter  of  Transmittal  by  Leslie  H.  Gelb  xv

L  Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  1

Summary  1

1.  Indochina  in  U.S.  Wartime  Policy,  1941-1945  7

A.  Roosevelt's  Trusteeship  Concept  9

B.  Truman  and  the  Occupation  of  Indochina,  1945  15
II.  U.S.  Neutrality  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1946-1949  19

A.  Failures  of  Negotiated  Settlement  19

B.  U.S.  Policy  Toward  the  Confiict,  1947-1949  28

III.  Origins  of  U.S.  Involvement  in  Vietnam  34

A.  The  Policy  Context  34

B.  The  U.S.  Enters  the  War  40

IV.  The  Character  and  Power  of  the  Viet  Minh — A  Summary  42
V.  Ho  Chi  Minh:  Asian  Tito?— A  Summary  47

2.  U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  53

Foreword  53

Summary  53

I.  U.S.  Policy  and  the  Bao  Dai  Regime  57

A.  The  Bao  Dai  Solution  57

B.  U.S.  Policy  Towards  Bao  Dai  61
II.  Leverage:  France  Had  More  Than  the  United  States  75

A.  American  Leverage  on  France  75

B.  French  Leverage  on  the  United  States  78
III.  Perceptions  of  the  Communist  Threat  to  Southeast  Asia  and  to

Basic  U.S.  Interests  81

A.  "Domino  Principle"  Before  Korea  82

B.  Importance  of  Indochina  82

C.  Impact  of  Start  of  Korean  War  83


Contents  of  Volume  I  vii

D.  Republican  Administration  and  Far  East  85

E.  Impact  of  Korean  Armistice  85

F.  Deepening  of  U.S.  Commitment  to  Containment  86

G.  Conclusion  87

IV.  The  Interagency  Debate  over  U.S.  Intervention  in  Indochina  88

A.  The  General  Policy  Context  88

B.  The  Question  of  Intervention  with  Ground  Forces  88

C.  The  New  Approach:  "United  Action"  93

V.  The  Attempt  to  Organize  "United  Action"  95

A.  The  Berlin  Conference  of  1954  95

B.  The  Ely  Mission  {March  20-24)  97

C.  "United  Action"  as  an  Alternative  to  Either  Negotiations  or  to
Unilateral  U.S.  Intervention  98

D.  Final  U.S.  Position  Before  Geneva  104

E.  Reappraisal  of  Domino  Theory  After  Dien  Bien  Phu  106

3.  The  Geneva  Conference,  May- July,  1954  108

I.  Background  to  the  Conference  108

II.  The  Conduct  and  Structure  of  Diplomacy  110

III.  The  Development  of  Bargaining  Positions  115

IV.  The  United  States  at  Geneva:  The  Stage  of  Force  and  Diplo-
macy, May  to  Mid-June  122

V.  The  Major  Issues  at  the  Conference,  May-June  132

VI.  The  Anglo-American  Rapprochement  141

VII.  Toward  a  Settlement:  The  Last  Thirty  Days  146

VIII.  The  Meaning  of  Geneva  165

4.  U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  179

Summary  179

I.  Aid  for  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1954  184

A.  The  American  Perspective  Develops  184

B.  The  Beginning  of  American  Aid  190
II.  The  U.S.  and  France's  Withdrawal  from  Vietnam,  1954-1956  204

Chronology  204

Key  Personalities,  1954-1956  209

A.  Introduction:  Post-Geneva  Expectations  210

B.  Initial  U.S.  Policy  Toward  Indochina  211

C.  Tentative  U.S.  Involvement  Becomes  Deeper,  Firmer  215

D.  Franco- American  Impasse  Over  Diem  225

E.  Crisis  of  the  Spring,  1955  229

F.  The  Twilight  of  French  Presence  in  Vietnam  239


viii Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

5.  Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  242

Summary  242

Table:  Major  Provisions  of  the  1954  Geneva  Accords  270

I.  Failure  of  the  Geneva  Settlement  283

A.  Introduction:  The  Flawed  Peace  283

B.  The  Partition  of  Vietnam  284

C.  Refugees:  Disruption  of  Vietnam's  Society  289
II.  Rebellion  Against  My-Diem  291

A.  Diem's  Political  Legacy:  Violence  and  Anti-Colonialism  291

B.  Ngo  Dinh  Diem:  Basis  of  Power  296

C.  Conflict  with  the  Armed  Sects  303

D.  Rural  Pacification  305

E.  Urban  Political  Alienation  314

F.  Tensions  with  the  Armed  Forces  322

G.  The  Viet  Cong  324

Documents  347

Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  584


[1971 Gravel introduction removed — copyrighted; body is the public-domain government document]

August  1971


xiii


Preface


The  text  of  this  book  consists  of  pubHc  documents  drawn  from  the  official
record  of  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  PubHc  Buildings  and  Grounds.

Early  in  June  1971,  the  New  York  Times,  and  then  other  newspapers,  began
printing  reports  on,  and  excerpts  from,  a  lengthy  Defense  Department  study  of
American  decisionmaking  on  Vietnam.  Shortly  thereafter,  the  Justice  Department
succeeded  in  obtaining  injunctions  halting  further  publication  of  these  stories.
On  the  evening  of  June  29,  1971,  while  there  was  still  doubt  as  to  whether  the
newspapers  would  be  permitted  to  continue  publishing  their  stories,  United  States
Senator  Mike  Gravel  of  Alaska  attempted  to  read  a  collection  of  the  Pentagon
Papers  in  his  possession  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate.  However,  his  effort  was  frus-
trated by  a  parliamentary  maneuver  which  prevented  him  from  gaining  access
to  the  Senate  floor.

As  Chairman  of  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Public  Buildings  and  Grounds,
Senator  Gravel  immediately  convened  a  hearing,  to  receive  testimony  from  Con-
gressman John  Dow  of  New  York  on  the  war-related  lack  of  funds  to  meet  our
nation's  needs  for  public  buildings.  As  his  opening  remarks,  and  during  the
course  of  the  evening,  Senator  Gravel  read  part  of  the  Pentagon  Papers  into  the
record.  The  remaining  portions  of  the  Papers  were  incorporated  into  the  record
of  the  subcommittee  and  then  were  released  to  the  press.

The  material  from  the  Pentagon  Papers  that  was  entered  into  the  record,  and
is  reprinted  here,  consisted  of  about  2900  pages  of  narrative,  1000  pages  of  ap-
pended documents,  and  a  200-page  collection  of  public  statements  by  govern-
ment officials  justifying  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam.  According  to  information
reported  in  the  press,  the  Defense  Department  study  included  in  total  a  narra-
tive of  about  3000  pages  and  documents  amounting  to  about  4000  pages.

The  material  presented  here  includes  a  full  history  of  U.S.  decisionmaking  on
Vietnam  from  the  early  1940s  through  March  of  1968.  Even  though  the  docu-
ments included  with  the  narrative  were  only  a  portion  of  those  appended  to  the
original  study,  they  were  of  sufficient  interest  and  importance  to  warrant  inclu-
sion in  these  volumes.  (There  are  extensive  quotations  within  the  narrative  from
many  of  the  other  documents  included  with  the  original  study.)  In  its  published
account  of  the  study,  the  New  York  Times  included  a  number  of  documents
which  did  not  appear  in  the  subcommittee  record.  These  have  been  reprinted
here  also,  in  proper  chronological  sequence,  and  their  source  is  indicated.  The
collection  of  public  statements  was  drawn  from  the  U.S.  Department  of  State
Bulletins  and  the  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  and  was  prepared  in  the  form
shown  here  by  the  Defense  Department  task  force  which  performed  the  study.

The  preparation  of  the  subcommittee  record  was  performed  under  the  direc-
tion of  Senator  Gravel.  The  chapter  sequence  was  arranged  to  provide  a  con-
venient, nearly  chronological  four-volume  format.  The  documents  and  public
statements  pertaining  to  each  period  are  appended  to  the  material  in  each  volume.

No  material  was  added  to  or  changed  in  the  study  or  appended  documents  and
statements.  In  some  cases,  material  was  illegible  or  missing.  If  this  occurred


xiv Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

within  a  direct  quotation,  the  omission  was  indicated  with  a  bracketed  statement.
If  it  occurred  in  narrative  text,  it  was  bridged  by  removing  the  entire  sentence
in  which  it  appeared,  when  it  was  evident  that  no  substantive  material  would  be
lost  by  this  procedure;  otherwise,  the  omission  was  indicated  by  a  bracketed
statement.  All  other  bracketed  insertions  appear  in  the  original  study.  Some  maps
were  removed  when  they  were  not  of  sufficient  quality  to  be  adequately  repro-
duced as  unretouched  facsimiles;  these  omissions  have  been  indicated  in  the  text.
Footnotes  in  the  original  study,  referring  primarily  to  internal  government  re-
ports, have  been  removed.  A  glossary  of  specialized  terms  and  acronyms  was
added.

These  volumes  provide  the  most  complete  text  of  this  history  of  American  in-
volvement in  Vietnam  yet  made  available,  in  a  form  which  should  make  it  fully
accessible  to  the  American  people.


XV


Letter  of  Transmittal  of  the  Study


January  15,  1969

TO: Clark  M.  Clifford

Secretary  of  Defense

On  June  17,  1967,  Secretary  Robert  S.  McNamara  directed  that  a  task  force
be  formed  TdT  study  the  history  of  United  States  involvement  in  Vietnam  from
World  War  11  to  the  present.  Mr.  McNamara's  guidance  was  simply  to  do  studies
that  were  "encyclopedic  and  objective."  With  six  full-time  professionals  assigned
to  the  task  force,  we  were  to  complete  our  work  in  three  months.  A  year  and  a
half  later,  and  with  the  involvement  of  six  times  six  professionals,  we  are  finally
done  to  the  tune  of  37  studies  and  15  collections  of  documents  in  43  volumes.

In  the  beginning,  Mr.  McNamara  gave  the  task  force  full  access  to  OSD
[Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense]  files,  and  the  task  force  received  access  to
CIA  materials,  and  some  use  of  State  Department  cables  and  memoranda.  We
had  no  access  to  White  House  files.  Our  guidance  prohibited  personal  interviews
with  any  of  the  principal  participants.

The  result  was  not  so  much  a  documentary  history,  as  a  history  based  solely
on  documents — checked  and  rechecked  with  ant-like  diligence.  Pieces  of  paper,
formidable  and  suggestive  by  themselves,  could  have  meant  much  or  nothing.
Perhaps  this  document  was  never  sent  anywhere,  and  perhaps  that  one,  though
commented  upon,  was  irrelevant.  Without  the  memories  of  people  to  tell  us,  we
were  certain  to  make  mistakes.  Yet,  using  those  memories  might  have  been  mis-
leading as  well.  This  approach  to  research  was  bound  to  lead  to  distortions,  and
distortions  we  are  sure  abound  in  these  studies.
<"  To  bring  the  documents  to  life,  to  fill  in  gaps,  and  just  to  see  what  the  "out-
^ side  world"  was  thinking,  we  turned  to  newspapers,  periodicals,  and  books.  We
never  used  these  sources  to  supplant  the  classified  documents,  but  only  to  sup-
plement them.  And  because  these  documents,  sometimes  written  by  very  clever
men  who  knew  so  much  and  desired  to  say  only  a  part,  and  sometimes  written
very  openly  but  also  contradictorily,  are  not  immediately  self- revealing  or  self-
explanatory,  we  tried  both  to  have  a  number  of  researchers  look  at  them  and  to
quote  passages  liberally.  Moreover,  when  we  felt  we  could  be  challenged  with
taking  something  out  of  context,  we  included  the  whole  paper  in  the  documentary
record  section  of  the  task  force  studies  [Documentary  Appendix].  Again  seeking
to  fend  off  inevitable  mistakes  in  interpretation  and  context,  what  seemed  to  us
key  documents  were  reviewed  and  included  in  several  overlapping  in  substance,
but  separate,  studies.

The  people  who  worked  on  the  task  force  were  superb — uniformly  bright  and
interested,  although  not  always  versed  in  the  art  of  research.  We  had  a  sense  of
doing  something  important  and  of  the  need  to  do  it  right.  Of  course,  we  all  had
our  prejudices  and  axes  to  grind,  and  these  shine  through  clearly  at  times,  but
Wv  tried,  we  think,  to  suppress  or  compensate  for  them.

These  outstanding  people  came  from  everywhere — the  military  services,  State,


xvi Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

O.S.D.,  and  the  "think  tanks."  Some  came  for  a  month,  for  three  months,  for  six
months,  and  most  were  unable,  given  the  unhappiness  of  their  superiors,  to  finish
the  studies  they  began.  Almost  all  the  studies  had  several  authors,  each  heir  duti-
fully trying  to  pick  up  the  threads  of  his  predecessor.  In  all,  we  had  36  profes-
sionals working  on  these  studies,  with  an  average  of  four  months  per  man.

The  quality,  style,  and  interest  of  the  studies  varies  considerably.  The  papers
in  Chapters [1-5 J,  concerning  the  years  1945  to  1961,  tend  to  be  generally  non-
startling — although  there  are  many  interesting  tidbits.  Because  many  of  the  docu-
ments in  this  period  were  lost  or  not  kept  (except  for  the  Geneva  conference
era)  we  had  to  rely  more  on  outside  resources.  From  1961  onwards,  the  records
were  bountiful,  especially  on  the  first  Kennedy  year  in  office,  the  Diem  coup,
and  on  the  subjects  of  the  deployment  of  ground  forces,  the  decisions  surround-
ing the  bombing  campaign  against  North  Vietnam,  US-GVN  relations,  and  at-
tempts at  negotiating  a  settlement  of  the  conflict.

Almost  all  the  studies  contain  both  a  summary  and  analysis  and  a  chronology.
The  chronologies  highlight  each  important  event  or  action  in  the  monograph  by
means  of  date,  description,  and  documentary  source.  The  summary  and  analysis
sections,  which  I  wrote,  attempt  to  capture  the  main  themes  and  facts  of  the
monographs — and  to  make  some  judgments  and  speculations  which  may  or  may
not  appear  in  the  text  itself.  The  monographs  themselves  stick,  by  and  large,  to
the  documents  and  do  not  tend  to  be  analytical.

Writing  history,  especially  where  it  blends  into  current  events,  especially  where
that  current  event  is  Vietnam,  is  a  treacherous  exercise.  We  often  could  not  tell
whether  something  happened  because  someone  decided  it,  decided  against  it,  or,
most  likely,  because  it  unfolded  from  the  situation.  History,  to  me,  has  been  ex-
pressed by  a  passage  from  Herman  Melville's  Moby  Dick  where  he  writes:  "This
is  a  world  of  chance,  free  will,  and  necessity — all  interweavingly  working  to-
gether as  one;  chance  by  turn  rules  either  and  has  the  last  featuring  blow  at
events."  Our  studies  have  tried  to  reflect  this  thought;  inevitably  in  the  organiz-
ing and  writing  process,  they  appear  to  assign  more  and  less  to  men  and  free  will
than  was  the  case.

Leslie  H.  Gelb
Director

Study  Task  Force


1


1. Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950


Summary

INDOCHINA  IN  U.S.  WARTIME  POLICY,  1941-1945

Significant  misunderstanding  has  developed  concerning  U.S.  policy  towards
Indochina  in  the  decade  of  World  War  II  and  its  aftermath.  A  number  of  his-
torians have  held  that  anti-colonialism  governed  U.S.  policy  and  actions  up  until
1950,  when  containment  of  communism  supervened.  For  example,  Bernard  Fall
(e.g.  in  his  1967  post-mortem  book,  Last  Reflections  on  a  War)  categorized
American  policy  toward  Indochina  in  six  periods:  "(1)  Anti-Vichy,  1940-1945;
(2)  Pro-yietJVlinh,  1945-1946;  (3)  Non-involvement,  1946-June  J950;  (4)  *
ProrFrench,  1950-July  1954;  (5)  Non-military  involvement,  1 954-November )
196^l7  (6)  Direct  and  full  involvement,  1961-  ."  Commenting  that  the  first
four  periods  are  those  "least  known  even  to  the  specialist,"  Fall  developed  the
thesis  that  President  Roosevelt  was  determined  "to  eliminate  the  French  from
Indochina  at  all  costs,"  and  had  pressured  the  Allies  to  establish  an  international
trusteeship  to  administer  Indochina  until  the  nations  there  were  ready  to  assume
full  independence.  This  obdurate  anti-colonialism,  in  Fall's  view,  led  to  cold  re-
fusal of  American  aid  for  French  resistance  fighters,  and  to  a  policy  of  pro-
moting Ho  Chi  Minh  and  the  Viet  Minh  as  the  alternative  to  restoring  the
French  bonds.  But,  the  argument  goes,  Roosevelt  died,  and  principle  faded;  by
late  1946,  anti-colonialism  mutated  into  neutrality.  According  to  Fall:  "Whether
this  was  due  to  a  deliberate  policy  in  Washington  or,  conversely,  to  an  absence  of
policy,  is  not  quite  clear.  .  .  .  The  United  States,  preoccupied  in  Europe,  ceased
to  be  a  diplomatic  factor  in  Indochina  until  the  outbreak  of  the  Korean  War."
In  1950,  anti-communism  asserted  itself,  and  in  a  remarkable  volte-face,  the
United  States  threw  its  economic  and  military  resources  behind  France  in  its  war
against  the  Viet  Minh.  Other  commentators,  conversely — prominent  among  them,
the  historians  of  the  Viet  Minh — have  described  U.S.  policy  as  consistently  con-  (
doning  and  assisting  the  reimposition  of  French  colonial  power  in  Indochina,  j
with  a  concomitant  disregard  for  the  nationalist  aspirations  of  the  Vietnamese. '

Neither  interpretation  squares  with  the  record;  the  United  States  was  less
concerned  over  Indochina,  and  less  purposeful  than  either  assumes.  Ambivalence
characterized  U.S.  policy  during  World  War  II,  and  was  the  root  of  much  sub-
sequent misunderstanding.  On  the  one  hand,  the  U.S.  repeatedly  reassured  the
French  that  its  colonial  possessions  would  be  returned  to  it  after  the  war.  On
the  other  hand,  the  U.S.  broadly  committed  itself  in  the  Atlantic  Charter  to  sup-
port national  self-determination,  and  President  Roosevelt  personally  and  ve-
hemently advocated  independence  for  Indochina.  F.D.R.  regarded  Indochina  as
a  flagrant  example  of  onerous  colonialism  which  should  be  turned  over  to  a
trusteeship  rather  than  returned  to  France.  The  President  discussed  this  proposal
with  the  Allies  at  the  Cairo,  Teheran,  and  Yalta  Conferences  and  received  the
endorsement  of  Chiang  Kai-shek  and  Stalin;  Prime  Minister  Churchill  demurred.
At  one  point,  Fall  reports,  the  President  offered  General  de  Gaulle  Filipino


2 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

advisers  to  help  France  establish  a  "more  progressive  policy  in  Indochina" —
which  offer  the  General  received  in  "pensive  silence."

Ultimately,  U.S.  policy  was  governed  neither  by  the  principles  of  the  Atlantic
Charter,  nor  by  the  President's  anti-colonialism,  but  by  the  dictates  of  military
strategy,  and  by  British  intransigence  on  the  colonial  issue.  The  United  States,
concentrating  its  forces  against  Japan,  accepted  British  military  primacy  in  South-
east Asia,  and  divided  Indochina  at  16th  parallel  between  the  British  and  the
Chinese  for  the  purposes  of  occupation.  U.S.  commanders  serving  with  the
British  and  Chinese,  while  instructed  to  avoid  ostensible  alignment  with  the
French,  were  permitted  to  conduct  operations  in  Indochina  which  did  not  de-
tract from  the  campaign  against  Japan.  Consistent  with  F.D.R.'s  guidance,  the
U.S.  did  provide  modest  aid  to  French — and  Viet  Minh — resistance  forces  in
Vietnam  after  March,  1945,  but  refused  to  provide  shipping  to  move  Free  French
troops  there.  Pressed  by  both  the  British  and  the  French  for  clarification  of
U.S.  intentions  regarding  the  political  status  of  Indochina,  F.D.R.  maintained  that
"it  is  a  matter  for  postwar."

The  President's  trusteeship  concept  foundered  as  early  as  March  1943,  when
the  U.S.  discovered  that  the  British,  concerned  over  possible  prejudice  to  Com-
monwealth policy,  proved  to  be  unwilling  to  join  in  any  declaration  on  trustee-
ships, and  indeed  any  statement  endorsing  national  independence  which  went
beyond  the  Atlantic  Charter's  vague  "respect  the  right  of  all  peoples  to  choose
the  form  of  government  under  which  they  will  live."  So  sensitive  were  the  British
on  this  point  that  the  Dumbarton  Oaks  Conference  of  1944,  at  which  the  blue-
print for  the  postwar  international  system  was  negotiated,  skirted  the  colonial
issue,  and  avoided  trusteeships  ahogether.  At  each  key  decisional  point  at  which
the  President  could  have  influenced  the  course  of  events  toward  trusteeship —
in  relations  with  the  U.K.,  in  casting  the  United  Nations  Charter,  in  instructions
to  allied  commanders — he  declined  to  do  so;  hence,  despite  his  lip  service  to
trusteeship  and  anti-colonialism,  F.D.R.  in  fact  assigned  to  Indochina  a  status
correlative  to  Burma,  Malaya,  Singapore  and  Indonesia:  free  territory  to  be
reconquered  and  returned  to  its  former  owners.  Non-intervention  by  the  U.S.
on  behalf  of  the  Vietnamese  was  tantamount  to  acceptance  of  the  French  re-
turn. On  April  3,  1945,  with  President  Roosevelt's  approval,  Secretary  of  State
Stettinius  issued  a  statement  that,  as  a  result  of  the  Yalta  talks,  the  U.S.  would
look  to  trusteeship  as  a  postwar  arrangement  only  for  "territories  taken  from  the
enemy,"  and  for  "territories  as  might  voluntarily  be  placed  under  trusteeship."
By  context,  and  by  the  Secretary  of  State's  subsequent  interpretation,  Indochina
fell  into  the  latter  category.  Trusteeship  status  for  Indochina  became,  then,  a
matter  for  French  determination.

Shortly  following  President  Truman's  entry  into  office,  the  U.S.  assured
France  that  it  had  never  questioned,  "even  by  implication,  French  sovereignty
over  Indo-China."  The  U.S.  policy  was  to  press  France  for  progressive  measures
in  Indochina,  but  to  expect  France  to  decide  when  its  peoples  would  be  ready
for  independence;  "such  decisions  would  preclude  the  establishment  of  a  trustee-
ship in  Indochina  except  with  the  consent  of  the  French  Government."  These
guidelines,  established  by  June,  1945 — before  the"  end  of  the  war — remained
fundamental  to  U.S.  policy.

With  British  cooperation,  French  military  forces  were  reestablished  in  South
Vietnam  in  September,  1945.  The  U.S.  expressed  dismay  at  the  outbreak  of
guerrilla  warfare  which  followed,  and  pointed  out  that  while  it  had  no  intention  of
opposing  the  reestablishment  of  French  control,  "it  is  not  the  policy  of  this  gov-
ernment to  assist  the  French  to  reestablish  their  control  over  Indochina  by  force.


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  3

and  the  willingness  of  the  U.S.  to  see  French  control  reestablished  assumes  that
[the]  French  claim  to  have  the  support  of  the  population  in  Indochina  is  borne
out  by  future  events."  Through  the  fall  and  winter  of  1945-1946,  the  U.S.  re-
ceived a  series  of  requests  from  Ho  Chi  Minh  for  intervention  in  Vietnam;  these
were,  on  the  record,  unanswered.  However,  the  U.S.  steadfastly  refused  to  assist
the  French  military  effort,  e.g.,  forbidding  American  flag  vessels  to  carry  troops
or  war  materiel  to  Vietnam.  On  March  6,  1946,  the  French  and  Ho  signed  an
Accord  in  which  Ho  acceded  to  French  reentry  into  North  Vietnam  in  return
for  recognition  of  the  DRV  as  a  "Free  State,"  part  of  the  French  Union.  As
of  April  1946,  allied  occupation  of  Indochina  was  officially  terminated,  and  the
U.S.  acknowledged  to  France  that  all  of  Indochina  had  reverted  to  French
control.  Thereafter,  the  problems  of  U.S.  policy  toward  Vietnam  were  dealt  with
in  the  context  of  the  U.S.  relationship  with  France.

U.S.  NEUTRALITY  IN  THE  FRANCO-VIET  MINH  WAR,  1946-1949

In  late  1946,  the  Franco- Viet  Minh  War  began  in  earnest.  A  chart  (pp.  A37  ff)
summarizes  the  principal  events  in  the  relations  between  France  and  Vietnam,
1946-1949,  describing  the  milestones  along  the  route  by  which  France,  on  the
one  hand,  failed  to  reach  any  lasting  accommodation  with  Ho  Chi  Minh,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  erected  the  "Bao  Dai  solution"  in  its  stead.  The  U.S.  during
these  years  continued  to  regard  the  conflict  as  fundamentally  a  matter  for  French
resolution.  The  U.S.  in  its  representations  to  France  deplored  the  prospect  of
protracted  war,  and  urged  meaningful  concessions  to  Vietnamese  nationalism.
However,  the  U.S.,  det^red  by  the  history  of  Ho's  communist  affiliation,  always
stopped  short  of  endorsing  ~H6  Chi  Minh  or  the  Viet  Minh.  Accordingly,  U.S.
policy  gravitated  with  that  of  France  toward  the  Bao  Dai  solution.  At  no  point
was  the  U.S.  prepared  to  adopt  an  openly  interventionist  course.  To  have  done
so  would  have  clashed  with  the  expressed  British  view  that  Indochina  was  an
exclusively  French  concern,  and  played  into  the  hands  of  France's  extremist
political  parties  of  both  the  Right  and  the  Left.  The  U.S.  was  particularly  ap-
prehensive lest  by  intervening  it  strengthen  the  political  position  of  French
Communists.  Beginning  in  1946  and  1947,  France  and  Britain  were  moving
toward  an  anti-Soviet  alliance  in  Europe  and  the  U.S.  was  reluctant  to  press  a
potentially  divisive  policy.  The  U.S.  [words  illegible]  Vietnamese  nationalism
relatively  insignificant  compared  with  European  economic  recovery  and  collec-
tive security  from  communist  domination.

It  is  not  as  though  the  U.S.  was  not  prepared  to  act  in  circumstances  such  as
these.  For  example,  in  the  1945-1946  dispute  over  Dutch  possessions  in  In-
donesia, the  U.S.  actively  intervened  against  its  Dutch  ally.  In  this  case,  how-
ever, the  intervention  was  in  concert  with  the  U.K.  (which  steadfastly  refused
similar  action  in  Indochina)  and  against  the  Netherlands,  a  much  less  significant
ally  in  Europe  than  France.  In  wider  company  and  at  projected  lower  cost,  the
U.S.  could  and  did  show  a  determination  to  act  against  colonialism.

The  resultant  U.S.  policy  has  most  often  been  termed  "neutrality."  It  was,
however,  also  consistent  with  the  policy  of  deferring  to  French  volition  an-
nounced by  President  Roosevelt's  Secretary  of  State  on  3  April  1945.  It  was  a
policy  characterized  by  the  same  indecision  that  had  marked  U.S.  wartime
policy.  Moreover,  at  the  time,  Indochina  appeared  to  many  to  be  one  region  in
the  troubled  postwar  world  in  which  the  U.S.  might  enjoy  the  luxury  of  absten-
tion.

In  February,  1947,  early  in  the  war,  the  U.S.  Ambassador  in  Paris  was  in-


4 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


structed  to  reassure  Premier  Ramadier  of  the  "very  friendliest  feelings"  of  the
U.S.  toward  France  and  its  interest  in  supporting  France  in  recovering  its  eco-
nomic, political  and  military  strength :

In  spite  any  misunderstanding  which  might  have  arisen  in  minds  French
in  regard  to  our  position  concerning  Indochina  they  must  appreciate  that
we  have  fully  recognized  France's  sovereign  position  in  that  area  and  we
do  not  wish  to  have  it  appear  that  we  are  in  any  way  endeavoring  under-
mine that  position,  and  French  should  know  it  is  our  desire  to  be  helpful
and  we  stand  ready  assist  any  appropriate  way  we  can  to  find  solution  for
Indochinese  problem.  At  same  time  we  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  fact  that
there  are  two  sides  this  problem  and  that  our  reports  indicate  both  a  lack
French  understanding  of  other  side  (more  in  Saigon  than  in  Paris)  and
continued  existence  dangerously  outmoded  colonial  outlook  and  methods  in
area.  Furthermore,  there  is  no  escape  from  fact  that  trend  of  times  is  to
effect  that  colonial  empires  in  XIX  Century  sense  are  rapidly  becoming
thing  of  past.  Action  Brit  in  India  and  Burma  and  Dutch  in  Indonesia  are
outstanding  examples  this  trend,  and  French  themselves  took  cognizance  of  it
both  in  new  Constitution  and  in  their  agreements  with  Vietnam.  On  other
hand  we  do  not  lose  sight  fact  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  has  direct_Communist
;  connections  and  it  should  be  obvious  that  we  are  not  interested  in  seeing
1  colonial  empire  administrations  supplanted  by  philosophy  and  political  or-
j  ganizations  emanating  from  and  controlled  by  Kremlin.  .  .  .

Frankly  we  have  no  solution  of  jiroblem  to  suggest.  It  is  basically  matter
for  two  parties  to  work  out  themselves  and  from  your  reports  and  those
from  Indochina  we  are  led  to  feel  that  both  parties  have  endeavored  to  keep
door  open  to  some  sort  of  settlement.  We  appreciate  fact  that  Vietnam
started  present  fighting  in  Indochina  on  December  19  and  that  this  action
has  made  it  more  difficult  for  French  to  adopt  a  position  of  generosity  and
conciliation.  Nevertheless  we  hope  that  French  will  find  it  possible  to  be
more  than  generous  in  trying  to  find  a  solution.
 ^

The  U.S.  anxiously  followed  the  vacillations  of  France's  policy  toward  Bao
Dai,  exhorting  the  French  to  translate  the  successive  "agreements"  they  con-
tracted with  him  into  an  effective  nationalist  alternative  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  and
the  Viet  Minh.  Increasingly,  the  U.S.  sensed  that  French  unwillingness  to  con-
cede political  power  to  Vietnamese  heightened  the  possibility  of  the  Franco-
Viet  Minh  conflict  being  transformed  into  a  struggle  with  Soviet  imperialism.
U.S.  diplomats  were  instructed  to  "apply  such_  persuasion  and/or  pressure  as
is  best  calculated  [to]  produce  desired  result  [of  France's]  unequivocally  and
promptly  approving  the  principle  of  Viet  independence."  France  was  notified  that
the  U.S.  was  willing  to  extend  financial  aid  to  a  Vietnamese  government  not  a
French  puppet,  "but  could  not  give  consideration  of  altering  its  present  policy
in  this  regard  unless  real  progress  [is]  made  in  reaching  non-Cpmmunist  solu-
tion in  Indochina  based  on  cooperation  of  true  nadgnaJists  of  that  country."

As  of  1948,  however,  the  U.S.  remained  uncertain  that  Ho  and  the  Viet  Minh
were  in  league  with  the  Kremlin.  A  State  Department  appraisal  of  Ho  Chi  Minh
in  July  1948,  indicated  that:

1.  Depts  info  indicates  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  is  Communist.  His  long
and  well-known  record  in  Comintern  during  twenties  and  thirties,  continuous
support  by  French  Communist  newspaper  Humanite  since  1945,  praise  given


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  5

him  by  Radio  Moscow  (which  for  past  six  months  has  been  devoting  in-
creasing attention  to  Indochina)  and  fact  he  has  been  called  "leading  com-
munist" by  recent  Russian  publications  as  well  as  Daily  Worker  makes  any
other  conclusion  appear  to  be  wishful  thinking.  "

2.  Dept  has  no  evidence  of  direct  link  between  Ho  and  Moscow  but
assumes  it  exists,  nor  is  it  able  evaluate  amount  pressure  or  guidance  Mos-
cow exerting.  We  have  impression  Ho  must  be  given  or  is  retaining  large
degree  latitude.  Dept  considers  that  USSR  accomplishing  its  immediate  aims
in  Indochina  by  (a)  pinning  down  large  numbers  of  French  troops,  (b)
causing  steady  drain  upon  French  economy  thereby  tending  retard  re-
covery and  dissipate  EC  A  assistance  to  France,  and  (c)  denying  to  world
generally  surpluses  which  Indochina  normally  has  available  thus  perpetuat-
ing conditions  of  disorder  and  shortages  which  favorable  to  growth  com-
munism. Furthermore,  Ho  seems  quite  capable  of  retaining  and  even
strengthening  his  grip  on  Indochina  with  no  outside  assistance  other  than
continuing  procession  ofFrench  puppet  govts.  _

In  the  fall  of  1948,  the  Office  of  Intelligence  Research  in  the  Department  of
State  conducted  a  survey  of  communist  influence  in  Southeast  Asia.  Evidence  of
Kremlin-directed  conspiracy  was  found  in  virtually  all  countries  except  Vietnam:

Since  December  19,  1946,  there  have  been  continuous  conflicts  between
French  forces  and  the  nationalist  government  of  Vietnam.  This  government
is  a  coalition  in  which  avowed  communists  hold  influential  positions.  Al-
though the  French  admit  the  influence  of  this  government,  they  have  con-
sistently refused  to  deal  with  its  leader.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  on  the  grounds  that
he  is  a  communist.

To  date  the  Vietnam  press  and  radio  have  not  adopted  an  anti-Ameri-
can position.  It  is  rather  the  French  colonial  press  that  has  been  strongly
anti-American  and  has  freely  accused  the  U.S.  of  imperialism  in  Indochina
to  the  point  of  approximating  the  official  Moscow  position.  Although  the
Vietnam  radio  has  been  closely  watched  for  a  new  position  toward  the
U.S.,  no  change  has  appeared  so  far.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  have  been  any
split  within  the  coalition  government  of  Vietnam.  .  .  .

Evaluation.  If  there  is  a  Moscow-directed  conspiracy  in  Southeast  Asia,
Indochina  is  an  anomaly  so  far.  Possible  explanations  are:

1 .  No  rigid  directives  have  been  issued  by  Moscow.

2.  The  Vietnam  government  considers  that  it  has  no  rightest  elements
that  must  be  purged.

3.  The  Vietnam  Communists  are  not  subservient  to  the  foreign  policies
pursued  by  Moscow.

4.  A  special  dispensation  for  the  Vietnam  government  has  been  arranged
in  Moscow.

Of  these  possibilities,  the  first  and  fourth  seem  most  likely.

ORIGINS  OF  U.S.  INVOLVEMENT  IN  VIETNAM

The  collapse  of  the  Chinese  Nationalist  government  in  1949  sharpened  Ameri-
can apprehensions  over  communist  expansion  in  the  Far  East,  and  hastened
U.S.  measures  to  counter  the  threat  posed  by  Mao's  China.  The  U.S.  sought  to
create  and  employ  policy  instruments  similar  to  those  it  was  bringing  into  play
against  the  Soviets  in  Europe:  collective  security  organizations,  economic  aid,


6 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


and  military  assistance.  For  example,  Congress,  in  the  opening  paragraphs  of  the
law  it  passed  in  1949  to  establish  the  first  comprehensive  military  assistance
program,  expressed  itself  "as  favoring  the  creation  by  the  free  countries  and
the  free  peoples  of  the  Far  East  of  a  joint  organization,  consistent  with  the
Charter  of  the  United  Nations,  to  establish  a  program  of  self-help  and  mutual
cooperation  designed  to  develop  their  economic  and  social  well-being,  to  safe-
guard basic  rights  and  liberties,  and  to  protect  their  security  and  independ-
ence. .  .  ."  But,  the  negotiating  of  such  an  organization  among  the  disparate
powers  and  political  entities  of  the  Far  East  was  inherently  more  complex  a
matter  than  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  nations  had  successfully  faced.  The  U.S.
decided  that  the  impetus  for  collective  security  in  Asia  should  come  from  the
Asians,  but  by  late  1949,  it  also  recognized  that  action  was  necessary  in  Indo-
china. Thus,  in  the  closing  months  of  1949,  the  course  of  U.S.  policy  was  set
to  block  further  communist  expansion  in  Asia:  by  collective  security  if  the
Asians  were  forthcoming;  by  collaboration  with  major  European  allies  and  com-
monwealth nations,  if  possible;  but  bilaterally  if  necessary.  On  that  policy  course
lay  the  Korean  War  of  1950-1953,  the  forming  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty
Organization  of  1954,  and  the  progressively  deepening  U.S.  involvement  in  Viet-
nam.

January  and  February,  1950,  were  pivotal  months.  The  French  took  the
first  concrete  steps  toward  transferring  public  administration  to  Bao  Dai's  State
of  Vietnam.  Ho  Chi  Minh  denied  the  legitimacy  of  the  latter,  proclaiming  the
DRV  as  the  "only  legal  government  of  the  Vietnam  people,"  and  was  formally
recognized  by  Peking  and  Moscow.  On  29  January  1950,  the  French  National
Assembly  approved  legislation  granting  autonomy  to  the  State  of  Vietnam.  On
February  1,  1950,  Secretary  of  State  Acheson  made  the  following  public  state-
ment:

f — '

I  The  recognition  by  the  Kremlin  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  communist  move-
ment in  Indochina  comes  as  a  surprise.  The  Soviet  acknowledgment  of  this
\  movement  should  remove  any  illusions  as  to  the  "nationalist"  nature  of  Ho
Chi  Minh's  aims  and  reveals  Ho  in  his  true  colors  as  the  mortal  enemy  of
native  indepedence  in  Indochina.

Although  timed  in  an  effort  to  cloud  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  by
France  to  the  legal  Governments  of  Laos,  Cambodia  and  Vietnam,  we  have
every  reason  to  believe  that  those  legal  governments  will  proceed  in  their
development  toward  stable  governments  representing  the  true  nationalist
sentiments  of  more  than  20  million  peoples  of  Indiochina.

French  action  in  transfering  sovereignty  to  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia has  been  in  process  for  some  time.  Following  French  ratification,  which
is  expected  within  a  few  days,  the  way  will  be  open  for  recognition  of  these
local  governments  by  the  countries  of  the  world  whose  policies  support
the  development  of  genuine  national  independence  in  former  colonial
areas.  .  .  .

Formal  French  ratification  of  Vietnamese  independence  was  announced  on  2
February  1950;  on  the  sarne  date.  President  Truman  approved  U.S.  recognition
for  Bao  Dai.  French  requests  for  aid  in  Indochina  followed  within  a  few  weeks.
On  May  8,  1950,  the  Secretary  of  State  announced  that:

r The  United  States  Government  convinced  that  neither  national  independ-
ence nor  democratic  evolution  exist  in  any  area  dominated  by  Soviet  im-


-  ^  ,'fr<i^  ^  -


JU  Cj


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  7

perialism,  considers  the  situation  to  be  such  as  to  warrant  its  according
economic  aid  and  mihtary  equipment  to  the  Associated  State  of  Indo-
china and  to  France  in  order  to  assist  them  in  restoring  stability  and  per-
mitting these  states  to  pursue  their  peaceful  and  democratic  development.

The  U.S.  thereafter  was  deeply  involved  in  the  developing  war.  But  it  cannot
be  said  that  the  extension  of  aid  was  a  volte-face  of  U.S.  policy  precipitated
solely  by  the  events  of  1950.  It  appears  rather  as  the  denouement  of  a  cohesive
progression  of  U.S.  policy  decisions  stemming  from  the  1945  determination  that
France  should  decide  the  political  future  of  Vietnamese  nationalism.  Neither  the
modest  O.S.S.  aid  to  the  Viet  Minh  in  1945,  nor  the  U.S.  refusal  to  abet  French
recourse  to  arms  the  same  year,  signaled  U.S.  backing  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.  To  the
contrary,  the  U.S.  was  very  wary  of  Ho,  apprehensive  lest  Paris'  imperialism  bje
succeeded  by  control  from  Moscow.  Uncertainty  characterized  the  U.S.  attitude
toward  Ho  through  1948,  but  the  U.S.  incessantly  pressured  France  to  accom-
modate "genuine"  Vietnamese  nationalism  and  independence.  In  early  1950,  both
the  apparent  fruition  of  the  Bao  Dai  solution,  and  the  patent  alignment  of  the
DRV  with  the  USSR  and  Communist  China,  impelled  the  U.S.  to  more  direct
intervention  in  Vietnam.

{End  of  Summary)

I. INDOCHINA  IN  U.S.  WARTIME  POLICY,  1941-1945

In  the  interval  between  the  fall  of  France  in  1940,  and  the  Pearl  Harbor  attack
in  December,  1941,  the  United  States  watched  with  increasing  apprehension  the
flux  of  Japanese  military  power  into  Indochina.  At  first  the  United  States  urged
Vichy  to  refuse  Japanese  requests  for  authorization  to  use  bases  there,  but  was
unable  to  offer  more  than  vague  assurances  of  assistance,  such  as  a  State  Depart-
ment statement  to  the  French  Ambassador  on  6  August  1940  that:

We  have  been  doing  and  are  doing  everything  possible  within  the  frame-
work of  our  established  policies  to  keep  the  situation  in  the  Far  East  stabil-
ized; that  we  have  been  progressively  taking  various  steps,  the  effect  of
which  has  been  to  exert  economic  pressure  on  Japan;  that  our  Fleet  is  now
based  on  Hawaii,  and  that  the  course  which  we  have  been  following,  as
indicated  above,  gives  a  clear  indication  of  our  intentions  and  activities  for
the  future.

The  French  Ambassador  replied  that:

In  his  opinion  the  phrase  "within  the  framework  of  our  established
policies."  when  associated  with  the  apparent  reluctance  of  the  American
Government  to  consider  the  use  of  military  force  in  the  Far  East  at  this  par-
ticular time,  to  mean  that  the  United  States  would  not  use  military  or  naval
force  in  support  of  any  position  which  might  be  taken  to  resist  the  Japanese
attempted  aggression  on  Indochina.  The  Ambassador  [feared]  that  the
French  Government  would,  under  the  indicated  pressure  of  the  Japanese
Government,  be  forced  to  accede  .  .  .

The  fears  of  the  French  Ambassador  were  realized.  In  1941,  however,  Japan
went  beyond  the  use  of  bases  to  demands  for  a  presence  in  Indochina  tanta-


8 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

mount  to  occupation.  President  Roosevelt  himself  expressed  the  heightening
U.S.  alarm  to  the  Japanese  Ambassador,  in  a  conversation  recorded  by  Acting
Secretary  of  State  Welles  as  follows :

The  President  then  went  on  to  say  that  this  new  move  by  Japan  in
Indochina  created  an  exceedingly  serious  problem  for  the  United  States  .  .  .
the  cost  of  any  military  occupation  is  tremendous  and  the  occupation  itself
is  not  conducive  to  the  production  by  civilians  in  occupied  countries  of  food
supplies  and  new  materials  of  the  character  required  by  Japan.  Had  Japan
undertaken  to  obtain  the  supplies  she  required  from  Indochina  in  a  peace-
ful way,  she  not  only  would  have  obtained  larger  quantities  of  such  supplies,
but  would  have  obtained  them  with  complete  security  and  without  the
draining  expense  of  a  military  occupation.  Furthermore,  from  the  military
standpoint,  the  President  said,  surely  the  Japanese  Government  could  not
have  in  reality  the  slightest  belief  that  China,  Great  Britain,  the  Netherlands
or  the  United  States  had  any  territorial  designs  on  Indochina  nor  were  in
the  slightest  degree  providing  any  real  threats  of  aggression  against  Japan.
This  Government,  consequently,  could  only  assume  that  the  occupation  of
Indochina  was  being  undertaken  by  Japan  for  the  purpose  of  further  offense
and  this  created  a  situation  which  necessarily  must  give  the  United  States
the  most  serious  disquiet  .  .  .

.  .  .  The  President  stated  that  if  the  Japanese  Government  would  re-
frain from  occupying  Indochina  with  its  military  and  naval  forces,  or,  had
such  steps  actually  been  commenced,  if  the  Japanese  Government  would
withdraw  such  forces,  the  President  could  assure  the  Japanese  Government
that  he  would  do  everything  within  his  power  to  obtain  from  the  Govern-
ments of  China,  Great  Britain,  the  Netherlands,  and  of  course  the  United
States  itself  a  binding  and  solemn  declaration,  provided  Japan  would  under-
take the  same  commitment,  to  regard  Indochina  as  a  neutralized  country
in  the  same  way  in  which  Switzerland  had  up  to  now  been  regarded  by  the
powers  as  a  neutralized  country.  He  stated  that  this  would  imply  that  none
of  the  powers  concerned  would  undertake  any  military  act  of  aggression
against  Indochina  and  would  remain  in  control  of  the  territory  and  would
not  be  confronted  with  attempts  to  dislodge  them  on  the  part  of  de  Gaullist
or  Free  French  agents  or  forces.

The  same  date,  Secretary  of  State  Cordell  Hull  instructed  Sumner  Welles  to  see
the  Japanese  Ambassador,  and

Make  clear  the  fact  that  the  occupation  of  Indochina  by  Japan  possibly
means  one  further  important  step  to  seizing  control  of  the  South  Sea  area,
including  trade  routes  of  supreme  importance  to  the  United  States  con-
trolling such  products  as  rubber,  tin  and  other  commodities.  This  was  of
vital  concern  to  the  United  States.  The  Secretary  said  that  if  we  did  not
bring  out  this  point  our  people  will  not  understand  the  significance  of  this
movement  into  Indochina.  The  Secretary  mentioned  another  point  to  be
stressed:  there  is  no  theory  on  which  Indochina  could  be  flooded  with
armed  forces,  aircraft,  et  cetera,  for  the  defense  of  Japan.  The  only  alterna-
tive is  that  this  venture  into  Indochina  has  a  close  relation  to  the  South  Sea
area  and  its  value  for  offense  against  that  area.

In  a  press  statement  of  2  August  1941,  Acting  Secretary  of  State  Welles  de-
plored Japan's  "expansionist  aims"  and  impugned  Vichy:


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  9

Under  these  circumstances,  this  Government  is  impelled  to  question
whether  the  French  Government  at  Vichy  in  fact  proposes  to  maintain  its
declared  policy  to  preserve  for  the  French  people  the  territories  both  at
home  and  abroad  which  have  long  been  under  French  sovereignty.

This  Government,  mindful  of  its  traditional  friendship  for  France,  has
deeply  sympathized  with  the  desire  of  the  French  people  to  maintain  their
J;erritories  and  to  preserve  them  intact.  In  its  relations  with  the  French  Gov-
ernment at  Vichy  and  with  the  local  French  authorities  in  French  terri-
tories, the  United  States  will  be  governed  by  the  manifest  effectiveness  with
which  those  authorities  endeavor  to  protect  these  territories  from  domina-
tion and  control  by  those  powers  which  are  seeking  to  extend  their  rule  by
force  and  conquest,  or  by  the  threat  thereof.

On  the  eve  of  Pearl  Harbor,  as  part  of  the  U.S.  attempt  to  obtain  Japanese
consent  to  a  non-aggression  pact,  the  U.S.  again  proposed  neutralization  of  Indo-
china in  return  for  Japanese  withdrawal.  The  events  of  7  December  1941  put
the  question  of  the  future  of  Indochina  in  the  wholly  different  context  of  U.S.
strategy  for  fighting  World  War  II.

A. ROOSEVELT'S  TRUSTEESHIP  CONCEPT

U.S.  policy  toward  Indochina  during  World  War  II  was  ambivalent.  On  the
one  hand,  the  U.S.  appeared  to  support  Free  French  claims  to  all  of  France's
overseas  dominions.  The  U.S.  early  in  the  war  repeatedly  expressed  or  implied
to  the  French  an  intention  to  restore  to  France  its  overseas  empire  after  the  war.
These  U.S.  commitments  included  the  August  2,  1941,  official  statement  on  the
Franco-Japanese  agreement;  a  December,  1941,  Presidential  letter  to  Petain;  a
March  2,  1942,  statement  on  New  Caledonia;  a  note  to  the  French  Ambassador
of  April  13,  1942;  Presidential  statements  and  messages  at  the  time  of  the  North
Africa  invasion;  the  Clark-Darlan  Agreement  of  November  22,  1942;  and  a  letter
of  the  same  month  from  the  President's  Personal  Representative  to  General
Henri  Giraud,  which  included  the  following  reassurance:

.  .  .  The  restoration  of  France  to  full  independence,  in  all  the  greatness
and  vastness  which  it  possessed  before  the  war  in  Europe  as  well  as  over-
seas, is  one  of  the  war  aims  of  the  United  Nations.  It  is  thoroughly  under-  1
stood  that  French  sovereignty  will  be  re-established  as  soon  as  possible  1
throughout  all  the  territory,  metropolitan  or  colonial,  over  which  flew  the  j
French  flag  in  1939.  '

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Atlantic  Charter  and  other  pronouncements  the  U.S.
proclaimed  support  for  national  self-determination  and  independence.  Moreover,
the  President  of  the  United  States,  especially  distressed  at  the  Vichy  "sell-out"  to
Japan  in  Indochina,  often  cited  French  rule  there  as  a  flagrant  example  of  oner-
ous and  exploitative  colonialism,  and  talked  of  his  determination  to  turn  Indo-
china over  to  an  international  trusteeship  after  the  war.  In  early  1944,  Lord
Halifax,  the  British  Ambassador  in  Washington,  called  on  Secretary  of  State
Hull  to  inquire  whether  the  President's  "rather  definite"  statements  "that  Indo-
china should  be  taken  away  from  the  French  and  put  under  an  international
trusteeship" — made  to  "Turks,  Egyptians  and  perhaps  others"  during  his  trip
to  Cairo  and  Teheran — represented  "final  conclusions  in  view  of  the  fact  that
they  would  soon  get  back  to  the  French  .  .  ."  (The  French  marked  well  the


10 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I

President's  views — in  fact  as  France  withdrew  from  Vietnam  in  1956,  its  Foreign
Minister  recalled  Roosevelt's  assuring  the  Sultan  of  Morocco  that  his  sympathies
lay  with  colonial  peoples  struggling  for  independence.  Lord  Halifax  later  re-
corded that :

The  President  was  one  of  the  people  who  used  conversation  as  others  of
us  use  a  first  draft  on  paper  ...  a  method  of  trying  out  an  idea.  If  it  does
not  go  well,  you  can  modify  it  or  drop  it  as  you  will.  Nobody  thinks  any-
thing of  it  if  you  do  this  with  a  paper  draft;  but  if  you  do  it  with  conversa-
tion, people  say  that  you  have  changed  your  mind,  that  "you  never  knew
where  you  have  him,"  and  so  on.

But  in  response  to  a  memorandum  from  Secretary  of  State  Hull  putting  the
question  of  Indochina  to  F.D.R.,  and  reminding  the  President  of  the  numerous
U.S.  commitments  to  restoration  of  the  French  empire,  Roosevelt  replied  (on
January  24,  1944),  that:

I  saw  Halifax  last  week  and  told  him  quite  frankly  that  it  was  perfectly
true  that  I  had,  for  over  a  year,  expressed  the  opinion  that  Indo-China
should  not  go  back  to  France  but  that  it  should  be  administered  by  an  inter-
national trusteeship.  France  has  had  the  country — thirty  million  inhabitants
for  nearly  one  hundred  years,  and  the  people  are  worse  off  than  they  were  at
the  beginning.

As  a  matter  of  interest,  I  am  wholeheartedly  supported  in  this  view  by
Generalissimo  Chiang  Kai-shek  and  by  Marshal  Stalin.  I  see  no  reason  to
play  in  with  the  British  Foreign  Office  in  this  matter.  The  only  reason  they
seem  to  oppose  it  is  that  they  fear  the  effect  it  would  have  on  their  own
possessions  and  those  of  the  Dutch.  They  have  never  liked  the  idea  of
trusteeship  because  it  is,  in  some  instances,  aimed  at  future  independence.
This  is  true  in  the  case  of  Indo-China.

Each  case  must,  of  course,  stand  on  its  own  feet,  but  the  case  of  Indo-
China  is  perfectly  clear.  France  has  milked  it  for  one  hundred  years.  The
people  of  Indo-China  are  entitled  to  something  better  than  that.

1. Military  Strategy  Pre-eminent

Throughout  the  year  1944,  the  President  held  to  his  views,  and  consistent  with
them,  proscribed  U.S.  aid  to  resistance  groups — including  French  groups — in
Indochina.  But  the  war  in  the  Asian  theaters  moved  rapidly,  and  the  center  of
gravity  of  the  American  effort  began  to  shift  northward  toward  Japan.  The  ques-
tion of  U.S.  strategy  in  Southeast  Asia  then  came  to  the  fore.  At  the  Second
Quebec  Conference  (September,  1944),  the  U.S.  refused  British  offers  of  naval
assistance  against  Japan  because  Admiral  King  believed  "the  best  occupation  for
any  available  British  forces  would  be  to  re-take  Singapore,  and  to  assist  the
Dutch  in  recovering  the  East  Indies,"  and  because  he  suspected  that  the  offer
"was  perhaps  not  unconnected  with  a  desire  for  United  States  help  in  clearing
the  Japanese  out  of  the  Malay  States  and  Netherlands  East  Indies."  Admiral
King's  suspicions  were  not  well-founded,  at  least  insofar  as  Churchill's  strategic
thought  was  concerned.  The  Prime  Minister  was  evidently  as  unwilling  to  invite
an  active  American  role  in  the  liberation  of  Southeast  Asia  as  the  U.S.  was  to
undertake  same;  as  early  as  February,  1944,  Churchill  wrote  that:


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  11

A  decision  to  act  as  a  subsidiary  force  under  the  Americans  in  the  Pacific
raises  difficuh  political  questions  about  the  future  of  our  Malayan  posses-
sions. If  the  Japanese  should  withdraw  from  them  or  make  peace  as  the
result  of  the  main  American  thrust,  the  United  States  Government  would
after  the  victory  feel  greatly  strengthened  in  its  view  that  all  possessions  in
the  East  Indian  Archipelago  should  be  placed  under  some  international  body
upon  which  the  United  States  would  exercise  a  decisive  concern.

The  future  of  Commonwealth  territories  in  Southeast  Asia  stimulated  intense
British  interest  in  American  intentions  for  French  colonies  there.  In  November
and  December  of  1944,  the  British  expressed  to  the  United  States,  both  in  London
and  in  Washington,  their  concern  "that  the  United  States  apparently  has  not  yet
determined  upon  its  policy  toward  Indochina."  The  head  of  the  Far  Eastern
Department  in  the  British  Foreign  Office  told  the  U.S.  Ambassador  that:

It  would  be  difficult  to  deny  French  participation  in  the  liberation  of
Indochina  in  light  of  the  increasing  strength  of  the  French  Government  in
world  affairs,  and  that,  unless  a  policy  to  be  followed  toward  Indochina  is
mutually  agreed  between  our  two  governments,  circumstances  may  arise  at
any  moment  which  will  place  our  two  governments  in  a  very  awkward
situation.

President  Roosevelt,  however,  refused  to  define  his  position  further,  notifying
Secretary  of  State  Stettinius  on  January  1,  1945:

I  still  do  not  want  to  get  mixed  up  in  any  Indo-China  decision.  It  is  a
matter  for  postwar. —  ...  I  do  not  want  to  get  mixed  up  in  any  military
effort  toward  the  liberation  of  Indo-China  from  the  Japanese. — You  can  tell
Halifax  that  I  made  this  very  clear  to  Mr.  Churchill.  From  both  the  military
and  civil  point  of  view,  action  at  this  time  is  premature.

However,  the  U.S.  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  were  concurrently  planning  the  removal
of  American  armed  forces  from  Southeast  Asia.  In  response  to  approaches  from
French  and  Dutch  officials  requesting  aid  in  expelling  Japan  from  their  former
colonial  territories,  the  U.S.  informed  them  that:

All  our  available  forces  were  committed  to  fighting  the  Japanese  else-
where in  the  Pacific,  and  Indochina  and  the  East  Indies  were  therefore  not
included  within  the  sphere  of  interest  of  the  American  Chiefs  of  Staff.

American  willingness  to  forego  further  operations  in  Southeast  Asia  led  to  a
directive  to  Admiral  Lord  Mountbatten,  Supreme  Commander  in  that  theater,
to  liberate  Malaya  without  U.S.  assistance.  After  the  Yalta  Conference  (Febru-
ary, 1945),  U.S.  commanders  in  the  Pacific  were  informed  that  the  U.S.  planned
to  turn  over  to  the  British  responsibility  for  operations  in  the  Netherlands  East
Indies  and  New  Guinea.  The  President,  however,  agreed  to  permit  such  U.S.
military  operations  in  Indochina  as  avoided  "alignments  with  the  French,"  and
detraction  from  the  U.S.  military  campaign  against  Japan.  The  latter  stricture
precluded,  in  the  U.S.  view,  the  U.S.  cooperation  with  the  French  at  Mount-
batten's  headquarters,  or  the  furnishing  of  ships  to  carry  Free  French  forces  to
Indochina  to  undertake  its  liberation.  This  U.S.  position  came  under  particularly
severe  French  criticism  after  IJ  March_1945,  when  the  Japanese  overturned  the
Vichy  regime  in  Vietnam,  and  prompted  the  Emperor  Bao  Dai  to  declare  Viet-


12 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

nam  unified  and  independent  of  France  under  Japanese  protection.  On  16  March
1945,  a  protest  from  General  de  Gaulle  led  to  the  following  exchange  between
the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  President:


DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE

Washington

March  16,  1945

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Subject:  Indo-China.

Communications  have  been  received  from  the  Provisional  Government  of  the
French  Republic  asking  for:

(1)  Assistance  for  the  resistance  groups  now  fighting  the  Japanese  in  Indo-
China.

(2)  Conclusion  of  a  civil  affairs  agreement  covering  possible  future  operations
in  Indo-China.

These  memoranda  have  been  referred  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  in  order  to
obtain  their  views  concerning  the  military  aspects  of  the  problems,  and  I  shall
communicate  with  you  further  on  the  subject  upon  receipt  of  the  Joint  Chiefs'
reply.

Attached  herewith  is  the  text  of  a  recent  telegram  from  Ambassador  Caffery
describing  his  conversation  with  General  de  Gaulle  on  the  subject  of  Indo-China.
From  this  telegram  and  de  Gaulle's  speech  of  March  14,  it  appears  that  this
Government  may  be  made  to  appear  responsible  for  the  weakness  of  the  resistance
to  Japan  in  Indo-China.  The  British  may  likewise  be  expected  to  encourage  this
view.  It  seems  to  me  that  without  prejudicing  in  any  way  our  position  re-
garding the  future  of  Indo-China  we  can  combat  this  trend  by  making  public
[material  illegible]  a  suggested  statement,  subject  to  your  approval,  by  the  State
Department.

/s/  E.  R.  Stettinius,  Jr.

Enclosures :

1 .  Proposed  Statement.

2.  Copy  of  telegram

from  Ambassador  Caffery
[not  included  here]


[Enclosure  1]

PROPOSED  STATEMENT

The  action  of  the  Japanese  Government  in  tearing  away  the  veil  with  which
it  for  so  long  attempted  to  cloak  its  domination  of  Indo-China  is  a  direct  conse-
quence of  the  ever-mounting  pressure  which  our  arms  are  applying  to  the  Japa-
nese Empire.  It  is  a  link  in  the  chain  of  events  which  began  so  disastrously  in
the  summer  of  1941  with  the  Franco-Japanese  agreement  for  the  "common  de-
fense" of  Indo-China.  It  is  clear  that  this  latest  step  in  the  Japanese  program  will
in  the  long  run  prove  to  be  of  no  avail.

The  Provisional  Government  of  the  French  Republic  has  requested  armed  as-
sistance for  those  who  are  resisting  the  Japanese  forces  in  Indo-China.  In  accord-
ance with  its  constant  desire  to  aid  all  those  who  are  willing  to  take  up  arms


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  13

against  our  common  enemies,  this  Government  will  do  all  it  can  to  be  of  assist-
ance in  the  present  situation,  consistent  with  plans  to  which  it  is  already  com-
mitted and  with  the  operations  now  taking  place  in  the  Pacific.  It  goes  without
saying  that  all  this  country's  available  resources  are  being  devoted  to  the  defeat
of  our  enemies  and  they  will  continue  to  be  employed  in  the  manner  best  calcu-
lated to  hasten  their  downfall.


[Response]

THE  WHITE  HOUSE

Washington

March  17,  1945

MEMORANDUM  FOR
The  Secretary  of  State

By  direction  of  the  President,  there  is  returned  herewith  Secretary  of  State
Memorandum  of  16  March,  subject  Indo-China,  which  includes  a  proposed
statement  on  the  Japanese  action  in  Indo-China.

The  President  is  of  the  opinion  that  it  is  inadvisable  at  the  present  time  to
issue  the  proposed  statement.

/s/  William  D.  Leahy


The  French  were  also  actively  pressuring  the  President  and  his  key  advisors
through  military  channels.  Admiral  Leahy  reported  that,  following  Yalta:

The  French  representatives  in  Washington  resumed  their  frequent  calls
to  my  office  after  our  return  from  the  Crimea.  They  labeled  most  of  their
requests  "urgent."  They  wanted  to  participate  in  the  combined  intelligence
group  then  studying  German  industrial  and  scientific  secrets;  to  exchange
information  between  the  American  command  in  China  and  the  French
forces  in  Indo-China;  and  to  get  agreement  in  principle  to  utilizing  the
French  naval  and  military  forces  in  the  war  against  Japan  (the  latter
would  assist  in  returning  Indo-China  to  French  control  and  give  France
a  right  to  participate  in  lend-lease  assistance  after  the  defeat  of  Germany.)

Most  of  the  time  I  could  only  tell  them  that  I  had  no  useful  information
as  to  when  and  where  we  might  make  use  of  French  assistance  in  the
Pacific.

However,  we  did  attempt  to  give  a  helping  hand  to  the  French  resistance
groups  in  Indo-China.  Vice  Admiral  Fenard  called  me  on  March  18  to
say  that  planes  from  our  14th  Air  Force  in  China  were  loaded  with  relief
supplies  for  the  undergrounders  but  could  not  start  without  authority  from
Washington.  I  immediately  contacted  General  Handy  and  told  him  of  the
President's  agreement  that  American  aid  to  the  Indo-China  resistance
groups  might  be  given  provided  it  involved  no  interference  with  our  opera-
tions against  Japan.

2. Failure  of  the  Trusteeship  Proposal

In  the  meantime,  the  President's  concept  of  postwar  trusteeship  status  for
dependent  territories  as  an  intermediate  step  toward  autonomy  had  undergone


14 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

study  by  several  interdepartmental  and  international  groups,  but  had  fared
poorly.  In  deference  to  British  sensibilities,  the  United  States  had  originally
sought  only  a  declaration  from  the  colonial  powers  setting  forth  their  intention
to  liberate  their  dependencies  and  to  provide  tutelage  in  self-government  for
subject  peoples.  Such  a  declaration  would  have  been  consistent  with  the  Atlantic
Charter  of  1941  in  which  the  U.S.  and  the  U.K.  jointly  agreed  that,  among  the
"common  principles  ...  on  which  they  base  their  hopes  for  a  better  future
for  the  world,"  it  was  their  policy  that:

1 ...  they  respect  the  right  of  all  peoples  to  choose  the  form  of  govern-
1 ment  under  which  they  will  live;  and  they  wish  to  see  sovereign  rights  and
) \ self-government  restored  to  those  who  have  been  forcibly  deprived  of
\ them.  .  .  .

In  November,  1942,  Secretary  Hull  submitted  to  the  President  a  proposed  draft
US-UK  declaration  entitled  "The  Atlantic  Charter  and  National  Independence,"
which  the  President  approved.  Before  this  draft  could  be  broached  to  the
British,  however,  they  submitted  a  counter-proposal,  a  statement  emphasizing
the  responsibility  of  "parent"  powers  for  developing  native  self-government,
and  avoiding  endorsement  of  trusteeships.  Subsequent  Anglo-American  discus-
sions in  March  1943  addressed  both  drafts,  but  foundered  on  Foreign  Secretary
Eden's  opposition.  Secretary  Hull  reported  in  his  memoirs  that  Eden  could  not
believe  that  the  word  "independence"  would  be  interpreted  to  the  satisfaction
of  all  governments:

.  .  .  the  Foreign  Secretary  said  that,  to  be  perfectly  frank,  he  had  to
say  that  he  did  not  like  our  draft  very  much.  He  said  it  was  the  word
"independence"  that  troubled  him,  he  had  to  think  of  the  British  Empire
system,  which  was  built  on  the  basis  of  Dominion  and  colonial  status.

He  pointed  out  that  under  the  British  Empire  system  there  were  vary-
ing degrees  of  self-government,  running  from  the  Dominions  through  the
colonial  establishments  which  had  in  some  cases,  like  Malta,  completely
self-government,  to  backward  areas  that  were  never  likely  to  have  their
own  government.  He  added  that  Australia  and  New  Zealand  also  had
colonial  possessions  that  they  would  be  unwilling  to  remove  from  their
supervisory  jurisdiction.

U.S.  inability  to  work  out  a  common  policy  with  the  U.K.  also  precluded
meaningful  discussion,  let  alone  agreement,  on  the  colonial  issue  at  the  Dum-
barton Oaks  Conversations  in  1944.  Through  March,  1945,  the  issue  was  further
occluded  by  debates  within  the  U.S.  Government  over  the  postwar  status  of
Pacific  islands  captured  from  the  Japanese:  in  general,  the  War  and  Navy
Departments  advocated  their  retention  under  U.S.  control  as  military  bases,
while  State  and  other  departments  advocated  an  international  trusteeship.

3. Decision  on  Indochina  Left  to  France

Secretary  of  State  Stettinius,  with  the  approval  of  President  Roosevelt,  issued
a  statement  on  April  3,  1945,  declaring  that,  as  a  result  of  international  dis-
cussions at  Yalta  on  the  concept  of  trusteeship,  the  United  States  felt  that  the
postwar  trusteeship  structure:


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  15

.  .  .  should  be  designed  to  permit  the  placing  under  it  of  the  terri-
tories mandated  after  the  last  war,  and  such  territories  taken  from  the
enemy  in  this  war  as  might  be  agreed  upon  at  a  later  date,  and  also  such
other  territories  as  might  be  voluntarily  placed  under  trusteeship.

Indochina  thus  seemed  relegated  to  French  volition.

Nonetheless,  as  of  President  Roosevelt's  death  on  April  12,  1945,  U.S.  policy
toward  the  colonial  possessions  of  its  allies,  and  toward  Indochina  in  particular,
was  in  disarray:

— The  British  remained  apprehensive  that  there  might  be  a  continued  U.S.
search  for  a  trusteeship  formula  which  might  impinge  on  the  Commonwealth.

— The  French  were  restive  over  continued  U.S.  refusal  to  provide  strategic
transport  for  their  forces,  resentful  over  the  paucity  of  U.S.  support  for  French
forces  in  Indochina,  and  deeply  suspicious  that  the  United  States — possibly  in
concert  with  the  Chinese — intended  to  block  their  regaining  control  of  Vietnam,
Laos  and  Cambodia.

B. TRUMAN  AND  THE  OCCUPATION  OF  INDOCHINA,  1945

Within  a  month  of  President  Truman's  entry  into  office,  the  French  raised  the
subject  of  Indochina  at  the  United  Nations  Conference  at  San  Francisco.  Secre-
tary of  State  Stettinius  reported  the  following  conversation  to  Washington:

.  .  .  Indo-China  came  up  in  a  recent  conversation  I  had  with  Bidault
and  Bonnet.  The  latter  remarked  that  the  French  Government  interprets
[Under  Secretary  of  State]  Welles'  statement  of  1942  concerning  the  restora-
tion of  French  sovereignty  over  the  French  Empire  as  including  Indo-
China,  the  press  continues  to  imply  that  a  special  status  will  be  reserved
for  this  colonial  area.  It  was  made  quite  clear  to  Bidault  that  the  record  I
is  entirely  innocent  of  any  official  statement  of  this  government  question-  1
ing,  even  by  implication,  French  sovereignty  over  Indo-China.  Certain  ele-  \
ments  of  American  public  opinion,  however,  condemned  French  govern-
mental policies  and  practices  in  Indo-China.  Bidault  seemed  relieved  and
has  no  doubt  cabled  Paris  that  he  received  renewed  assurances  of  our
recognition  of  French  sovereignty  over  that  area.

In  early  June  1945,  the  Department  of  State  instructed  the  United  States
Ambassador  to  China  on  the  deliberations  in  progress  within  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment and  its  discussions  with  allies  on  U.S.  policy  toward  Indochina.  He  was  in-
formed that  at  San  Francisco:

...  the  American  delegation  has  insisted  upon  the  necessity  of  provid-
ing for  a  progressive  measure  of  self-government  for  all  dependent  peoples
looking  toward  their  eventual  independence  or  incorporation  in  some  form
of  federation  according  to  circumstances  and  the  ability  of  the  peoples
to  assume  these  responsibilities.  Such  decisions  would  preclude  the  establish-
ment of  a  trusteeship  in  Indochina  except  with  the  consent  of  the  French
Government.  The  latter  seems  unlikely.  Nevertheless  it  is  the  President's
intention  at  some  appropriate  time  to  ask  that  the  French  Government
give  some  positive  indication  of  its  intentions  in  regard  to  the  establish-
ment of  civil  liberties  and  increasing  measures  of  self-government  in  Indo-
china before  formulating  further  declarations  of  policy  in  this  respect.


16 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

The  United  Nations  Charter  (June  26,  1945)  contained  a  "Declaration  Re-
garding Non-Self-Governing  Territories":

Article  73

Members  of  the  United  Nations  which  have  or  assume  responsibilities
for  the  administration  of  territories  whose  peoples  have  not  yet  attained
a  full  measure  of  self-government  recognize  the  principle  that  the  interests
of  the  inhabitants  of  these  territories  are  paramount,  and  accept  as  a
sacred  trust  the  obligation  to  promote  to  the  utmost,  within  the  system  of
international  peace  and  security  established  by  the  present  Charter,  the
well-being  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  territories,  and,  to  this  end:

a.  to  ensure,  with  due  respect  for  the  culture  of  the  peoples  con-
cerned, their  political,  economic,  social,  and  educational  advancement,
their  just  treatment,  and  their  protection  against  abuses;

b.  to  develop  self-government,  to  take  due  account  of  the  political
aspirations  of  the  peoples,  and  to  assist  them  in  the  progressive  develop-
ment of  their  free  political  institutions,  according  to  the  particular  cir-
cumstances of  each  territory  and  its  peoples  and  their  varying  stages  of
advancement;  .  .  .

Again,  however,  military  considerations  governed  U.S.  policy  in  Indochina.
President  Truman  replied  to  General  de  Gaulle's  repeated  offers  for  aid  in
Indochina  with  statements  to  the  effect  that  it  was  his  policy  to  leave  such  mat-
ters to  his  military  commanders.  At  the  Potsdam  Conference  (July,  1945),  the
Combined  Chiefs  of  Staff  decided  that  Indochina  south  of  latitude  16°  North
was  to  be  included  in  the  Southeast  Asia  Command  under  Admiral  Mountbatten,
Based  on  this  decision,  instructions  were  issued  that  Japanese  forces  located  north
of  that  line  would  surrender  to  Generalissimo  Chiang  Kai-shek,  and  those  to  the
south  to  Admiral  Lord  Mountbatten;  pursuant  to  these  instructions,  Chinese
forces  entered  Tonkin  in  September,  1945,  while  a  small  British  task  force  landed
at  Saigon.  Political  difficulties  materialized  almost  immediately,  for  while  the
Chinese  were  prepared  to  accept  the  Vietnamese  government  they  found  in  power
in  Hanoi,  the  British^refused  to  do  likewise  in  Saigon,  and  deferred  to  the  French
there  from  the  outset.

There  is  no  evidence  that  serious  concern  developed  in  Washington  at  the
swiftly  unfolding  events  in  Indochina.  In  mid-August,  Vietnamese  resistance
forces  of  the  Viet  Minh,  under  Ho  Chi  Minh,  had  seized  power  in  Hanoi  and
shortly  thereafter  demanded  and  received  the  abdication  of  the  Japanese  puppet,
Emperor  Bao  Dai.  On  V-J  Day,  September  2nd,  Ho  Chi  Minh  had  proclaimed
in  Hanoi  the  establishment  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV).  Jhe
DRV  ruled  as  the  only  civil  government  in  all  of  Vietnam  for  a  period  of  about
20  days.  On  23  September  1945,  with  the  knowledge  of  the  British  Commander
in  Saigon,  French  forces  overthrew  the  local  DRV  government,  and  declared
French  authority  restored  in  Cochinchina.  Guerrilla  war  began  around  Saigon.
Although  American  OSS  representatives  were  present  in  both  Hanoi  and  Saigon
and  ostensibly  supported  the  Viet  Minh,  the  United  States  took  no  official  posi-
tion regarding  either  the  DRV,  or  the  French  and  British  actions  in  South
Vietnam.  In  October,  1945,  the  United  States  stated  its  policy  in  the  following
terms :

US  has  no  thought  of  opposing  the  reestablishment  of  French  control  in
Indochina  and  no  official  statement  by  US  GOVT  has  questioned  even  by


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  17

implication  French  sovereignty  over  Indochina.  However,  it  is  not  the  policy
of  this  GOVT  to  assist  the  French  to  reestablish  their  control  over  Indo-
china by  force  and  the  willingness  of  the  US  to  see  French  control  reestab-
lished assumes  that  French  claim  to  have  the  support  of  the  population  of
Indochina  is  borne  out  by  future  events.

French  statements  to  the  U.S.  looked  for  an  early  end  to  the  hostilities,  and
spoke  reassuringly  of  reforms  and  liberality.  In  November,  Jean  Chauvel,  Secre-
tary-General to  the  French  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  told  the  U.S.  Ambas-
sador that :

When  the  trouble  with  the  Annamites  broke  out  de  Gaulle  had  been
urged  by  the  French  Mission  in  India  to  make  some  sort  of  policy  statement
announcing  France's  intention  to  adopt  a  far-reaching  progressive  policy
designed  to  give  the  native  population  much  greater  authority,  responsibility
and  representation  in  govt.  De  Gaulle  considered  the  idea  but  rejected  it
because  in  the  state  of  disorder  prevailing  in  Indochina  he  believed  that  no
such  policy  could  be  implemented  pending  restoration  of  French  authority
and  would  therefore  just  be  considered  by  everyone  as  "merely  more  fine
words."  Furthermore  de  Gaulle  and  the  Foreign  Minister  believe  that  the
present  situation  is  still  so  confused  and  they  have  so  little  information
really  reliable  on  the  overall  Indochina  picture  that  such  plans  and  thoughts
as  they  held  heretofore  may  have  to  be  very  thoroughly  revised  in  the  light
of  recent  developments.

Despite  the  fact  that  the  French  do  not  feel  that  they  can  as  yet  make
any  general  statements  outlining  specific  future  plans  for  Indochina,  Chau-
vel says  that  they  hope  "very  soon"  to  put  into  operation  in  certain  areas
programs  including  local  elections  which  will  be  designed  to  grant  much
greater  authority  and  greater  voice  in  affairs  to  the  natives.  This  he  said
would  be  a  much  better  indication  of  the  sincerity  of  French  intentions
than  any  policy  statement.  .  .  .  The  French  hope  soon  to  negotiate  an
agreement  with  [the  King  of  Cambodia]  which  will  result  in  the  granting
of  much  greater  responsibility  and  authority  to  the  Cambodians.  He  men-
tioned specifically  that  there  would  be  many  more  natives  integrated  into
the  local  administrative  services  and  it  was  also  hoped  that  local  elections
could  soon  be  held.  The  French  he  said  intend  to  follow  the  same  proce-
dure in  Laos  when  the  situation  permits  and  eventually  also  in  Annam  and
Tonkin.  When  order  is  restored  throughout  Indochina  and  agreements  have
been  reached  with  the  individual  states  Chauvel  said  the  French  intend  to
embody  the  results  of  these  separate  agreements  into  a  general  program
for  all  of  Indochina.

From  the  autumn  of  1945  through  the  autumn  of  1946,  the  United  States
received  a  series  of  communications  from  Ho  Chi  Minh  depicting  calamitous
conditions  in  Vietnam,  invoking  the  principles  proclaimed  in  the  Atlantic  Charter
and  in  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations,  and  pleading  for  U.S.  recognition  of
the  independence  of  the  DRV,  or — as  a  last  resort — trusteeship  for  Vietnam
under  the  United  Nations.  But  while  the  U.S.  took  no  action  on  Ho's  requests,  it
was  also  unwilling  to  aid  the  French.  On  January  15,  1946,  the  Secretary  of  War
was  advised  by  the  Department  of  State  that  it  was  contrary  to  U.S.  policy  to
"employ  American  flag  vessels  or  aircraft  to  transport  troops  of  any  nationality
to  or  from  the  Netherlands  East  Indies  or  French  Indochina,  nor  to  permit  use


18 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

of  such  craft  to  carry  arms,  ammunition  or  military  equipment  to  these  areas."
However,  the  British  arranged  for  the  transport  of  additional  French  troops  to
Indochina,  bilaterally  agreed  with  the  French  for  the  latter  to  assume  British
occupation  responsibilities,  and  signed  a  pact  on  9  October,  1945,  giving  "full
recognition  to  French  rights"  in  Indochina.  French  troops  began  arriving  in
Saigon  that  month,  and  subsequently  the  British  turned  over  to  them  some  800
U.S.  Lend-Lease  jeeps  and,  trucks.  President  Truman  approved  the  latter  trans-
action on  the  grounds  that  removing  the  equipment  would  be  impracticable.

The  fighting  between  the  French  and  the  Vietnamese  which  began  in  South
Vietnam  with  the  23  September,  1945,  French  coup  d'etat,  spread  from  Saigon
throughout  Cochinchina,  and  to  southern  Annam.  By  the  end  of  January,  1946,
it  was  wholly  a  French  affair,  for  by  that  time  the  British  withdrawal  was  com-
plete; on  4  March,  1946,  Admiral  Lord  Mountbatten  deactivated  Indochina  as
territory  under  the  Allied  Southeast  Asia  Command,  thereby  transferring  all  con-
trol to  French  authorities.  From  French  headquarters,  via  Radio  Saigon,  came

f  announcements  that  a  military  "mopping-up"  campaign  was  in  progress,  but
pacification  was  virtually  complete; "Burthese  reports  of  success  were  typically

A  interspersed  with  such  items  as  the  following:

20  March  1946:

Rebel  bands  are  still  (wreaking  destruction)  in  the  areas  south  of  Saigon.
These  bands  are  quite  large,  some  numbering  as  many  as  1,000  men.  Con-
centrations of  these  bands  are  to  be  found  ...  in  the  villages.  Some  have
turned  north  in  an  attempt  to  disrupt  (communications)  in  the  Camau
Peninsula,  northeast  of  Batri  and  in  the  general  area  south  of  (Nha  Trang).
In  the  area  south  of  Cholon  and  in  the  north  of  the  Plaine  des  Jenes  region,
several  bands  have  taken  refuge.  .  .  .

21  March  1946:

The  following  communique  was  issued  by  the  High  Commissioner  for
Indochina  this  morning:  "Rebel  activities  have  increased  in  the  Bien  Hoa
area,  on  both  banks  of  the  river  Dong  Nai.  A  French  convoy  has  been  at-
tacked on  the  road  between  Bien  Hoa  and  Tan  Uyen  where  a  land  mine  had
been  laid  by  the  rebels.

"In  the  (Baclo)  area,  northwest  of  Saigon,  a  number  of  pirates  have  been
captured  in  the  course  of  a  clean-up  raid.  Among  the  captured  men  are  five
Japanese  deserters.  The  dead  bodies  of  three  Japanese,  including  an  officer,
have  been  found  at  the  point  where  the  operation  was  carried  out.

"A  French  detachment  was  ambushed  at  (San  Jay),  south  Annam.  The
detachment,  nevertheless,  succeeded  in  carrying  out  its  mission.  Several
aggressions  by  rebel  parties  are  reported  along  the  coastal  road."

Violence  abated  in  South  Vietnam  somewhat  as  Franco-DRV  negotiations
proceeded  in  spring,  1946,  but  in  the  meantime,  French  forces  moved  into  further
confrontation  with  Vietnamese  "rebels"  in  Tonkin.  In  February,  1946,  a  French
task  force  prepared  to  force  landings  at  Haiphong,  but  was  forestalled  by  diplo-
matic maneuver.  A  Franco-Chinese  agreement  of  28  February  1946  provided
that  the  Chinese  would  turn  over  their  responsibilities  in  northern  Indochina  to
the  French  on  31  March  1946.

On  March  6,  1946,  a  French-DRV  accord  was  reached  in  the  following  terms:


1.  The  French  Government  recognizes  the  Vietnamese  Republic  as  a
Free  State  having  its  own  Government,  its  own  Parliament,  its  own  Army


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  19

and  its  own  Finances,  forming  part  of  the  Indochinese  Federation  and  of
,  the  French  Union.  In  that  which  concerns  the  reuniting  of  the  three  "Anna-
!  mite  Regions"  [Cochinchina,  Annam,  Tonkin]  the  French  Government
j  pledges  itself  to  ratify  the  decisions  taken  by  the  populations  consulted  by
)  referendum.

2.  The  Vietnamese  Government  declares  itself  ready  to  welcome  amicably
the  French  Army  when,  conforming  to  international  agreements,  it  relieves
the  Chinese  Troops.  A  Supplementary  Accord,  attached  to  the  present  Pre-
liminary Agreement,  will  estabhsh  the  means  by  which  the  relief  operations
will  be  carried  out.

3.  The  stipulations  formulated  above  will  immediately  enter  into  force.
Immediately  after  the  exchange  of  signatures,  each  of  the  High  Contracting
Parties  will  take  all  measures  necessary  to  stop  hostilities  in  the  field,  to
maintain  the  troops  in  their  respective  positions,  and  to  create  the  favorable
atmosphere  necessary  to  the  immediate  opening  of  friendly  and  sincere
negotiations.  These  negotiations  will  deal  particularly  with:

a.  diplomatic  relations  of  Viet-nam  with  Foreign  States

b.  the  future  law  of  Indochina

c.  French  interests,  economic  and  cultural,  in  Viet-nam.
Hanoi,  Saigon  or  Paris  may  be  chosen  as  the  seat  of  the  conference.

DONE  AT  HANOI,  the  6th  of  March  1946
Signed:  Sainteny

Signed:  Ho-chi  Minh
and  Vu  Hong  Khanh


French  forces  quickly  exercise  their  prerogative,  occupying  Hanoi  on  18  March
1946,  and  negotiations  opened  in  Dalat  in  April.

Hence,  as  of  April  10,  1946,  allied  occupation  in  Indochina  was  officially
over,  and  French  forces  were  positioned  in  all  of  Vietnam's  major  cities;  the
problems  of  U.S.  policy  toward  Vietnam  then  shifted  from  the  context  of  war-
time strategy  to  the  arena  of  the  U.S.  relationship  with  France.

II. U.S.  NEUTRALITY  IN  THE  FRANCO-VIET  MINH  WAR,  1946-1949

A. FAILURES  OF  NEGOTIATED  SETTLEMENT

The  return  of  the  French  to  Tonkin  in  March,  1946,  created  an  explosive  situa-
ation.  North  Vietnam,  a  traditionally  rice-deficit  area,  had  experienced  an  extraor-
dinarily bad  harvest  in  1945.  Severe  famine  was  scarcely  helped  by  the  concen-
tration of  armies  in  the  Red  River  Delta — Vietnamese  irregular  forces,  the  most
numerous  belonging  to  the  Viet  Minh;  some  150,000  Chinese;  and  then  the
French  Expeditionary  Corps.  The  people  were  not  only  hungry,  but  politically
restive;  the  popular  appetite  for  national  independence  had  been  thoroughly
whetted  by  the  Viet  Minh  and  the  formation  of  the  DRV.  While  feeling  against
all  foreign  occupiers  ran  high,  the  French  remained  the  primary  target  of  enmity.
But  the  March  6  Accord  deferred  a  reckoning,  serving  to  mollify  extremists  in
Tonkin,  and  to  dampen  guerrilla  operations  in  South  Vietnam.  The  accord  in  any
event  underwrote  peaceful  cooperation  between  France  and  the  DRV  in  North
Vietnam  for  eight  months.

Yet  the  March  6  Accord  constituted  an  admission  of  defeat  for  Ho  Chi  Minh,


20 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

because  his  policy  had  been  directed  toward  internationalizing  the  Indochina
problem.  Ho  made  repeated  overtures  to  the  United  States,  to  the  United  Nations,
and  to  China,  the  USSR,  and  the  U.K.  His  letters  presented  eloquent  appeals  for
U.S.  or  U.N.  intervention  in  Vietnam  on  the  grounds  of  the  principles  embodied
in  the  Atlantic  Charter,  the  U.N.  Charter,  and  on  humanitarian  grounds.  The  last
such  to  be  forvi^arded  to  the  U.S.  prior  to  the  Accord  of  6  March  1946,  is  sum-
marized in  the  following  telegram  from  an  American  diplomat  in  Hanoi,  received
in  Washington  27  February  1946:

Ho  Chi  Minh  handed  me  2  letters  addressed  to  President  of  USA,  China,
Russia,  and  Britain  identical  copies  of  which  were  stated  to  have  been  for-
warded to  other  governments  named.  In  2  letters  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  request
[sic]  USA  as  one  of  United  Nations  to  support  idea  of  Annamese  independ-
\  ence  according  to  Philippines  [sic]  example,  to  examine  the  case  of  the  An-
inamese,  and  to  take  steps  necessary  to  maintenance  of  world  peace  which
is  being  endangered  by  French  efforts  tp_reconqiier_Indochina.  He  asserts
that  Annamese  will  fight  until  United  Nations  interfere  in  support  of  An-
namese independence.  The  petition  addressed  to  major  United  Nations
contains:

* A.  Review  of  French  relations  with  Japanese  where  French  Indochina
allegedly  aided  Japs:

B.  Statement  of  establishment  on  2  September  1945  of  PENW  [sic]  Dem-
ocratic Republic  of  Viet  Minh:

C.  Summary  of  French  conquest  of  Cochin  China  begun  23  Sept  1945
and  still  incomplete:

D.  Outline  of  accomplishments  of  Annamese  Government  in  Tonkin
!  including  popular  elections,  abolition  of  undesirable  taxes,  expansion  of  edu-
l  cation  and  resumption  as  far  as  possible  of  normal  economic  activities :

E.  Request  to  4  powers :  ( 1 )  To  intervene  and  stop  the  war  in  Indochina
in  order  to  mediate  fair  settlement  and  (2)  to  bring  the  Indochinese  issue
before  the  United  Nations  organization.  The  petition  ends  with  statement
that  Annamese  ask  for  full  independence  in  fact  and  that  in  interim  while
awaiting  UNO  decision  the  Annamese  will  continue  to  fight  the  reestablish-

,ment  of  French  imperialism.  Letters  and  petition  will  be  transmitted  to
I  Department  soonest.

There  is  no  record  that  the  U.S.  encouraged  Ho  Chi  Minh  thus  to  submit  his
cause  to  the  U.S.,  beyond  the  O.S.S.  support  he  received  during  and  immediately
after  World  War  II;  nor  does  the  record  reflect  that  the  U.S.  responded  affirma-
tively to  Ho's  petitions.  Rather,  the  U.S.  Government  appears  to  have  adhered
uniformly  to  a  policy  of  looking  to  the_Freach  rather  than  to  yietnamese  Na-
tionalists for  constructive  steps  toward  Vietnamese  independence.  On  5  Decem-
ber, 1946,  after  the  November  incidents,  but  before  the  fighting  broke  out  in
earnest.  State  instructed  the  U.S.  diplomatic  representative  in  Hanoi  as  follows:

Assume  you  will  see  Ho  in  Hanoi  and  offer  following  summary  our
present  thinking  as  guide.

Keep  in  mind  Ho's  clear  record  as  agent  international  comrnunism,
absence  evidence  recantation  Moscow  affiliations,  confused  political  situa-
tion France  and  support  Ho  receiving  French  Communist  Party.  Least
desirable  eventuality  would  be  establishment  Communist-dominated  Mos-
cow-oriented state  Indochina  in  view  DEPT,  which  most  interested  INFO


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  21


v^strength  non-communist  elements  Vietnam.  Report  fully,  repeating  or  re-
questing DEPT  repeat  Paris.

Recent  occurrences  Tonkin  cause  deep  concern.  Consider  March  6  accord
and  modus  vivendi  as  result  peaceful  negotiation  provide  basis  setdement
outstanding  questions  between  France  and  Vietnam  and  impose  responsi-
bility both  sides  not  prejudice  future,  particularly  forthcoming  Fontaine-
bleau  Conference,  by  resort  force.  Unsettled  situation  such  as  pertains  cer-
tain to  offer  provocations  both  sides,  but  for  this  reason  conciliatory  patient
attitude  especially  necessary.  Intransigence  either  side  and  disposition  exploit
incidents  can  only  retard  economic  rehabilitation  Indochina  and  cause
indefinite  postponement  conditions  cooperation  France  and  Vietnam  which
both  agree  essential.

If'^Ho  takes  stand  non-implementation  promise  by  French  of  Cochinchina,
referendum  relieves  Vietnam  responsibility  compliance  with  agreements,
you  might  if  you  consider  advisable  raise  question  whether  he  believes
referendum  after  such  long  disorder  could  produce  worthwhile  result  and
whether  he  considers  compromise  on  status  Cochinchina  could  possibly  be
reached  through  negotiation.

May  say  American  people  have  welcomed  attainments  Indochinese  in
efforts  realize  praiseworthy  aspirations  greater  autonomy  in  framework
democratic  institutions  and  it  would  be  regrettable  should  this  interest  and
sympathy  be  imperilled  by  any  tendency  Vietnam  administration  force  issues
by  intransigence  and  violence.

May  inform  Ho  [U.S.  Ambassador  Paris]  discussing  situation  French
similar  frankness.  For  your  INFO,  [Foreign  Office]  in  DEC  3  conversation
stated  (1)  no  question  reconquest  Indochina  as  such  would  be  counter
French  public  opinion  and  probably  beyond  French  military  resources,  (2)
French  will  continue  base  policy  March  6  accord  and  modus  vivendi  and
make  every  effort  apply  them  through  negotiation  Vietnam,  (3)  French
would  resort  forceful  measures  only  on  restricted  scale  in  case  flagrant
violation  agreements  Vietnam,  (4)  d'Argenlieu's  usefulness  impaired  by  out-
spoken dislike  Vietnam  officials  and  replacement  perhaps  desirable,  (5)
French  Communists  embarrassed  in  pose  as  guardian  French  international
interests  by  barrage  telegraphic  appeals  from  Vietnam.  [Ambassador]  will
express  gratification  this  statement  French  policy  with  observation  imple-
mentation such  policy  should  go  far  obviate  any  danger  that  ( 1 )  Vietnamese
irreconcilables  and  extremists  might  be  in  position  make  capital  of  situation
(2)  Vietnamese  might  be  turned  irrevocably  against  West  and  toward  ide-
ologies and  affiliations  hostile  democracies  which  could  result^  perpetual
foment  Indochina  with  consequences  all  Southeast  Asia.  ~

Avoid  impression  US  Govt  making  formal  intervention  this  juncture.
Publicity  any  kind  would  be  unfortunate.

Paris  be  guided  foregoing.

Acheson,  Acting.

For  a  while,  the  French  seemed  genuinely  interested  in  pursuing  a  policy  based
on  the  March  6  Accord  and  the  modus  vivendi,  and  in  avoiding  a  test  of  arms
with  the  DRV.  If  there  were  contrary  utterances  from  some,  such  as  Admiral
d'Argenlieu,  the  High  Commissioner  of  Indo-China, — who  recorded  his  "amaze-
ment that  France  has  such  a  fine  expeditionary  corps  in  Indochina  and  yet  its
leaders  prefer  to  negotiate  rather  than  to  fight.  .  .  ." — there  were  many  such
as  General  Leclerc,  who  had  led  French  forces  into  Hanoi  on  18  March  1946,


22 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

I  and  promptly  called  on  Ho  Chi  Minh,  announcing  every  intention  of  honoring
[  the  March  6  Accord.  "At  the  present  time,"  he  said,  "there  is  no  question  of
I  imposing  ourselves  by  force  on  masses  who  desire  evolution  and  innovation."
The  French  Socialist  Party — the  dominant  political  party  in  France- — ^consistently
advocated  conciliation  during  1946.  In  December,  1946,  even  after  the  armed
incidents  in  November  between  French  and  DRV  armed  forces  in  North  Viet-
nam, Leon  Blum — who  had  become  Premier  of  France,  at  the  head  of  an  all-
Socialist  Cabinet — wrote  that  France  had  no  alternative  save  to  grant  the  Viet-
namese independence:

There  is  one  way  and  only  one  of  preserving  in  Indochina  the  prestige
of  our  civilization,  our  political  and  spiritual  influence,  and  also  those  of
our  material  interests  which  are  legitimate:  it  is  sincere  agreement  [with
Viet  Nam]  on  the  basis  of  independence.  .  .  .

The  Communists,  the  other  major  Leftist  party  in  France,  were  also  vocally
conciliatory;  but,  expectant  of  controlling  the  government,  if  not  alone  at  least
as  part  of  a  coalition,  they  tended  to  be  more  careful  than  the  Socialists  of  their

^  ability  to  sway  nationalist  sentiment.  In  July  of  1946,  UHumanite,  the  Com-
munist newspaper,  had  emphasized  that  the  Party  did  not  wish  France  to  be
reduced  to  "its  own  small  metropolitan  territory,"  but  warned  that  such  would

,  be  the  consequence  if  the  colonial  peoples  turned  against  France:

♦«  Are  we,  after  having  lost  Syria  and  Lebanon  yesteday,  to  Jose  Indo-

china tomorrow,  North  Africa  the  day  after?

In  the  National  Assembly  in  September,  1946,  a  Communist  deputy  had  declared
that:

The  Communists  are  as  much  as  the  next  person  for  the  greatness  of  the
country.  But  .  .  .  they  have  never  ceased  to  affirm  that  the  French  Union
.  .  .  can  only  be  founded  on  the  confident,  fraternal,  and  above  all,  demo-
cratic collaboration  of  all  the  peoples  and  races  who  compose  it.  .  .  .

However,  Ho  Chi  Minh  was  unable  to  capitalize  upon  this  connection  with  the
French  Left  (Ho  had  been  one  of  the  founding  members  of  the  French  Com-
munist Party  in  the  early  1920's)  to  turn  the  expressed  convictions  of  eilher  the
Socialists  or  the  Communists  to  the  advantage  of  the  DRV.  The  Communists  were
not  prepared  to  press  the  case  for  the  Vietnamese  at  the  cost  of  votes  in  France.
The  Socialists  in  power  paid  only  lip  service  to  conciliation,  and  allowed  the  more
militant  colonialists,  especially  those  in  Vietnam,  to  set  France's  policy  in  Indo-
china; thus.  Admiral  d'Argenlieu,  not  General  Leclerc,  spoke  for  the  French
Government.

In  mid-December,  1946,  as  soon  as  Blum  took  office,  Ho  sent  him  a  telegram
with  proposals  for  easing  tension  in  Vietnam,  but  the  message  did  not  reach
Paris  until  December  26.  By  that  time  the  flashpoint  had  been  passed.  In  Hanoi,
on  19  December  1946,  Vietnamese  troops,  after  several  days  of  mounting  ani-
mosity punctuated  with  violence,  cut  off  the  city's  water  and  electricity,  and
attacked  French  posts  using  small  arms,  mortar  and  artillery.  The  issue  of  who
was  the  aggressor  has  never  been  resolved.  The  fighting  flared  across  North  Viet-
nam, and  two  days  later,  the  guerrilla  war  in  South  Vietnam  quickened  pace.


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  23

The  French  responded  to  the  initial  attacks  with  an  occasional  savagery  which
rendered  increasingly  remote  restoration  of  status  quo  ante.

On  23  December  1946,  Premier  Leon  Blum  addressed  the  National  Assem-
bly on  the  Indochina  crisis.  His  speech  was  characteristically  principled,  and
characteristically  ambiguous:  he  talked  peace,  but  endorsed  militant  French
officials  in  Vietnam.  Although  he  declared  that  "the  old  colonial  system  founded
on  conquest  and  maintained  by  constraint,  which  tended  toward  exploitation
of  conquered  lands  and  peoples  is  finished  today,"  he  also  stated  that:

We  have  been  obliged  to  deal  with  violence.  The  men  who  are  fighting  out
there,  the  French  soldiers  and  the  friendly  populations,  may  count  unre-
servedly on  the  vigilance  and  resolution  of  the  government.

It  was  our  common  task  to  try  everything  to  spare  the  blood  of  our  chil-
dren— and  also  the  blood  that  is  not  ours,  but  which  is  blood  all  the  same,
that  of  a  people  whose  right  to  political  liberty  we  recognized  ten  months
ago,  and  who  should  keep  their  place  in  the  union  of  peoples  federated
around  France.  .  .  .

Before  all,  order  must  be  reestablished,  peaceful  order  which  is  necessarily
the  basis  for  the  execution  of  contracts.

Premier  Blum  was  succeeded  within  a  week  of  his  speech  by  the  first  govern-
ment of  the  Fourth  Republic  under  Paul  Ramadier.  France  sent  three  emissaries
to  Vietnam  at  this  juncture:  Admiral  d'Argenlieu,  General  Leclerc,  and  the  So-
cialist Minister  of  Overseas  France,  Marius  Moutet.  Admiral  d'Argenlieu  be-
came the  High  Commissioner  of  Indochina,  and  accused  the  Vietnamese  of  break-
ing faith  with  France.  He  stated  emphatically  that  France  intended  to  preserve
in  Indochina :

.  .  .  the  maintenance  and  development  of  its  present  influence  and  of
its  economic  interests,  the  protection  of  ethiii(^rninorities  with  which  it  is
entrusted,  the  care  of  assuring  the  security  of  strategic  bases  within  the
framework  of  defense  of  the  Federation  and  the  French  Union.  .  .  .

France  does  not  intend  in  the  present  state  of  evolution  of  the  Indochi-
nese  people  to  give  them  unconditional  and  total  independence,  which  would
only  be  a  fiction  gravely  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  two  parties.

The  other  two  representatives  of  France  were  dispatched  on  fact-finding  mis-
sions. Their  reports  contained  diametrically  opposing  policy  recommendations.
General  Leclerc  wrote :

In  1947  France  will  no  longer  put  down  by  force  a  grouping  of  24,000,000
inhabitants  which  is  assuming  unity  and  in  which  there  exists  a  xenophobic
and  perhaps  a  national  ideal.  .  .  .

The  capital  problem  from  now  on  is  political.  It  is  a  question  of  coming
to  terms  with  an  awakening  xenophobic  nationalism,  channeling  it  in  order
to  safeguard,  at  least  in  part,  the  rights  of  France.

The  General  had  been  sent  to  examine  the  military  situation,  and  returned
recommending  a  political  solution.  The  Socialist  Marius  Moutet  had  been  sent
to  inquire  into  the  political  prospects,  and  returned  with  the  conclusion  that  only
a  military  solution  was  promising.  Like  Admiral  d'Argenlieu,  Moutet  believed
that  there  could  be  no  negotiations  with  Ho  Chi  Minh.  He  wrote  of  the  "cruel


24 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

disillusionment  of  agreements  that  could  not  be  put  into  effect  .  .  .  and  he
declared  that :

We  can  no  longer  speak  of  a  free  agreement  between  France  and  Viet-
nam. .  .  .

f  Before  any  negotiations  today,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  military  decision.
.  I  am  sorry,  but  one  cannot  commit  such  madness  as  the  Vietnamese  have
(  done  with  impunity.

It  was  the  politician's  ideas,  rather  than  the  general's,  which  prevailed  in  Paris.
Premier  Ramadier — himself  a  Socialist — spoke  of  peace  in  Vietnam,  and  an-
nounced that  his  government  favored  independence  and  unity  for  Vietnam :

Independence  within  the  French  Union  [and]  union  of  the  three  Annamese
countries,  if  the  Annamese  people  desire  it.

At  the  same  time,  however,  his  government  permitted  Admiral  d'Argenlieu  to
launch  a  military  campaign  of  major  proportions  and  punitive  intent.

Very  early  in  the  war,  the  French  raised  the  spectre  of  Communist  conspiracy
in  Vietnam.  Admiral  d'Argenlieu  in  Saigon  called  for  an  internationally  concerted
policy  to  array  the  Western  powers  against  the  expansion  of  communism  in
Asia,  beginning  with  Vietnam.  In  the  National  Assembly  debated  in  March,  1947,
a  Rightist  deputy  introduced  the  charge  that  the  violence  in  Vietnam  had  been
directed  from  Moscow:

Nationalism  in  Indochina  is  a  means,  the  end  is  Soviet  imperialism.

Neither  the  government  nor  the  people  of  France  heeded  General  Leclerc's  state-
ment of  January,  1947:

Anti-communism  will  be  a  useless  tool  as  long  as  the  problem  of  national-
ism remains  unsoTvedT'

Ho  Chi  Minh,  for  his  part,  issued  repeated  appeals  to  France  for  peace,  even
offering  to  withdraw  personally:

When  France  recognizes  the  independence  and  unity  of  Vietnam,  we  will
retire  to  our  village,  for  we  are  not  ambitious  for  power  or  honor.

In  February,  1947,  the  French  offered  terms  to  Ho  tantamount  to  unconditional
surrender.  Ho  flatly  rejected  these,  asking  the  French  representative,  "If  you
were  in  my  place,  would  you  accept  them?  ...  In  the  French  Union  there  is
no  place  for  cowards.  If  I  accepted  their  conditions  I  should  be  one."  On  1  March
1947,  Ho  appealed  again  to  the  French  government  and  the  French  people:

Once  again,  we  declare  solemnly  that  the  Vietnamese  people  desire  only
unity  and  independence  in  the  French  Union,  and  we  pledge  ourselves  to
respect  French  economic  and  cultural  interests.  ...  If  France  would  but
say  the  word  to  cease  hostility  immediately,  so  many  lives  and  so  much
property  would  be  saved  and  friendship  and  confidence  would  be  regained.

But  the  French  displayed  little  interest  in  negotiations.  Premier  Ramadier  stated
in  March,  1947,  that:


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  25

We  must  protect  the  life  and  possessions  of  Frenchmen,  of  foreigners,  of
our  Indochinese  friends  who  have  confidence  in  French  liberty.  It  is  neces-
sary that  we  disengage  our  garrisons,  re-establish  essential  communications,
assure  the  safety  of  populations  which  have  taken  refuge  with  us.  That  we
have  done.

Ramadier  and  his  ministers  spoke  repeatedly  in  the  spring  of  1947  of  an  immi-
nent end  to  the  "military  phase"  of  the  crisis,  and  of  the  beginning  of  a  "con-
structive phase,"  in  which  presumably  economic  and  political  assistance  would
supplant  the  military  instrument;  but  in  what  was  to  become  a  pattern  of  ex-
pectation and  frustration,  the  Fourth  Republic  discovered  that  its  military  forces
were  incapable  of  controlling  even  the  principal  lines  of  communication  in
Vietnam,  and  that  the  military  solution  severely  taxed  the  full  resources  of  the
French  Union.  In  March,  1947  an  additional  division  of  troops  for  the  French
Expeditionary  Corps,  dispatched  to  Vietnam  per  General  Leclerc's  recommenda-
tion, had  to  be  diverted  en  route  to  quell  an  insurgency  in  Madagascar.

By  the  summer  of  1947,  the  French  Government  was  aware  that  the  situation
in  Indochina  was  at  an  impasse.  Having  failed  in  its  attempt  to  force  a  military
decision,  it  turned  to  a  poHtical  solution,  as  suggested  by  General  Leclerc.  But
again  the  ideas  of  Admiral  d'Argenlieu  weighed  heavily.  In  January,  1947,
d'Argenlieu  wrote  that:

If  we  examine  the  problem  basically,  we  are  led  to  inquire  whether  the
political  form  unquestionably  capable  of  benefiting  from  the  political  pres-
tige of  legitimacy  is  not  the  traditional  monarchic  institution,  the  very  one
that  existed  before  the  Japanese  surrender.  .  .  .  The  return  of  the  Emperor
[Bao  Dai]  would  probably  reassure  all  those  who,  having  opposed  the  Viet
Minh,  fear  they  will  be  accused  of  treason.

It  was  withJBao  Dai,  not  Ho  Chi  Minh,  that  the  French  elected  to  negotiate
for  a  political  settlement_with  Vietnamese  Nationalists.

French  emissaries  approached  Bao  Dai  with  terms  not  unlike  those  Ho  Chi
Minh  had  negotiated  on  6  March  1946:  unity  and  independence  within  the
French  Union,  provided  Bao  Dai  formed  a  government  which  would  furnish
a  clear  alternative  to  Ho  Chi  Minh's  DRV.  With  French  encouragement,  a
group  of  Vietnamese  Nationalists  formed  a  political  party  advocating  the  in-
stallation of  Bao  Dai  at  the  head  of  a  non-Viet  Minh  Vietnamese  regime.  Bao
Dai  was  at  first  evasive  and  skeptical,  but  was  eventually  convinced  that  the
French  situation  in  Indochina  was  sufficiently  desperate  that  they  would  have
to  honor  commitments  they  made  to  him.  Bao  Dai  also  seems  to  have  believed ;
that  he  could  attract  American  support  and  material  aid — a  view  which  may
have  stemmed  in  part  from  a  1947  Life  magazine  article  by  William  C.  Bullitt,
the  influential  former  U.S.  Ambassador  to  France,  endorsing  Bao  Dai  as  a  solu-
tion to  France's  dilemma.

France  then  proceeded  to  contract  with  Bao  Dai  a  series  of  agreements,  each
of  which  ostensibly  brought  Bao  Dai  closer  to  genuine  autonomy  for  Vietnam.
It  was  not,  however,  until  February,  1950,  that  the  French  National  Assembly
acceded  to  political  independence  and  unification  for  Vietnam.  Chronicled  below
are  the  principal  steps  by  which  France  failed  on  the  one  hand  to  reach  an
accommodation  with  Ho  Chi  Minh,  and  on  the  other  hand  erected  the  "Bao
Dai  solution"  in  its  stead.


26 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

PRINCIPAL  EVENTS
FRANCE-VIETNAM  RELATIONS,


1946-1950


1 .  Led  to  French
occupation  of
Tonkin  Delta.

2.  No  significant  step
taken  by  France
toward  DRV
autonomy.


Description  Outcome

Accord  of  6  March  1946

Agreement  signed  by  Ho  Chi  Minh  with
French  provides  that:

1.  France  recognizes  DRV  as :  "Free
State  .  .  .  forming  part  of  the  Indo-
china Federation  and  the  French
Union."

2.  DRV  welcomes  French  Army  into
Tonkin  for  5  years.

3.  Further  negotiations  to  spell  out  details
for  DRV  independence.

First  Dalat  Conference,  19  April-11  May  1946

French  and  DRV  delegates  attempt  to  1 .  Overshadowed  by

negotiate  differences,  but  are  able  to  continuing  guer-

enact  only  minor  agreements  on  cultural  rill  a  war  in

and  educational  matters.  ,  Cochinchina.

2.  A  commission
was  set  up  to
arrange  an  armis-
tice; futile.

1  June  1946

1 .  Touched  off  new
wave  of  guerrilla
war  in  South
Vietnam.

2.  Possibility  of
divided  Vietnam
pressured  DRV  in
negotiations  with

.  . -,  France;  stiffened

[Material  missing]  DRV  attitudes.

6.  Referendum  to  decide  Cochinchina's
relationship  to  DRV.

7.  France-DRV  talks  to  resume  in
January,  1947.

'Incidents"'  at  Haiphong,  Langson,  and  Tourane,  November,  1946

Local  disputes  lead  to  clashes  between  1.  French  seized

French  and  DRV  troops.


Establishment  of  Provisional  Government  of  Cochinchina,
French  announce  formation  of  an  inde-
pendent Cochinchina  within  the  Indo-
china Federation  and  the  French  Union.


2.


unilateral  control
over  Haiphong
and  Langson.
French  reinforce-
ments landed  at
Tourane  in  viola-
tion of  March  6
Accord.


(Continued  on  next  page)


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  27

Hanoi  Incident,  19  December  1946

Large-scale  conflict  begins,  spreads  Complete  breakdown

throughout  Vietnam.  of  relations  between

France  and  DRV

Declaration  of  the  Freedom  of  Cochinchina,  4  February  1947


French  High  Commissioner  extends
powers  of  the  Saigon  Government  to
include:

1.  Legislative  and  executive  action
on  all  internal  affairs.

2.  Universal  suffrage  for  election  of
legislature.


First  Ha  Long  Bay  Agreement,  7  December  1947

1.  Bao  Dai  associates  himself  with
French-sponsored  nationalist  move-
ment.

2.  French  promise  in  vague  terms
national  independence  for  Vietnam.


Second  Ha  Long  Bay  Agreement,  5  June  1948

1 .  France  solemnly  recognizes  the
independence  of  Vietnam  within
the  French  Union.

2.  Bao  Dai  reassociates  himself  with
the  attempt  to  form  a  nationalist
government.


Ely  see  Agreement,  8  March  1949

In  an  exchange  of  letters  between  Bao
Dai  and  President  Auriol,  France:

1 .  Reconfirms  Vietnam's  status  as  an
independent  Associated  State
within  the  French  Union.

2.  Agrees  to  unifying  Vietnam,  and
placing  it  under  Vietnamese  admin-
istration, under  terms  to  be  negotiated
subsequently.


1 .  President  Le  Van
Hoach  of  Cochin-
china  admitted
Viet  Minh  con-
trolled greater
part  of  Cochin-
china.

2.  Elections  re-
peatedly post-
poned because  of
civil  disorder.

1 .  French  took  no
action  toward  re-
leasing their  con-
trol in  Vietnam.

2.  Bao  Dai  withdrew
to  Europe.

3.  Agreement  con-
demned by  non-
Viet  Minh  [words
missing]

1 .  France  trans-
ferred no  signifi-
cant political
power  to  Viet-
namese.

2.  Led  only  to  fur-
ther negotiations
between  Bao  Dai
and  France.


French  economic
and  political
primacy  remained
unchanged,  even
in  principle.
Cochinchina  for-
mally merged  with
Annam  and  Ton-
kin in  State  of


(Continued  on  next  page)


28 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Ely  see  Agreement,  8  March  1949  (continued)

3. '  Retains  control  of  Vietnamese  armed  Vietnam  in  June,

I  forces  and  foreign  relations.  1949.

3.  Plans  for  internal
administrative
transfer  an-
nounced 30
December  1949.

4.  Practical  matters
of  transfer  of
administrative
functions  in  prin-
cipal external
affairs  were  de-
ferred to  Pau
Negotiations  of
1950.

Recognition  of  the  Independence  of  the  State  of  Vietnam,  14  June  1949


French  High  Commissioner  for  Indo-
china and  Emperor  Bao  Dai  exchange
letters  in  Saigon  formalizing  Elysee
Agreement.


French  Ratification  of  the  Independence  of  Vietnam
Following  National  Assembly  approval
(29  January  1950),  France  announces
ratification  of  the  status  for  Vietnam,
[words  missing]


1 .  Cochinchina  gov-
ernment tendered
resignation  to  Bao
Dai,  merging  in
principle  with
new  State  of
Vietnam.

February  1950

1 .  U.S.  recognized
State  of  Vietnam
(3  February
1950).

2.  Details  of  trans-
fer of  powers
strained  Pau
Negotiations

( M  arch-Novem-
ber, 1950).


B. U.S.  POLICY  TOWARD  THE  CONFLICT,  1947-1949

The  U.S.  manifested  increasing  concern  over  the  conflict  in  Indochina,  but
through  1949  American  policy  continued  to  regard  the  war  as  fundamentally  a
matter  for  French  resolution.  It  is  clear  on  the  record  that  American  policy-
makers of  the  day  perceived  the  vacuity  of  French  policies  in  1946  and  1947.
j  The  U.S.,  in  its  representations  to  France,  consistently  deplored  the  prospect  of
I  protracted  war  in  Vietnam,  and  urged  meaningful  concessions  to  Vietnamese
j  nationalism.  However,  the  U.S.  always  stopped  short  of  endorsing  Ho  Chi  Minh,
I  deterred  by  Ho's  history  of  communist  affiliation.  Accordingly,  U.S.  policy  gravi-
•  tated  with  that  of  France  toward  the  Bao  Dai  solution.  At  no  point  was  the  U.S.
prepared  to  adopt  an  openly  interventionist  course.  To  have  done  so  would  have
clashed  with  the  expressed  British  view  that  Indochina  was  an  exclusively  French
concern,  and  played  into  the  hands  of  France's  extremist  political  parties  of  both


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  29

the  Right  and  the  Left.  The  U.S.  was  particularly  apprehensive  lest  by  inter-
vening it  strengthen  the  political  position  of  French  Comn  unists.  Moreover,  in
1946  and  1947,  France  and  Britain  were  moving  toward  an  anti-Soviet  alliance
in  Europe,  and  the  U.S.  was  reluctant  to  press  a  potentially  divisive  policy.  Com-
pared with  European  recovery,  and  escape  from  communist  domination,  the  U.S.
considered  the]^f ate  qf_  Vietnamese  nationalism  relatively  insignificant.  Further,
the  dispute  in  1946  and  1945  over~tHe"  Dutch  possession  in  Indonesia  had  fur-
nished a  precedent:  there  the  U.S.  had  moved  cautiously,  and  only  after  long
delays,  to  internationalize  the  conflict.  Extensive  American  and  British  invest-
ments in  Indonesia,  moreover,  afforded  common  ground  for  intervention.  No
similar  rationale  or  commonality  existed  for  intervention  in  Indochina,  since
Indochina  was  almost  exclusively  a  French  economic  preserve,  and  a  political
morass  which  the  U.K.  was  manifestly  interested  in  avoiding.

The  resultant  U.S.  policy  has  most  often  been  termed  "neutrality."  It  was,
however,  also  consistent  with  the  policy  of  deferring  to  French  volition  an-
nounced by  President  Roosevelt's  Secretary  of  State  on  3  April  1945.  It  was  a
policy  characterized  by  the  same  indecision  that  had  marked  U.S.  wartime  policy.
It  was,  moreover,  a  policy  formulated  with  an  undertone  of  indifference:  at  the
time,  Indochina  appeared  to  be  one  region  in  which  the  U.S.  might  enjoy  the
luxury  of  abstention.

When  open  warfare  broke  out  between  the  DRV  and  France  in  December,
1946,  John  Carter  Vincent,  Director  of  the  Office  of  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  in  a
memorandum  to  Under  Secretary  Acheson  of  23  December  1946,  recommended
that  the  latter  call  in  the  French  Ambassador  to  highlight  inherent  dangers.  The
memorandum  included  this  acute  analysis:

Although  the  French  in  Indochina  have  made  far-reaching  paper-conces-
sions to  the  Vietnamese  desire  for  autonomy,  French  actions  on  the  scene
have  been  directed  toward  whittling  down  the  powers  and  the  territorial
extent  of  the  Vietnam  "free  state."  This  process  the  Vietnamese  have  con-
tinued to  resist.  At  the  same  time,  the  French  themselves  admit  that  they
lack  the  military  strength  to  reconquer  the  country.  In  brief,  with  inadequate
forces,  with  public  opinion  sharply  at  odds,  with  a  government  rendered
largely  ineffective  through  internal  division,  the  French  have  tried  to  ac-
complish in  Indochina  what  a  strong  and  united  Britain  has  found  it  unwise
to  attempt  in  Burma.  Given  the  present  elements  in  the  situation,  guerrilla
warfare  may  continue  indefinitely.

Secretary  Acheson  acted  on  Mr.  Vincent's  suggestion,  and  expressed  to  the
Ambassador  views  summarized  as  follows :


We  had  anticipated  such  a  situation  developing  in  November  and  events
have  confirmed  our  fears.  While  we  have  no  wish  to  offer  to  mediate  under
present  conditions  we  do  want  the  French  GOVT  to  know  that  we  are
ready  and  willing  to  do  anything  which  it  might  consider  helpful  in  the
circumstances.  We  have  been  gratified  to  learn  of  Moutet's  mission  and  have
confidence  in  his  moderation  and  broad  viewpoint.  We  believe  however  that
the  situation  is  highly  inflammatory  and  if  present  unsettled  conditions  con-
tinue, there  is  a  possibility  that  other  powers  might  attempt  to  bring  the
matter  up  before  the  Security  Council.  If  this  happens,  as  in  the  case  of
Indonesia,  the  question  will  arise  whether  the  matter  is  one  of  purely  French
internal  concern  or  a  situation  likely  to  disturb  the  peace.  Other  powers


30 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

might  likewise  attempt  some  form  of  intervention  as  has  been  suggested  in
the  Chinese  pn  ss.  We  would  be  opposed  to  such  steps,  but  from  every
point  of  view  Vi  seems  important  that  the  question  be  settled  as  soon  as
possible.  Mr.  Acheson  added  that  he  wondered  whether  the  French  would
attempt  to  reconquer  the  country  through  military  force  which  was  a  step
that  the  British  had  found  unwise  to  attempt  in  Burma.

On  8  January,  1947,  the  Department  of  State  instructed  the  American  Ambas-
sador in  Paris  that  the  U.S.  would  approve  sale  of  arms  and  armaments  to
France  "except  in  cases  which  appear  to  relate  to  Indochina."  On  the  same  date,
8  January  1947,  the  French  conveyed  to  the  Department  of  State  a  message  that:

...  the  French  Government  appreciated  the  understanding  attitude  that
Mr.  Acheson  had  shown  in  discussing  the  problem  of  Indochina;  that  it  had
taken  note  of  Mr.  Acheson's  offer  of  "good  offices"  and  appreciated  the  spirit
in  which  the  offer  was  made;  and  that  the  French  Government  did  not  feel
that  it  could  avail  itself  of  our  offer  but  must  continue  to  handle  the  situa-
tion single-handedly  along  the  lines  stated  by  Moutet.  [The  emissary]  went
on  to  say  that  the  principal  objective  of  the  French  military  was  to  restore
order  and  reopen  communications.  He  said  that  after^  this  was  done  the
French  Government  would  be  prepared  to  discuss  matters  with  the  Viet-
namese. He  said  that  the  French  Government  had  every  intention  of  living
up  to  the  agreement  of  last  March  6  and  the  modus  vivendi  of  September
15,  once  order  was  restored.  [He  was]  asked  .  .  .  whether  he  thought  the
French  military  could  restore  order  within  any  foreseeable  future  time.  He
\  seemed  to  think,  without  much  evidence  of  conviction,  that  they  could.

There  then  ensued  an  interesting  exchange  between  the  U.S.  official  and  the
French  representative  in  which  the  Frenchman  sketched  a  claim  of  American
culpability  for  the  war:

Speaking  personally,  I  told  him  that  I  thought  there  was  one  flaw  in  the
French  approach  to  the  problem  worth  mentioning.  I  had  in  mind  an  ap-
parent assumption  by  the  French  that  there  was  an  equality  of  responsibility
as  between  the  French  and  the  Vietnamese.  I  said  that  this  did  not  seem  to
me  to  be  the  case;  that  the  responsibility  of  France  as  a  world  power  to
achieve  a  solution  of  the  problem  was  far  greater  than  that  of  the  Viet-
namese; and  that  the  situation  was  not  one  which  could  be  localized  as  a
purely  French- Vietnamese  one  but  might  affect  adversely  conditions  through-
out Southeast  Asia.

[The  emissary]  quickly  substituted  the  word  "authority"  for  "responsibil-
ity" and  said  that  the  French  were  now  faced  with  the  problem  of  reassert-
ing their  authority  and  that  we  must  share  the  responsibility  for  their  delay
in  doing  so  because  we  had  not  acceded  to  French  requests  in  the  autumn
of  1 945  for  material  assistance.

Early  in  February,  the  U.S.  Ambassador  in  Paris  was  instructed  to  reassure
Premier  Ramadier  of  the  "very  friendliest  feelings"  of  the  U.S.  toward  France
and  its  interest  in  supporting  France's  recovering  economic,  political  and  military
strength :

In  spite  any  misunderstanding  which  might  have  arisen  in  minds  French
in  regard  to  our  position  concerning  Indochina  they  must  appreciate  that  we


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  31

have  fully  recognized  France's  sovereign  position  in  that  area  and  we  do  not
wish  to  have  it  appear  that  we  are  in  any  way  endeavoring  undermine  that
position,  and  French  should  know  it  is  our  desire  to  be  helpful  and  we  stand
ready  assist  any  appropriate  way  we  can  to  find  solution  for  Indochinese
problem.  At  same  time  we  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  fact  that  there  are  two
sides  this  problem  and  that  our  reports  indicate  both  a  lack  French  under-
standing of  other  side  (more  in  Saigon  than  in  Paris)  and  continued  exist-
ence dangerously  outmoded  colonial  outlook  and  methods  in  area.  Further-
more, there  is  no  escape  from  fact  that  trend  of  times  is  to  effect  that  colo-
nial empires  in  XIX  Century  sense  are  rapidly  becoming  thing  of  past.
Action  Brit  in  India  and  Burma  and  Dutch  in  Indonesia  are  outstanding
examples  this  trend,  and  French  themselves  took  cognizance  of  it  both  in
new  Constitution  and  in  their  agreements  with  Vietnam.  On  other  hand  we
do  not  lose  sight  fact  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  has  direct  Communist  connections
and  it  should  be  obvious  that  we  are  not  interested  in  seeing  colonial  empire
administrations  supplanted  by  philosophy  and  political  organizations  ema-
nating from  and  controlled  by  Kremlin.  .  .  .

Frankly  we  have  no  solution  of  problem  to  suggest.  It  is  basically  matter
for  two  parties  to  work  out  themselves  and  from  your  reports  and  those
from  Indochina  we  are  led  to  feel  that  both  parties  have  endeavored  to
keep  door  open  to  a  settlement.  We  appreciate  fact  that  Vietnam  started
present  fighting  in  Indochina  on  December  19  and  that  this  action  has  made
it  more  difficult  for  French  to  adopt  a  position  of  generosity  and  concilia-
tion. Nevertheless  we  hope  that  French  will  find  it  possible  to  be  more  than
generous  in  trying  to  find  a  solution.

Thus,  the  U.S.  chose  to  remain  outside  the  conflict;  the  announced  U.S.  posi-
tion was,  in  the  words  of  Secretary  of  State  George  C.  Marshall,  to  hope  that
"a  pacific  basis  of  adjustment  of  the  difficulties  could  be  found."  Events  con-
spired against  this  hope,  however,  and  as  the  fighting  continued,  the  prospect  of
a.  Moscow-controlled  state  in  Vietnam  continued  to  draw  the  U.S.  nearer  to  in-
volvementT  Orf  May  1947,  the  Department  of  State  furnished  the  following
guidance  to  U.S.  diplomats  in  Paris,  Saigon,  and  Hanoi:

Key  our  position  is  our  awareness  that  in  respect  developments  affecting
position  Western  democratic  powers  in  southern  Asia,  we  essentially  in  same
boat  as  French,  also  as  British  and  Dutch.  We  cannot  conceive  setbacks  to
long-range  interests  France  which  would  not  also  be  setbacks  our  own.  Con-
versely we  should  regard  close  association  France  and  members  French
Union  as  not  only  to  advantage  peoples  concerned,  but  indirectly  our  own.

In  our  view,  southern  Asia  in  critical  phase  its  history  with  seven  new
nations  in  process  achieving  or  struggling  independence  or  autonomy.  These
nations  include  quarter  inhabitants  world  and  their  future  course,  owing
sheer  weight  populations,  resources  they  command,  and  strategic  location,
will  be  momentous  factor  world  stability.  Following  relaxation  European
controls,  internal  racial,  religious,  and  national  differences  could  plunge  new
nations  into  violent  discord,  or  already  apparent  anti-Western  Pan-Asiatic
tendencies  could  become  dominant  political  force,  or  Communists  could  cap-
ture control.  We  consider  as  best  safeguard  against  these  eventualities  a
continued  close  association  between  newly-autonomous  peoples  and  powers
which  have  long  been  responsible  their  welfare.  In  particular  we  recognize
Vietnamese  will  for  indefinite  period  require  French  material  and  technical


32 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

>  assistance  and  enlightened  political  guidance  which  can  be  provided  only  by
nation  steeped  like  France  in  democratic  tradition  and  confirmed  in  respect
human  liberties  and  worth  individual.

We  equally  convinced,  however,  such  association  must  be  voluntary  to  be
lasting  and  achieve  results,  and  that  protraction  present  situation  Indochina
can  only  destroy  basic  voluntary  cooperation,  leave  legacy  permanent  bitter-
ness, and  irrevocably  alienate  Vietnamese  from  France  and  those  values  rep-
resented by  France  and  other  Western  democracies.

While  fully  appreciating  difficulties  French  position  this  conflict,  we  feel
there  is  danger  in  any  arrangement  which  might  provide  Vietnamese  oppor-
tunity compare  unfavorably  their  own  position  and  that  of  other  peoples
southern  Asia  who  have  made  tremendous  strides  toward  autonomy  since
war.

While  we  are  still  ready  and  willing  do  anything  we  can  which  might  be
considered  helpful,  French  will  understand  we  not  attempting  come  forward
with  any  solution  our  own  or  intervene  in  situation.  However,  they  will  also
understand  we  inescapably  concerned  with  situation  Far  East  generally,  upon
which  developments  Indochina  likely  have  profound  effect.  .  .  .

For  your  INFO,  evidence  that  French  Communists  are  being  directed
accelerate  their  agitation  French  colonies  even  extent  lose  much  popular  sup-
port France  (URTEL  1719  Apr  25)  may  be  indication  Kremlin  prepared
sacrifice  temporary  gains  with  40  million  French  to  long  range  colonial
strategy  with  600  million  dependent  people,  which  lends  great  urgency  fore-
going views.  .  .  .  DEPT  much  concerned  lest  French  efforts  find  QUOTE
true  representatives  Vietnam  UNQUOTE  with  whom  negotiate  result  crea-
tion impotent  puppet  GOVT  along  lines  Cochinchina  regime,  or  that  restora-
tion Baodai  [sic]  may  be  attempted,  implying  denipcracies  reduced  resort
monarchy  as  weapon  against  Communism.  You  may  refer  these  further
views  if  nature  your  conversations  French  appears  warrant.

The  U.S.  position  may  have  influenced  the  French  to  revise  the  first  Ha  Long
Bay  Agreement  (December,  1947)  and  when  the  second  agreement  was  signed
in  June,  1948,  the  U.S.  promptly  instructed  the  U.S.  Ambassador  to  "apply  such
persuasion  and/or  pressure  as  is  best  calculated  [to]  produce  desired  result"  of
France's  "unequivocally  and  promptly  approving  the  principle  of  Viet  inde-
pendence." Again,  however,  the  Ambassador  was  instructed  to  avoid  ostensible
intervention  while  making  it  clear  that  the  U.S.  foresaw  France's  losing  Indo-
china if  it  persisted  to  ignore  American  advice.  These  instructions  were  repeated
at  the  end  of  August,  1948,  with  the  assertion  that  the  Department  of  State  "be-
lieves nothing  should  be  left  undone  which  will  strengthen  truly  nationalist  groups
in  Indochina  and  induce  present  supporters  of  the  Viet  Minh  to  come  to  the
side  of  that  group."

The  first  suggestions  that  the  U.S.  became  tangibly  involved  in  Vietnam  appear
in  a  reported  conversation  of  the  U.S.  Ambassador  with  the  French  Foreign
Office  in  September,  1948.  The  U.S.  Ambassador  again  urged  on  France  legis-
lation or  other  definite  action  to  move  toward  the  unification  of  Vietnam,  and
the  immediate  negotiation  of  concrete  steps  toward  autonomy  as  envisaged  by
the  Ha  Long  Bay  Agreement.  He  then  told  the  French  representative  that:

.  .  .  US  is  fully  appreciative  difficulties  which  face  French  Government
in  Indochina  at  this  time  and  reminds  him  that  US  had  already  indicated  its
willingness,  if  French  Government  so  desired,  to  give  public  indication  its


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  33

approval  of  concrete  steps  by  French  Government  to  come  to  grips  with
basic  political  problem  of  Indochina,  I  informed  him  that  US  also  willing
under  similar  circumstances  to  consider  assisting  French  Government  with
respect  to  matter  of  financial  aid  for  Indochina  through  EGA  but  could  not
give  consideration  to  altering  its  present  policy  in  this  regard  unless  real
progress  made  in  reaching  non-Communist  solution  in  Indochina  based  on
cooperation  of  true  nationalists  of  that  country.

As  negotiations  proceeded  with  Bao  Dai  preliminary  to  the  Elysee  Agreement,
the  Department  of  State  instructed  the  American  Ambassador  in  Paris,  on  17
January  1949,  that:

While  the  Department  is  desirous  of  the  French  coming  to  terms  with
Bao  Dai  or  any  truly  nationalist  group  which  has  a  reasonable  chance  of
winning  over  the  preponderance  of  Vietnamese,  we  cannot  at  this  time  irre-
trievably commit  the  U.S.  to  support  of  a  native  government  which  by  fail-
ing to  develop  appeal  among  Vietnamese  might  become  virtually  a  puppet
government  separated  from  the  people  and  existing  only  by  the  presence  of
French  military  forces.

Following  the  Elysee  Agreement,  the  U.S.  was  better  disposed  toward  pro-
viding aid  in  Indochina.  On  10  May  1949,  the  American  Consul  in  Saigon  was
informed  that  the  U.S.  desired  the  "Bao  Dai  experiment"  to  succeed,  since  there
appeared  to  be  no  other  alternative:

At  the  proper  time  and  under  the  proper  circumstances,  the  Department
will  be  prepared  to  do  its  part  by  extending  recognition  to  the  Bao  Dai  gov-
ernment and  by  expressing  the  possibility  of  complying  with  any  request  by
such  a  government  for  U.S.  arms  and  economic  assistance.  It  must  be  under-
stood, however,  that  an  aid  program  of  this  nature  would  require  Congres-
sional approval.  Since  the  U.S.  could,  however,  scarcely  afford  backing  a
government  which  would  have  the  color  and  be  likely  to  suffer  the  fate  of
a  puppet  regime,  it  must  be  clear  that  France  will  offer  all  necessary  con-
cessions to  make  the  Bao  Dai  solution  attractive  to  the  nationalists.  This  is
a  step  of  which  the  French  themselves  must  see  the  urgency  and  necessity  in
view  of  the  possibly  short  time  remaining  before  Communist  successes  in
China  are  felt  in  Indochina.  Moreover,  the  Bao  Dai  government  must
through  its  own  efforts  demonstrate  the  capacity  to  organize  and  conduct
affairs  wisely  so  as  to  insure  the  maximum  opportunity  for  obtaining  requi-
site popular  support.

But  "anti-communism"  initially  proved  to  be  no  better  guideline  for  the  formu-
lation of  American  policy  in  Indochina  than  it  had  been  for  the  French.  Indeed,
early  U.S.  attempts  to  discern  the  nature  and  extent  of  communist  influence  in
Vietnam  devolved  to  the  seeming  paradox  that  if  Ho  Chi  Minh  were  communist,
he  seemed  to  have  no  visible  ties  with  Moscow.  For  example,  a  State  Depart-"
ment  appraisal  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  provided  to  the  U.S.  Ambassador  in  China  in
July,  1948,  was  admittedly  speculative:

1.  Depts  info  indicates  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  is  Communist,  His  long  and
well-known  record  in  Comintern  during  twenties  and  thirties,  continuous
support  by  French  Communist  newspaper  Humanite  since  1945,  praise  given


34


Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


U


him  by  Radio  Moscow  (which  for  past  six  months  has  been  devoting  increas-
ing attention  to  Indochina)  and  fact  he  has  been  called  "leading  communist"
by  recent  Russian  publications  as  well  as  Daily  Worker  makes  any  other
conclusion  appear  to  be  wishful  thinking.

2.  Dept  has  no  eyidence  of  direct  Hnk  between  Ho  and  Moscow  but  as-
sumes it  exists,  nor  is  it  able  evaluate  amount  pressure  or  guidance  Moscow
exerting.  We  have  impression  Ho  must  be  given  or  is  retaining  large  degree
latitude.  Dept  considers  that  USSR  accomplishing  its  immediate  aims  in  In-
dochina by  (a)  pinning  down  large  numbers  of  French  troops,  (b)  causing
steady  drain  upon  French  economy  thereby  tending  retard  recovery  and
dissipate  EC  A  assistance  to  France,  and  (c)  denying  to  world  generally  sur-
pluses which  Indochina  normally  has  available  thus  perpetuating  conditions
of  disorder  and  shortages  which  favorable  to  growth  communism.  Further-
more, Ho  seems  quite  capable  of  retaining  and  even  strengthening  his  grip
on  Indochina  with  no_outside  assistance  other  than  continuing  procession  of
French  puppet  govts.


r


-  In  the  fall  of  1948,  the  Office  of  Intelligence  Research  in  the  Department  of
State  conducted  a  survey  of  communist  influence  in  Southeast  Asia.  Evidence  of
Kremlin-directed  conspiracy  was  found  in  vijtually^ajl  countries  except  Vietnam:

I Since  December  19,  1946,  there  have  been  continuous  conflicts  between
French  forces  and  the  nationalist  government  of  Vietnam.  This  government
is  a  coalition  in  which  avowed  communists  hold  influential  positions.  Al-
^  though  the  French  admit  the  influence  of  this  government,  they  have  con-
sistently refused  to  deal  with  its  leader,  Ho  Chi  Minh,  on  the  grounds  that
he  is  a  communist.

To  date  the  Vietnam  press  and  radio  have  not  adopted  an  anti-American
position.  It  is  rather  the  French  colonial  press  that  has  been  strongly  anti-
American  and  has  freely  accused  the  U.S.  of  imperialism  in  Indochina  to
the  point  of  approximating  the  official  Moscow  position.  Although  the  Viet-
nam radio  has  been  closely  watched  for  a  new  position  toward  the  U.S.,  no
change  has  appeared  so  far.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  have  been  any  split
within  the  coalition  government  of  Vietnam.  .  .  .

Evaluation.  If  there  is  a  Moscow-directed  conspiracy  in  Southeast  Asia,
Indochina  is  an  anomoly  so  far.  Possible  explanations  are:

1.  No  rigid  directives  have  been  issued  by  Moscow.

2.  The  Vietnam  government  considers  that  it  has  no  rightest  elements
that  must  be  purged.

i 3.  The  Vietnam  Communists  are  not  subservient  to  the  foreign  policies
pursued  by  Moscow,

4.  A  special  dispensation  for  the  Vietnam  government  has  been  arranged
i  in  Moscow.

f  Of  these  possibilities,  the  first  and  fourth  seem  most  likely.
III. ORIGINS  OF  THE  U.S.  INVOLVEMENT  IN  VIETNAM

A. THE  POLICY  CONTEXT  ^_^uJ2>-<.i  ^

Events  in  China -of  1948  and  1949  brought  the  United  States  to  a  new  aware-
ness of  the  vigor  of  communism  in  Asia,  and  to  a  sense_ of  urgency  over  its  con-

^6


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  35

tainment.  U.S.  policy  instruments  developed  to  meet  unequivocal  communist
challenges  in  Europe  were  applied  to  the  problem  of  the  Far  East.  Concurrent
^lih  the  development  of  NATO,  a  U.S.  search  began  for  collective  security  in
Asia;  economic  and  military  assistance  programs  were  inaugurated;  and  the  Tru-
man Doctrine  acquired  wholly  n^ew  dimension  by  extension  into  regions  where
the  European  empires  were  being  dismantled.  In  March,  1947,  President  Truman
had  set  forth  the  following  policy  guidelines:

I  believe  that  it  must  be  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  support  free
peoples  who  are  resisting  attempted  subjugation  by  armed  minorities  or  by
outside  pressures.  I  believe  we  must  assist  free  peoples  to  work  out  their  own
destinies  in  their  own  way.  .  .  .

The  President  went  on  to  underscore  the  U.S.  determination  to  commit  its  re-
sources to  contain  communism.  While  he  clearly  subordinated  military  aid  to
economic  and  political  means,  he  did  assert  the  U.S.  intent  to  assist  in  maintain-
ing security:

To  insure  the  peaceful  development  of  nations,  free  from  coercion,  the
United  States  has  taken  a  leading  part  in  establishing  the  United  Nations.
The  United  Nations  is  designed  to  make  possible  freedom  and  independence
for  all  its  members.  We  shall  not  realize  our  objectives,  however,  unless  we
are  willing  to  help  free  peoples  to  maintain  their  free  institutions  and  their
nationaMnte^rity  against  aggres^ye  movements  that  seek  to  impose  upon
them  totalitarian  regimes.

In  the  year  1947,  while  U.S.  military  assistance  began  to  flow  into  Greece  to
ward  off  subversive  aggression,  the  U.S.  inaugurated  the  European  Recovery  Plan
(ERP).  ERP  was  aimed  at  economic  recovery  in  Western  Europe,  especially  in
countries  such  as  France  and  Italy  where  post-war  depression  was  fostering
marked  leftward  political  trends.  In  one  of  the  high  level  appraisals  of  the  situa-
tion that  the  U.S.  had  to  counter  in  1947,  the  Harriman  Committee  on  Foreign
Aid  has  concluded  that :

The  interest  of  the  United  States  in  Europe  .  .  .  cannot  be  measured
simply  in  economic  terms.  It  is  also  strategic  and  political.  We  all  know
that  we  are  faced  in  the  world  today  with  two  conflicting  ideologies.  .  .  .
Our  position  in  the  world  has  been  based  for  at  least  a  century  on  the  exist-
ence in  Europe  of  a  number  of  strong  states  committed  by  tradition  and  in-
chnation  to  the  democratic  concept.  .  .  .

The  fall  of  the  Czechoslovakian  Government  in  February  1948  brought  about
the  Brussels  Pact,  a  Western  European  collective  defense  and  economic  collabora-
tion arrangement.  The  blockade  of  Berlin,  which  began  on  1  April  1948,  acceler-
ated U.S.  movement  toward  membership  in  the  alliance.  On  June  11,  1948  the
U.S.  Senate  adopted  a  resolution  advising  the  Executive  to  undertake  the:

.  .  .  Progressive  development  of  regional  and  other  collective  arrange-
ments for  individual  and  collective  self-defense  in  accordance  with  the  pur-
poses, principles,  and  provisions  of  the  Charter  [of  the  UN],  association  of
the  United  States,  by  constitutional  process,  with  such  regional  and  other


36 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

collective  arrangements  as  are  based  on  continuous  and  effective  self-help
and  mutual  aid,  and  as  affect  its  national  security.

That  same  month,  Congress  passed  the  Economic  Cooperation  Act,  and  in  July,
1948,  opened  negotiations  for  a  North  Atlantic  Alliance.  The  North  Atlantic
Treaty  was  signed  in  April,  1949,  and  entered  into  force  in  August  of  that  year.

In  the  same  omnibus  foreign  assistance  legislation  which  had  authorized  ECA
in  June,  1948,  Congress  had  provided  for  a  China  Aid  Program.  This  measure
met  almost  immediate  failure,  for  Mao's  armies  spread  unchecked  over  the  China
mainland,  and  by  mid- 1949  the  position  of  the  nationalists  there  was  untenable.
The  "failure"  of  U.S.  aid — which  was  termed  such  by  Congressional  critjcsr^no
less  than  the  urgent  situation  in  Europe  and  the  exploding  of  the  first  Soviet
nuclear  device  in  September.  1949,  figured  in  Congressional  action  on  military
assistance  legislation.

On  October  6,  1949,  Congress  passed  the  Mutual  Defense  Assistance  Program
(MDAP)  through  which  U.S.  arms,  military  equipment  and  training  assistance
might  be  provided  world-wide  for  collective  defense.  In  the  first  appropriations
under  MDAP,  NATO  countries  received  76%  of  the  total,  and  Greece  and
Turkey  (not  yet  NATO  members),  16%.  But  Korea  and  the  Philippines  received
modest  aid,  and  the  legislatoraxlearly  intended  the  law  to  underwrite  subsequent
appropriations  for  collective  security  in  Asia.  The  opening  paragraph  of  the  law
not  only  supported  NATO,  but  foreshadowed  the  Southeast  Asia  Collective
Defense  Treaty :

An  Act  to  Promote  the  Foreign  Policy  and  Provide  for  the  Defense  and
General  Welfare  of  the  United  States  by  Furnishing  Military  Assistance  to
Foreign  Nations,  Approved  October  6,  1949.

Be  it  enacted  by  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  of  the  United
States  of  America  in  Congress  assembled.  That  this  Act  may  be  cited  as
the  "Mutual  Defense  Assistance  Act  of  1949."

FINDINGS  AND  DECLARATION  OF  POLICY

The  Congress  of  the  United  States  reaffirms  the  policy  of  the  United  States
to  achieve  international  peace  and  security  through  the  United  Nations  so
that  armed  force  shall  not  be  used  except  in  the  common  interest.  The
Congress  hereby  finds  that  the  efforts  of  the  United  States  and  other  coun-
tries to  promote  peace  and  security  in  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  the
Charter  of  the  United  Nations  require  additional  measures  of  support  based
upon  the  principle  of  continuous  and  effective  self-help  and  mutual  aid.
These  measures  include  the  furnishing  of  military  assistance  essential  to  en-
able the  United  States  and  other  nations  dedicated  to  the  purposes  and  prin-
ciples of  the  United  Nations  Charter  to  participate  effectively  in  arrange-
ments for  individual  and  collective  self-defense  in  support  of  those  purposes
and  principles.  In  furnishing  such  military  assistance,  it  remains  the  policy
of  the  United  States  to  continue  to  exert  maximum  efforts  to  obtain  agree-
ments to  provide  the  United  Nations  with  armed  forces  as  contemplated  in
the  Charter  and  agreements  to  achieve  universal  control  of  weapons  of  mass
destruction  and  universal  regulation  and  reduction  of  armaments,  including
armed  forces,  under  adequate  safeguards  to  protect  complying  nations  against
violation  and  evasion.

The  Congress  hereby  expresses  itself  as  favoring  the  creation  by  the  free


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  37

countries  and  the  free  peoples  of  the  Far  East  of  a  joint  organization,  con-
sistent with  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations,  to  estabhsh  a  program  of
self-help  and  mutual  cooperation  designed  to  develop  their  economic  and
social  well-being,  to  safeguard  basic  rights  and  liberties  and  to  protect  their
security  and  independence.

The  Congress  recognizes  that  economic  recovery  is  essential  to  interna-
tional peace  and  security  and  must  be  given  clear  priority.  The  Congress
also  recognizes  that  the  increased  confidence  of  free  peoples  in  their  ability
to  resist  direct  or  indirect  aggression  and  to  maintain  internal  security  will
advance  such  recovery  and  support  political  stability.

While  Congress  was  deliberating  on  MDAP,  the  staff  of  the  National  Security
Council,  at  the  request  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  had  been  reexamining  U.S.
policy  toward  Asia.  In  June,  1949^  the  Secretary  had  noted  that  he  was:

.  .  .  increasingly  concerned  at  the  .  .  .  advance  of  communism  in  large  •
areas  of  the  world  and  particularly  the  successes  of  communism  in  [
China.  .  .  .

A  major  objective  of  United  States  policy,  as  I  understand  it,  is  to  contain
communism  in  order  to  reduce  its  threat  to  our  security.  Our  actions  in
Asia  should  be  part  of  a  carefully  considered  and  comprehensive  plan  to
further  that  objective.

The  NSC  study  responding  to  the  Secretary's  request  is  remarkable  for  the
rarity  of  its  specific  references  to  Indochina.  The  staff  study  focused,  rather,  on
generalities  concerning  the  conflict  between  the  interests  of  European  metropoles
and  the  aspirations  of  subject  Asian  peoples  for  independence.  The  following  ex-
tract is  from  the  section  of  the  study  dealing  with  Southeast  Asia:

The  current  conflict  between  colonialism  and  native  independence  is  the
most  important  political  factor  in  southeast  Asia.  This  conflict  results  not
only  from  the  decay  of  European  imperial  power  in  the  area  but  also  from
a  widening  political  consciousness  and  the  rise  of  militant  nationalism  among
the  subject  peoples.  With  the  exception  of  Thailand  and  the  Philippines,  the
southeast  Asia  countries  do  not  possess  leaders  practiced  in  the  exercise  of
responsible  power.  The  question  of  whether  a  colonial  country  is  fit  to  govern
itself,  however,  is  not  always  relevant  in  practical  politics.  The  real  issue
would  seem  to  be  whether  the  colonial  country  is  able  and  determined  to
make  contjnjaed  foreign  rule  an  overall  losing  proposition  for  the  metro-
politan power.  If  it  is,  independence  ToFthe  colonial  country  is  the  only  prac-  ,
tical  solution,  even  though  .misgovernment  eventuates.  A  solution  of  the
con^sequent  problem,  of  jnst^ability}  if  it  arises,  must  be  sought  on  a  non-
imgeriaiist  pLane.  In  any  event,  colonial-nationalist  conflict  provides  a  fertile
field  for  subversive  communist  activities,  and  it  is  now  clear  that  southeast
Asia  is  the  target  of  a  coordinated  offensive  directed  by  the  Kremlin.  In
seeking  to  gain  control  of  southeast  Asia,  the  Kremlin  is  motivated  in  part
by  a  desire  to  acquire  southeast  Asia's  resources  and  communication  lines,
and  to  deny  them  to  us.  But  the  political  gains  which  would  accrue  to  the  ,
USSR  from  communist  capture  of  southeast  Asia  are  equally  significant.  The|
extension  of  communist  authority  in  China  represents  a  grievous  political!
defeaWor  us;  if  southeast  Asia  also  is  swept  by  communism  we  shall  have|
suffered  a  major  political  rout  the  repercussions  of  which  will  be  felt  through- »


38 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I  r^^r^^

fj  out  the  rest  of  the  world,  especially  in  the  Middle  East  and  in  a  then  criti-
[  cally  exposed  Australia.  The  United  States  should  continue  to  use  its  influ-
ence looking  toward  resolving  the  colonial  nationalist  conflict  in  such  a  way
as  to  satisfy  the  fundamental  demands  of  the  nationalist-colonial  conflict,
lay  the  basis  for  political  stability  and  resistance  to  communism,  and  avoid
weakening  the  colonial  powers  who  are  our  western  allies.  However,  it  must
be  remembered  that  the  long  colonial  tradition  in  Asia  has  left  the  peoples
of  that  area  suspicious  of  Western  influence.  We  must  approach  the  prob-
lem from  the  Asiatic  point  of  view  in  so  far  as  possible  and  should  refrain
from  taking  the  lead  in  movements  which  must  of  necessity  be  of  Asian
origin.  It  will  therefore  be  to  our  interest  wherever  possible  to  encourage
the  peoples  of  India,  Pakistan,  the  Philippines  and  other  Asian  states  to  take
the  leadership  in  meeting  the  common  problems  of  the  area.  .  .  .

It  would  be  to  the  interest  of  the  United  States  to  make  use  of  the  skills,
knowledge  and  long  experience  of  our  European  friends  and,  to  whatever
extent  may  be  possible,  enlist  their  cooperation  in  measures  designed  to
check  the  spread  of  USSR  influence  in  Asia.  If  members  of  the  British
Commonwealth,  particularly  India,  Pakistan,  Australia  and  New  Zealand,
can  be  persuaded  to  join  with  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States
in  carrying  out  constructive  measures  of  economic,  political  and  cultural
cooperation,  the  results  will  certainly  be  in  our  interest.  Not  only  will  the
United  States  be  able  thus  to  relieve  itself  of  part  of  the  burden,  but  the  co-
operation of  the  white  nations  of  the  Commonwealth  will  arrest  any  poten-
tial dangers  of  the  growth  of  a  white-colored  polarization.

On  December  30,  1949,  the  National  Security  Council  met  with  President  Truman
presiding,  discussed  the  NSC  staff  study,  and  approved  the  following  conclusions:

As  the  basis  for  realization  of  its  objectives,  the  United  States  should  pur-
sue a  policy  toward  Asia  containing  the  following  components :

a.  The  United  States  should  make  known  its  sympathy  with  the  efforts
of  Asian  leaders  to  form  regional  associations  of  nonrConimunist  states  of
the  various  Asian  areas,  and  if  in  due  course  associations  eventuate,  the
United  States  should  be  prepared,  if  invited,  to  assist  such  associations  to
fulfiU  their  purposes  under  conditions  which  would  be  to  our  interest.
The  following  principles  should  guide  our  actions  in  this  respect:

1)  Any  association  formed  must  be  the  result  of  a  genuine  desire
on  the  part  of  the  participating  nations  to  cooperate  for  mutual  benefit
in  solving  the  political,  economic,  social  and  cultural  problems  of  the
area.

2)  The  United  States  must  not  take  such  an  active  part  in  the  early
stages  of  the  formation  of  such  an  association  that  it  will  be  subject  to
the  charge  of  using  the  Asiatic  nations  to  further  United  States  ambi-
tions.

3)  The  association,  if  it  is  to  be  a  constructive  force,  must  operate
on  the  basis  of  mutual  aid  and  self-help  in  all  fields  so  that  a  true  part-
nership may  exist  based  on  equal  rights  and  equal  obligations.

4)  United  States  participation  [words  illegible]  association  formed
will  be  in  accord  with  Chapter  VIII  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Na-
tions dealing  with  regional  arrangements.

b.  The  United  States  should  act  to  develop  and  strengthen  the  security


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  39

of  the  area  from  Communist  external  aggression  or  _  internal  mbversion^
These  steps  should  take  into  account  any  benefits  to  the  security  of  Asia
which  may  flow  from  the  development  of  one  or  more  regional  group-
ings. The  United  States  on  its  own  initiative  should  now:

1)  Improve  the  United  States  position  with  respect  to  Japan,  the
Ryukyus  and  the  Philippines.

2)  Scrutinize  closely  the  development  of  threats  from  Communist
aggression,  direct  or  indirect,  and  be  prepared  to  help  within  our
means  to  meet  such  threats  by  providing  political,  economic,  and  mili-
tary assistance  and  advice  where  clearly  needed  to  supplement  the  re-
sistance of  the  other  governments  in  and  out  of  the  area  which  are  more
directly  concerned.

3)  Develop  cooperative  measures  through  multilateral  or  bilateral
arrangements  to  combat  Communist  internal  subversion.

4)  Appraise  the  desiraEiIity  "and  the  means  of  developing  in  Asia
some  form  of  collective  security  arrangements,  bearing  in  mind  the
following  considerations:

a)  The  reluctance  of  India  at  this  time  to  join  in  any  anti-Com-
munist security  pact  and  the  influence  this  will  have  among  the
other  nations  of  Asia.

b)  The  necessity  of  assuming  that  any  collective  security  arrange-
ments which  might  be  developed  be  based  on  the  principle  of  mutual
aid  and  on  a  demonstrated  desire  and  ability  to  share  in  the  burden
by  all  the  participating  states.

c)  The  necessity  of  assuring  that  any  such  security  arrangements
would  be  consonant  with  the  purposes  of  any  regional  association
which  may  be  formed  in  accordance  with  paragraph  3-a  above.

d)  The  necessity  of  assuring  that  any  such  security  arrangement
would  be  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  Article  51  of  the
Charter  relating  to  individual  and  collective  self-defense.

c.  The  United  States  should  encourage  the  creation  of  an  atmosphere
favorable  to  economic  recovery  and  development  in  non-Communist  Asia,
and  to  the  revival  of  twords  illegible]  non-discriminatory  lines.  The
policy  of  the  United  States  should  be  adapted  to  promote,  where  possible,
economic  conditions  that  will  contribute  to  political  stability  in  friendly
countries  of  Asia,  but  the  United  States  should  carefully  avoid  assuming
responsibility  for  the  economic  welfare  and  development  of  that  conti-
nent. .  .  .

h.  The  United  States  should  continue  to  use  its  influence  in  Asia
toward  resolving  the  colonial-nationalist  conflict  in  such  a  way  as  to
satisfy  the  fundamental  demands  of  the  nationalist  movement  while  at
the  same  time  minimizing  the  strain  on  the  colonial  powers  who  are  our
Western  allies.  Particular  attention  should  be  given  to  the  problem  of
French  Indo-China  and  action  should  be  taken  to  bring  home  to  the
French  the  urgency  of  removing  the  barriers  to  the  obtaining  by  Bao  Dai  i
or  other  non-Communist  nationalist  leaders  of  the  support  of  a  substantial  j
proportion  of  the  Vietnamese.  .  .  .  I

i.  Active  consideration  should  be  given  to  means  by  which  all  members
of  the  British  Commonwealth  may  be  induced  to  play  a  more  active  role
in  collaboration  with  the  United  States  in  Asia.  Similar  collaboration
should  be  obtained  to  the  extent  possible  from  other  non-Communist  na-
tions having  interests  in  Asia.


40 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

j.  Recognizing  that  the  non-Communist  governments  of  South  Asia
already  constitute  a  bulwark  against  Communist  expansion  in  Asia,  the
United  States  should  exploit  every  opportunity  to  increase  the  present
Western  orientation  of  the  area  and  to  assist,  within  our  capabilities,  its
governments  in  their  efforts  to  meet  the  minimum  aspirations  of  their
people  and  to  maintain  internal  security.

Thus,  in  the  closing  months  of  1949,  the  course  of  U.S.  policy  was  set  to  block
further  communist  expansion  in  Asia:  by  collective  security  if  the  Asians  were
forthcoming,  by  collaboration  with  major  European  allies  and  commonwealth
nations,  if  possible,  but  bilaterally  if  necessary.  On  that  policy  course  lay  the
Korean  War  of  1950-1953,  the  forming  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organiza-
tion of  1954,  and  the  progressively  deepening  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam.

B. THE  U.S.  ENTERS  THE  WAR

On  December  30,  1949,  the  French  signed  over  ten  separate  implementing
agreements  relating  to  the  transfer  of  internal  administration  in  Vietnam  to  Bao
Dai's  State  of  Vietnam,  in  accordance  with  the  Elysee  Agreement  of  March  8,
1949.  By  January,  1950,  Mao's  legions  had  reached  Vietnam's  northern  frontier,
and  North  Vietnam  was  moving  into  the  Sino-Soviet  orbit.  A  Department  of
State  statement  enunciated  U.S.  policy  as  of  20  January  1950:

DEPT  still  hopeful  Bao  Dai  wilj_  succeed  in  gaining  increasing  popular
support  at_Ho's  expense  and  our  policy  remains  essentially  the  same;  to
encourage  him  and  to  urge  PR  toward  further  concessions.

The  start  made  by  Bao  Dai,  the  qualities  exhibited  by  him,  and  his  initial
reception  seem  to  have  been  better  than  we  might  have  anticipated,  even
discounting  optimism  of  FR  sources.  Transfer  of  power  apparently  well
received.  FR  success  in  disarming  and  interning  fleeing  CHI  Nationalists
without  serious  intervention  to  the  present  by  CHI  COMMIES  also  en-
couraging.

However,  more  recently,  marked  opposition  has  been  encountered  which
demonstrates  at  least  that  Bao  Dai's  popular  support  has  not  yet  widened.
Increased  Viet  Minh  MIL  activity  is  disquieting.  This  CLD  be  special  effort
by  Ho,  timed  to  coincide  with  transfer  of  power  and  the  arrival  of  CHI
COMMIES  armies  on  frontier,  and  to  precede  Bangkok  Conference,  or  CLD
be  evidence  of  increasing  strength  reinforced  by  hopes  of  CHI  COMMIE
support,  direct  or  indirect.

DEPT  has  as  yet  no  knowledge  of  negotiations  between  Ho  and  Mao
groups  although  radio  intercept  of  New  China  News  Agency  release  of  JAN
17  indicates  that  Ho  has  messaged  the  "GOVTS  of  the  world"  that  "the
GOVT  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  is  the  only  legal  GOVT^of
the  Vietnam  people"  and  is  "ready  to  establish  DIPL  relations  with^any^
GOVT  which  WLD  be  willing  to  cooperate  with  her  on  the  basis  of  equality
and  mutual  respect  of  national  sovereignty  and  territory  so  as  to  defend
*  world  peace  and  democracy."  Ho's  radio  making  similar  professions.  .  .  .

Nature  and  timing  of  recognition  of  Bao  Dai  now  under  consideration
here  and  with  other  GOVTS.  .  .  .


First  the  Chinese  Communists,  and  then  the  Soviets  recognized  the  DRV.
On  29  January  1950,  the  French  National  Assembly  approved  legislation  grant-


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  41


ing  autonomy  to  the  State  of  Vietnam.  On  February  1,  1950,  Secretary  of  State
Acheson  made  the  following  public  statement:

The  recognition  by  the  Kremlin  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  communist  movement
in  Indochina  comes  as  a  surprise.  The  Soviet  acknowledgment  of  this  move-
ment should  remove  any  illusions  as  to  the  "nationalist"  nature  of  Ho  Chi
Minh's  aims  and  reveals  Ho  in  his  true  colors  as  the  mortal  enemy  of  native
independence  in  Indochina.

Although  timed  in  an  effort  to  cloud  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  by  France
to  the  legal  Governments  of  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Vietnam,  we  have  every
reasonable  [words  illegible]  governments  will  proceed  in  their  development
toward  stable  governments  representing  the  true  nationalist  sentiments  of
more  than  20  million  peoples  of  Indochina.

French  action  in  transferring  sovereignty  to  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia
has  been  in  process  for  some  time.  Following  French  ratification,  which  is
expected  within  a  few  days,  the  way  will  be  open  for  recognition  of  these
legal  governments  by  the  countries  of  the  world  whose  policies  support  the
development  of  genuine  national  indeipendence  in  former  colonial  areas.
Ambassador  Jessup  has  already  expressed  to  Emperor  Bao  Dai  our  best
wishes  for  prosperity  and  stability  in  Vietnam,  and  the  hope  that  closer  re-
lationship will  be  established  between  Vietnam  and  the  United  States.

Formal  French  ratification  of  Vietnamese  independence  was  announced  on
2  Febuary  1950.  President  Truman  approved  U.S.  recognition  for  Bao  Dai  the
same  date,  and  on  4  February,  the  American  Consul  General  in  Saigon  was  in-
structed to  deliver  the  following  message  to  Bao  Dai:

Your  Imperial  Majesty:

I  have  Your  Majesty's  letter  in  which  I  am  informed  of  the  signing  of
the  agreements  of  March  8,  1949  between  Your  Majesty,  on  behalf  of  Viet-
nam, and  the  President  of  the  French  Republic,  on  behalf  of  France.  My
Government  has  also  been  informed  of  the  ratification  on  February  2,  1950
by  the  French  Government  of  the  agreements  of  March  8,  1949.

Since  these  acts  establish  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  as  an  independent  State
within  the  French  Union,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  Your
Majesty  and  the  people  of  Vietnam  on  this  happy  occasion.

The  Government  of  the  United  States  of  America  is  pleased  to  welcome
the  Republic  of  Vietnam  into  the  community  of  peace-loving  nations  of  the
world  and  to  extend  diplomatic  recognition  to  the  Government  of  the  Re-
public of  Vietnam.  I  look  forward  to  an  early  exchange  of  diplomatic  rep-
resentatives between  our  two  countries.  .  .  .

Recognition  of  Bao  Dai  was  followed  swiftly  by  French  requests  for  U.S.  aid.
On  May  8,  1950,  Secretary  of  State  Acheson  released  the  following  statement
in  Paris :

The  [French]  Foreign  Minister  and  I  have  just  had  an  exchange  of  views
on  the  situation  in  Indochina  and  are  in  general  agreement  both  as  to  the
urgency  of  the  situation  in  that  area  and  as  to  the  necessity  for  remedial
action.  We  have  noted  the  fact  that  the  problem  of  meeting  the  threat  to
the  security  of  Viet  Nam,  Cambodia,  and  Laos  which  now  enjoy  inde-
pendence within  the  French  Union  is  primarily  the  responsibility  of  France


42 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


and  the  Governments  and  peoples  of  Indochina.  The  United  States  recognizes
that  the_solutipnLpf  the  Indochina  problem  depends  both  upon  the  restora-
tion of  security  and  upon  the  development  of  genu ine_  nationalism  and  that
United  States  assistance  can  and  should  contribute  to  these  major  objectives.

The  United  States  Government,  convinced  that  neither  national  inde-
pendence nor  democratic  evolution  exist  in  any  area  dominated  by  Soviet
imperialism,  considers  the  situation  to  be  such  as  to  warrant  its  according
economic  aid  and  military  equipment  to  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina

Land  to  France  in  order  to  assist  them  in  restoring^tability  and  permitting
these  states  to  pursue  their  peaceful  and  democratic  development.

On  May  11,  1950,  the  Acting  Secretary  of  State  made  the  following  state-
ment:

A  special  survey  mission,  headed  by  R.  Allen  Griffin,  has  just  returned
from  Southeast  Asia  and  reported  on  economic  and  technical  assistance
needed  in  that  area.  Its  over-all  recommendations  for  the  area  are  modest
and  total  in  the  neighborhood  of  $60  million.  The  Department  is  working
on  plans  to  implement  that  program  at  once.

Secretary  Acheson  on  Monday  in  Paris  cited  the  urgency  of  the  situation
applying  in  the  associated  states  of  Viet-Nam,  Laos  and  Cambodia.  The  De-
partment is  working  jointly  with  EGA  to  implement  the  economic  and  tech-
nical assistance  recommendations  for  Indochina  as  well  as  the  other  states
of  Southeast  Asia  and  anticipates  that  this  program  will  get  underway  in
the  immediate  future.

Military  assistance  for  Southeast  Asia  is  being  worked  out  by  the  Depart-
ment of  Defense  in  cooperation  with  the  Department  of  State,  and  the  de-
tails will  not  be  made  public  for  security  reasons.

i  Military  assistance  needs  will  be  met  from  the  President's  emergency  fund
I  of  $75  million  provided  under  MDAP  for  the  general  area  of  China.

Economic  assistance  needs  will  be  met  from  the  EGA  Ghina  Aid  funds,
part  of  which  both  Houses  of  Congress  have  indicated  will  be  made  avail-
able for  the  general  area  of  China.  Final  legislative  action  is  still  pending  on
this  authorization  but  is  expected  to  be  completed  within  the  next  week.

The  United  States  thereafter  was  directly  involved  in  the  developing  tragedy  in
Vietnam.


IV. THE  CHARACTER  AND  POWER  OF  THE  VIET  MINH—
A  SUMMARY

One  of  the  recurrent  themes  of  criticism  of  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  has  been
that  from  the  end  of  World  War  II  on,  there  was  a  failure  to  recognize  that  the
Viet  Minh  was  the  principal  vehicle  for  Vietnamese  nationalism  and  that  it,  in
fact,  was  in  control  of  and  effectively  governing  all  of  Vietnam.  Evidence  on
issues  like  popularity  and  control  is  always  somewhat  suspect — especially  when
dealing  with  an  exotic  country  like  Vietnam  at  a  time  when  what  Americans
knew  about  it  was  largely  dependent  on  French  sources.  Nonetheless,  some
generalizations  can  be  made  and  supported.

First,  the  Viet  Minh  was  the  main  repository  of  Vietnamese  nationalism  and
I  anti-French  colonialism.  There  were  other  such  groups  promoting  Viet  independ-


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  43

ence  but  none  were  competitive  on  a  country-wide  scale.  It  is  also  true  that  the
disciplined,  well-organized,  and  well-led  Indochinese  Communist  Party  was  the
controlling  element  in  the  Viet  Minh.  The  ICP  was  not,  however,  in  the  numeri-
cal majority  either  in  total  membership  or  in  leadership  posts  held.  This  gap
between  control  and  numbers  can  be  explained  by  two  factors:  (a)  ICP  strategy
was  to  unify  nationahst  elements  to  achieve  the  immediate  objective  of  inde-
pendence; and  (b)  the  other  components  of  the  Viet  Minh  were  sizable  enough,
to  fractionalize  the  whole  movement.  In  other  words,  from  World  War  II  on,i
the  ICP  was  strong  enough  to  lead,  but  not  to  dominate  Vietnamese  nationalism,  v

Second,  the  Viet  Minh  was  sufficiently  popular  and  effective  to  turn  itself  into  »
a  Vietnam-wide  government  that  could  have  extended  its  authority  throughout !
the  country  after  World  War  II — except  for  the  obstacle  of  reasserted  French  1
power,  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  of  indigenous  political  opposition  in  Cochinchina.  [
The  Viet  Minh  was  always  more  powerful  in  Tonkin  and  Annam  than  in  South
Vietnam.  However,  it  seems  likely  that  in  the  absence  of  the  French,  the  Viet  I
Minh  through  its  governmental  creation,  the  DRV,  would  have  overridden  in-  |
digenous  tribal,  religious,  and  other  opposition  in  short  order.  ^

Vietnamese  nationalism  developed  three  types  of  political  parties  or  move-
ments :

Reform  parties.  Narrowly  based  among  the  small  educated  Vietnamese  elite,
these  parties  made  little  pretense  at  representing  the  masses  of  the  peasantry —
except  in  the  ancient  mandarinal  sense  of  paternal  leadership.  In  general,  they
advocated  reform  of  the  relationship  between  France  and  Vietnam  to  establish
an  independent  and  united  nation,  but  would  neither  sever  beneficial  bonds  with
the  metropole,  nor  alter  drastically  the  Vietnamese  social  structure.  Members
included  many  men  of  impeccable  repute  and  undoubted  nationalist  convictions
— among  them  Ngo  Dinh  Diem — but  also  a  number  of  known  opportunist  and
corrupt  Vietnamese.  The  reformist  parties  were  further  discredited  by  collabora-
tion with  the  Japanese  during  World  War  II.  These  parties  formed  the  basis  for  ^
the  "Bao  Dai  solution"  to  which  France  and  the  U.S.  gravitated  in  the  late  1940's.  j

Theocratic  parties.  In  Cochinchina — and  almost  exclusively  there — during  the
1930's  there  emerged  religious  sects  commanding  firm  loyalties  of  hundreds  of
thousands  of  peasants.  Two  of  these — the  Cao  Dai  and  the  Hoa  Hao — aspired
to  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  power,  fielded  armed  forces,  and  formed  local
governments.  They  opposed  both  French  political  and  cultural  hegemony,  and
domination  by  other  Vietnamese  parties.  Some  elements  collaborated  openly  with
the  Japanese  during  1940-1945.  Because  these  parties  were  of  local  and  religious
character,  any  parallel  with  other  Viet  political  organizations  would  be  inexact.
These  movements  account  in  large  measure  for  the  distinctive  character  of  South
Vietnamese  nationalism  as  compared  with  that  of  Annam  or  Tonkin.

Revolutionary  parties.  The  numerous  remaining  Vietnamese  political  parties
fall  into  the  revolutionary  category:  they  advocated  Vietnam's  independence
from  France  and  some  degree  of  radical  reorganization  of  the  Viet  poUty.  Their
political  coloration  ranged  from  the  deep  red  of  the  Saigon-centered  Trotskyites
(who  advocated  anti-imperialist  revolution  throughout  the  world,  and  within
Vietnam,  expropriation  for  the  workers  and  peasants)  through  the  less  violent
hues  of  communism  and  Kuomintang-styled  nationalism,  to  the  indistinct,  eclectic
nationalism  of  the  Binh  Xuyen  criminal  fraternity  (another  Saigon  phenomenon).


44 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Only  two  of  these  movements  developed  a  Vietnam-wide  influence:  the  Indo-
chinese  Communist  Party  (ICP),  and  the  Vietnam  Nationalist  Party  (VNQDD).
Both  these  parties  were  troubled  throughout  their  history  by  factionalism,  and
by  repeated  (French  police)  purges.  Both  aspired  to  politicizing  the  peasants;
neither  wholly  succeeded.  Of  the  two,  the  ICP  consistently  demonstrated  the
greater  resiliency  and  popularity,  attributable  to  superior  conspiratorial  doctrine
and  technique,  and  to  more  coherent  and  astute  leadership.  Both  the  ICP  and
the  VNQDD  figured  in  peasant  uprisings  in  1930-1931,  and  1940-1941.  Each
played  a  role  in  the  Vietnamese  resistance  against  the  Vichy  French  and  the
Japanese  during  World  War  II:  the  ICP  as  the  nucleus  of  the  Viet  Minh,  and  the
VNQDD  as  the  principal  component  of  the  Chinese  Nationalist-sponsored  Dong
Minh  Hoi.

The  Viet  Minh — Viet  Nam  Doc  Lap  Dong  Minh  Hoi,  League  for  the  Inde-
pendence of  Vietnam — came  into  being  in  May,  1941,  at  the  8th  Plenum  of  the
Indochinese  Communist  Party,  held  in  South  China.  It  was  formed  as  a  "united
front"  organization  initially  composed  of  the  ICP,  Revolutionary  Youth  League,
the  New  Vietnam  Party,  and  factions  of  the  Vietnam  Nationalist  Party
(VNQDD).  Membership  was  held  open  to  any  other  individuals  or  groups
willing  to  join  in  struggling  for  "national  liberation."  The  announced  program
of  the  Viet  Minh  called  for  a  wide  range  of  social  and  political  reforms  designed
mainly  to  appeal  to  Viet  patriotism.  Emphasis  was  placed  on  an  anti-Japanese
crusade  and  preparation  for  "an  insurrection  by  the  organization  of  the  people
into  self-defense  corps,"  not  on  communist  cant.

Though  a  Kuomintang  general  originally  sponsored  the  Viet  Minh,  Ho  soon
became  suspect,  and  in  1942  was  jailed  by  the  Chinese.  While  he  was  in  prison,
probably  to  offset  the  Viet  Minh's  growing  appeal,  and  to  assure  tighter  Chinese
control  of  the  Vietnamese,  the  KMT  fostered  a  rival  Viet  "popular  front,"  the
Vietnam  Revolutionary  League  (Dong  Minh  Hoi),  which  was  based  on  the
VNQDD,  the  Great  Vietnam  Nationalist  Party  (Dai  Viet),  and  a  number  of
smaller  groups,  but  was  supposed  to  include  the  Viet  Minh.  In  fact,  however,
the  Dong  Minh  Hoi  never  acquired  more  than  a  nominal  control  over  the  Viet
Minh.  In  1943,  Ho  was  released  from  prison  and  put  in  charge  of  the  Dong
Minh  Hoi — a  status  apparently  conditioned  on  his  accepting  overall  Chinese
guidance  and  providing  the  allies  with  intelligence.  But  as  the  war  progressed.
Ho  and  the  Viet  Minh  drew  apart  from  the  Dong  Minh  Hoi,  and  the  latter  never
succeeded  in  acquiring  apparatus  within  Vietnam  comparable  to  the  Viet  Minh's.

During  the  war,  some  Vietnamese  political  parties  collaborated  with  the
Japanese  or  the  Vichy  French.  These  were  put  at  a  disadvantage  during  and  after
the  war  in  competition  with  the  ICP,  the  Viet  Minh,  or  the  Dong  Minh  Hoi — all
of  which  developed  an  aura  of  unwavering  faith  to  resistance  against  all  foreign
domination.  But  only  the  ICP  and  the  Viet  Minh  established  their  reputations
by  extensive  wartime  operations  among  the  people  of  Vietnam.  In  Cochinchina,
up  until  surfacing  in  April  1945,  the  ICP  continued  to  operate  largely  under-
ground and  without  much  regard  for  the  Viet  Minh  mantle;  in  Annam  and
Tonkin,  however,  all  ICP  undertakings  were  given  Viet  Minh  identity.  Through-
out Vietnam,  the  ICP  initiated  patient  political  action:  the  dissemination  of
propaganda,  the  training  of  cadres,  the  establishment  of  a  network  of  cells  down
to  hamlet  level.  The  ICP  was  during  the  war  the  hard  core  of  the  Viet  Minh,
but  the  bulk  of  the  Viet  Minh  membership  were  no  doubt  quite  unaware  of  that
fact:  they  served  the  Viet  Minh  out  of  a  patriotic  fervor.

The  American  O.S.S.  during  World  War  II  dealt  with  the  Viet  Minh  as  the


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  45

sole  efficient  resistance  apparatus  within  Vietnam,  depending  upon  it  for  reliable
intelligence,  and  for  aid  in  assisting  downed  allied  pilots.  However,  the  Viet
Minh  itself  assigned  priority  to  political  tasks  ahead  of  these  military  missions.
The  first  permanent  Viet  Minh  bases  were  established  in  1942-43  in  the  moun-
tains north  of  Hanoi.  Only  after  its  political  network  was  well  established  did  it
field  its  first  guerrilla  forces,  in  September  1943.  The  first  units  of  the  Viet  Minh
Liberation  Army  came  into  being  on  December  24  of  that  year,  but  there  is  no
evidence  of  large  scale,  concerted  guerrilla  operations  until _after  March.  1945.

At  the  end  of  1944,  the  Viet  Minh  claimed  a  total  membership  of  500,000,
of  which  200,000  were  in  Tonkin,  150,000  in  Annam,  and  150,000  in  Cochinchina.
The  Viet  Minh  political  and  military  structure  was  significantly  further  developed
in  North  Vietnam.  In  May  1945,  a  Viet  Minh  "liberated  zone"  was  established
near  the  Chinese  border.  As  the  war  drew  to  a  close  the  Viet  Minh  determined
to  preempt  allied  occupation,  and  to  form  a  government  prior  to  their  arrival.
The  Viet  Minh  ability  to  do  so  proved  better  in  the  north  than  in  the  south.  In
August  1945,  Ho  Chi  Minh's  forces  seized  power  from  the  Japanese  and  Bao  Dai
in  North  Vietnam,  forced  the  emperor  to  abdicate,  and  to  cede  his  powers  to
Ho's  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV).  In  Cochinchina,  however,  the
Viet  Minh  were  able  to  gain  only  tenuous  control  of  Saigon  and  its  environs.
Nonetheless,  when  the  allies  arrived,  the  Viet  Minh  were  the  de  facto  govern-
ment in  both  North  and  South  Vietnam:  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  his  DRV  in  Hanoi,
and  an  ICP-dominated  "Committee  of  the  South"  in  Saigon.

On  12  September  1945,  the  British  landed  a  Gurkha  battalion  and  a  com-
pany of  Free  French  soldiers  in  Saigon.  The  British  commander  regarded  the
Vietnamese  government  with  disdain  because  of  its  lack  of  authority  from  the
French  and  because  of  its  inability  to  quell  civil  disorder  in  South  Vietnam.
Saigon  police  clashed  with  Trotskyites,  and  in  the  rural  areas,  fighting  broke  out
between  Viet  Minh  troops  and  those  of  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hoa.  Spreading  vio-
lence rendered  futile  further  attempts  to  draw  together  the  Vietnamese  factions,
and  prompted  the  French  to  importune  the  British  commander  to  permit  them
to  step  in  to  restore  order.  On  the  morning  of  23  September,  French  troops
overthrew  the  Vietnamese  government  after  a  tenure  of  only  three  weeks.  The
official  British  account  termed  the  French  method  of  executing  the  coup  d'etat
"unfortunate"  in  that  they  "absolutely  ensured  that  countermeasures  would  be
taken  by  the  [Vietnamese].  .  .  ."  Vietnamese  retaliation  was  quick  and  violent:
over  one  hundred  Westerners  were  slain  in  the  first  few  days,  and  others  kid-
napped; on  26  September,  the  U.S.  commander  of  the  O.S.S.  in  Saigon  was
killed.  Thus,  the  first  Indochina  War  began  in  Cochinchina  in  late  September,
1945,  and  American  blood  was  shed  in  its  opening  hours.

At  that  juncture,  the  ICP  in  Cochinchina  was  in  a  particularly  vulnerable
position.  The  ICP  had  permitted  the  Viet  Minh  to  pose  as  an  arm  of  the  Allies,
and  had  supported  cooperation  with  the  British  and  amnesty  for  the  French.
The  Party  had  even  undertaken,  through  the  Committee  of  the  South,  to  repress
the  Trotskyites.  But  violence  undermined  its  advocacy  of  political  moderation,
of  maintaining  public  order,  and  of  negotiations  with  the  French.  Further,  the
ICP  in  Saigon  was  assured  by  French  communists  that  they  would  receive  no
assistance  from  Party  brethren  abroad.  The  French  coup  d'etat  thrust  conflict
upon  the  Vietnamese  of  Cochinchina.  The  question  before  the  communists  was
how  to  respond;  the  ICP  leadership  determined  [words  illegible]  and  that  to  main-
tain leadership  of  the  nationalist  movement  in  South  Vietnam  they  had  to  make
the  Viet  Minh  the  most  unbending  foe  of  compromise  with  the  French.


46 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

The  situation  in  all  of  Vietnam  at  the  end  of  the  war  was  confused — neither
the  French,  nor  the  Viet  Minh,  nor  any  other  group  exercised  clear  authority.
While  the  Viet  Minh  was  far  and  away  the  single  most  powerful  Vietnamese
organization,  and  while  it  claimed  dominion  over  all  Vietnam,  its  authority
was  challenged  in  the  North  by  the  Chinese  and  in  the  South  by  the  British.
The  French  position  was  patently  more  tenuous  than  that  of  the  Viet  Minh  until
9  October  1945.  On  that  date,  France  and  the  UK  concluded  an  agreement
whereby  the  British  formally  recognized  French  civil  administration  in  Indochina
and  ceded  its  occupation  rights  to  France  south  of  the  16th  parallel.  This  ceding
of  authority  in  the  South  did  not,  as  a  practical  matter,  ensure  French  rule.  With
only  35,000  French  soldiers  in  South  Vietnam,  the  Viet  Minh  and  other  parties
were  well  able  to  contest  the  French.

Viet  Minh  authority  in  Annam  and  Tonkin  was  less  ambiguous,  but  by  no
means  unchallenged.  In  the  North,  the  salient  political  fact  of  life  for  the  Viet
Minh  was  the  presence  of  the  Chinese  Nationalist  Army  of  Occupation  number-
ing 50,000  men.  Through  this  presence,  the  Chinese  were  able  to  force  the  Viet
Minh  to  accommodate  Chinese-Viet  Nationalists  within  the  DRV  and  to  defer  to
Chinese  policy  in  other  respects.

The  Viet  Minh  had  to  go  further  still  in  accommodating  the  wishes  of  the
Chinese.  In  setting  up  the  DRV  government  of  2  September  1945,  pro-Chinese,
non-Viet  Minh  politicians  were  included,  and  the  ICP  took  only  6  of  16  cabinet
posts.  On  11  November  1945,  the  Viet  Minh  leadership  went  even  further,  and
formally  dissolved  the  ICP  in  the  interest  of  avoiding  "misunderstandings."  Even
this,  however,  was  not  sufficient.  Compelled  by  opposition  demands,  Ho  agreed
to  schedule  national  elections  for  January  of  1946.  The  results  of  these  elections
were  arranged  beforehand  with  the  major  opposition  parties,  and  the  Assembly
thus  "elected"  met  on  2  March  1946.  This  Assembly  approved  a  new  DRV
government,  with  the  ICP  holding  only  2  of  12  cabinet  posts.

By  then,  France  was  ready  to  pose  a  stronger  challenge.  French  reinforce-
ments had  arrived  in  Indochina,  so  that  Paris  could  contemplate  operations  in
North  Vietnam  as  well  as  in  Cochinchina.  In  early  1946,  the  Chinese  turned
over  their  occupation  rights  in  the  North  to  France.  Faced  with  increased  French
military  power  and  Chinese  withdrawal,  and  denied  succor  from  abroad.  Ho
decided  that  he  had  no  recourse  save  to  negotiate  with  the  French.  On  6  March
1946,  Ho  signed  an  Accord  with  the  French  providing  for  French  re-entry  into
Vietnam  for  five  years  in  return  for  recognizing  the  DRV  as  a  free  state  within
the  French  union.

This  Accord  taxed  Ho's  popularity  to  the  utmost,  and  it  took  all  Ho's  prestige
to  prevent  open  rebellion.  On  27  May  1946,  Ho  countered  these  attacks  by
merging  the  Viet  Minh  into  the  Lien  Viel,  a  larger,  more  embracing  "national
front."  Amity  within  the  Lien  Viet,  however,  lasted  only  as  long  as  the  Chinese
[^remained  in  North  Vietnam.  When  they  withdrew  a  few  weeks  later,  in  mid-
June,  the  Viet  Minh,  supported  by  French  troops,  attacked  the  Dong  Minh  Hoi
I  and  the  VNQDD,  as  "enemies  of  the  peace,"  effectively  suppressed  organized
I  opposition,  and  asserted  Viet  Minh  control  throughout  North  Vietnam.

But  even  this  ascendancy  proved  transitory.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  though  he  tried
hard,  was  unable  to  negotiate  any  durable  modus  vivendi  with  the  French  in
the  summer  and  fall  of  1946.  In  the  meantime,  the  DRV  and  the  Viet  Minh  were
drawn  more  and  more  under  the  control  of  the  "Marxists"  of  the  former  ICP.
For  example,  during  the  session  of  the  DRV  National  Assembly  in  November,
nominal  opposition  members  were  whittled  down  to  20  out  of  more  than  300
seats,  and  a  few  "Marxists"  dominated  the  proceedings.  Nonetheless,  the  DRV


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  Al

government  maintained  at  least  a  facade  of  coalition.  Through  1949,  ICP  mem-
bers remained  in  the  minority,  and  nominally  oppositionist  VNQDD  and  Dong
Minh  Hoi  politicians  were  consistendy  included.

Although  the  Cochinchina  war  continued  throughout  1946,  with  the  Viet
Minh  assuming  a  leading  role  in  resistance,  war  in  North  Vietnam  did  not  break
out  until  December,  1946.  A  series  of  armed  clashes  in  November  were  fol-
lowed by  a  large  scale  fighting  in  Hanoi  in  late  December.  The  DRV  government
took  to  the  hills  to  assume  the  status  of  shadow  state.  The  Viet  Minh  trans-
formed itself  back  into  a  semi-covert  resistance  organization  and  committed
itself  throughout  the  nation  to  the  military  defeat  of  the  French.  During  the
opening  year  of  the  war,  1947,  the  Viet  Minh  took  steps  to  restore  its  image  as
a  popular,  patriotic,  anti-foreign  movement,  and  again  to  play  down  the  ICP
role  in  its  leadership.  The  DRV  government  was  reorganized  and  prominent
communists  excluded.  As  the  Viet  Minh  gathered  strength  over  the  years,  how-
ever, these  same  leaders  reentered  the  DRV  government.

In  February  1951,  addressing  the  Congress  of  the  Vietnamese  Communist
Party  (Lao  Dong),  Ho  Chi  Minh  stated  that  the  Communist  Party  had  formed
and  led  the  Viet  Minh,  and  founded  and  ruled  the  DRV.  When  the  French
colonialists  reappeared  in  South  Vietnam  and  a  Nationalist  Chinese-sponsored
government  seemed  in  prospect  in  North  Vietnam,  Ho  averred,  the  Party  went
underground,  and  entered  into  agreements  with  the  French:

Lenin  said  that  even  if  a  compromise  with  bandits  was  advantageous  to
the  revolution,  he  would  do  it.  .  .  .

But  Ho's  explanation  notwithstanding,  the  Viet  Minh  was  irrefutably  national-
ist, popular,  and  patriotic.  It  was  also  the  most  prominent  and  successful  vehicle
of  Viet  nationalism  in  the  1940's.  To  a  degree  it  was  always  non-communist.
Available  evidence  indicates,  however,  that  from  its  inception.  Ho  Chi  Minh  and
his  lieutenants  of  the  Indochinese  Communist  Party  conceived  its  strategy,  di-
rected its  operations,  and  channeled  its  energies  consistent  with  their  own  goals
— as  they  subsequently  claimed.  Whether  the  non-communist  elements  of  the
Viet  Minh  might  have  become  dominant  in  different  circumstances  must  be
relegated  to  speculation.  It  seems  clear  that,  as  matters  developed,  all  of  the  f
non-communist  nationalist  movements — reformist,  theocratic,  or  revolutionary —  |
were  too  localized,  too  disunited,  or  too  tainted  with  Japanese  or  Nationalist  j
Chinese  associations  to  have  competed  successfully  with  the  ICP  for  control  1
of  the  Viet  Minh.  And  none  could  compete  effectively  with  the  Viet  Minh  in  j
gaining  a  following  among  Vietnam's  peasants.

[Supporting  text  not  available]

V. HO  CHI  MINH:  ASIAN  TITO?— A  SUMMARY

Among  the  more  cogent  critiques  of  U.S.  policy  toward  Vietnam  is  the  con-
tention that  the  U.S.  failed  to  recognize  in  Ho  Chi  Minh  a  potential  Asian  "Tito."
This  view  holds  that  Ho  has  always  been  more  concerned  with  Vietnam's  inde-
pendence and  sovereign  viability  than  with  following  the  interests  and  dictates
of  Moscow  and  Peking.  With  U.S.  support,  the  argument  runs.  Ho  would  have
adopted  some  form  of  neutrality  in  the  East-West  conflict  and  maintained  the
DRV  as  a  natural  and  durable  bulwark  against  Chinese  expansion  southward.
Thus,  were  it  not  for  "U.S.  communist  blinders,"  Ho  would  have  served  the


48 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

larger  purposes  of  American  policy  in  Asia.  Though  the  focus  of  inquiry  in
this  study  is  the  period  immediately  following  World  War  II,  when  it  would
have  been  relatively  easy  to  support  an  anti-Japanese,  anti-colonial  Ho,  it  is
often  argued  that  the  U.S.  neglected  another  opportunity  after  the  Geneva  Con-
ference of  1954 — and  indeed,  that  U.S.  acceptance  of  Ho,  and  a  communist
dominated  Vietnam,  may  be  the  only  path  to  peace  in  Southeast  Asia  today.  The
historical  (1945-1954)  argument  has  a  persuasive  ring.  In  the  light  of  the
present  costs  and  repercussions  of  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam,  any  prior  way
out  can  seem  attractive.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  a  dynamic  and  unified  com-
munist Vietnam  under  Ho  Chi  Minh  could  have  been  vigorously  expansionist,
thus  causing  unanticipated  difficult  problems  in  some  ways  comparable  to  cur-
rent ones.

Many  authors  have  advanced  one  version  or  another  of  the  "Tito"  hypothesis.
Some  develop  the  principal  thesis  that  a  different  U.S.  policy  could  have  moved
Ho  to  non-alignment  and  opposition  to  Peking;  others  stress  the  corollary  that
Ho  was  forced  into  dependence  upon  Peking  and  Moscow  by  American  op-
position or  indifference.  Whether  Ho  was  a  nationalist  or  a  communist  is  not
at  issue;  all  of  the  authors  quoted  seem  to  accept  that  Ho  was  a  communist,  and
that  a  communist  Vietnam  would  probably  have  eventuated  under  his  leadership.
Rather,  their  arguments  center  on  what  they  perceive  to  be  Ho's  willingness  to
subordinate  communist  goals,  forms,  and  international  discipline  to  attaining
Vietnam's  independence  and  unity.  A  few  openly  favor  a  communist  Vietnam
on  the  grounds  that  only  a  national  communism  led  by  Ho  would  be  sufficiently
strong  to  survive  adjacent  to  China.  They  stress  Ho's  attempts  in  1945  and  1946
to  obtain  Western  backing,  and  point  out  that  antipathy  to  China  is  a  pillar  of
Viet  nationalism.  Many  concede  that  the  Tito  analogy  is  not  wholly  appropriate.
Unlike^Tito,  Ho  came  to  power  after  the  war  without  the  aid  of  another  com-
munist state.  More  basically,  there  was  no  analogy  to  be  made  until  late  1948,
when  the  experiment  with  Tito  seemed  like  it  would  work.  Nonetheless,  these
authors  point  out  that  if  the  U.S.  found  it  advantageous  to  set  aside  its  repug-
nance to  Tito's  communism  in  the  interest  of  stemming  Russian  expansion  in
Europe,  it  should  have  been  willing  to  accommodate  Ho  Chi  Minh's  communism
for  similar  ends  in  Asia.  This  critique  generally  ends  with  the  accusation  that
the  U.S.  purpose  in  Southeast  Asia  is  simply  and  solely  to  stop  communism.

An  examination  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  political  development  through  1950  may
provide  a  basis  to  narrow  the  range  of  speculation  concerning  Ho  and  U.S.
policy.  From  such  a  review,  it  is  evident  that  the  man  who  in  1945  became
President  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  was  a  mature,  extraordinarily
dedicated  revolutionary  who  had  undergone  severe  hardships  serving  the  cause
of  Vietnam's  freedom  from  France.  Fifty-five  years  of  age  in  1945,  he  had  been
a  communist  for  twenty-five  years — one  of  the  founding  members  of  the  French
Communist  Party — and  a  Comintern  agent  in  Asia  for  fifteen  years  before
World  War  II.  He  was  originally  of  Nghe-An,  a  province  traditionally  a  spawn-
ing ground  of  revolutionists;  of  a  father  imprisoned  by  the  French  for  nationalist
activism;  and  of  a  Hue  school  known  for  radical  nationalism  among  its  students.
Exiled  from  Vietnam  from  1910  to  1940,  imprisoned  in  Hong  Kong  and  in
China,  deprived  of  home,  family,  fame,  fortune  and  companionship  outside  the
Comintern's  conspiratorial  circles,  he  apparently  devoted  himself  selflessly  all
those  years  to  revolution  in  Vietnam.  Ruth  Fischer,  a  well-known  German
former  communist  who  knew  Ho  during  this  period,  has  written,  "It  was  Ho  Chi
Minh's  nationalism  which  impressed  us  European  Communists  born  and  bred
in  a  rather  grey  kind  of  abstract  internationalism."


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  49

For  Ho,  now  back  in  Asia,  World  War  II  opened  new  avenues  to  the  attain-
ment of  his  Hfe-long  goals.  France  discredited  itself  in  Vietnam  through  Vichy's
collaboration  with  the  Japanese,  and  then  in  1945  was  toppled  from  power  alto-
gether by  Japanese  arms.  In  the  meantime.  Ho  had  built  the  Viet  Minh  into
the  only  Vietnam-wide  political  organization  capable  of  effective  resistance  to
either  the  Japanese  or  the  French.  Ho  was  the  only  Vietnamese  wartime  leader
with  a  national  following,  and  he  assured  himself  wider  fealty  among  the
Vietnamese  people  when  in  August-September,  1945,  he  overthrew  the  Japanese,
obtained  the  abdication  of  Bao  Dai,  established  the  DRV,  and  staged  receptions
for  in-coming  allied  occupation  forces — in  which  the  DRV  acted  as  the  incum-
bent Vietnamese  government.  For  a  few  weeks  in  September  1945,  Vietnam  was
— for  the  first  and  only  time  in  its  modern  history — free  of  foreign  domination,
and  united  from  north  to  south  under  Ho  Chi  Minh.

Ho  became  the  focus  of  the  nationalist  fervor  evoked  by  these  and  subsequent
events.  Leaders  of  the  rival  Vietnamese  Nationalist  Party  (VNQDD)  and  the
Revolutionary  League  (Dong  Minh  Hoi),  although  admitted  to  the  DRV
government,  commanded  no  grass-roots  organizations,  and  since  they  were
closely  associated  with  the  Chinese  Nationalists,  shared  in  full  measure  in  the
anti-Chinese  odium  among  the  people  of  North  Vietnam.  In  South  Vietnam,
French  intrigue,  and  Vietnamese  disunity  precluded  the  emergence  of  a  com-
petitor to  Ho.  When  France  resorted  to  force  to  restore  its  control  over  Vietnam,
Ho  again  became  the  head  of  Viet  resistance,  and  the  Viet  Minh  became  the
primary  nationalist  protagonists.  Hence,  Ho  Chi  Minh,  both  on  his  own  merits
and  out  of  lack  of  competition,  became  the  personification  of  Vietnamese  na-
tionalism.

Ho,  nonetheless,  found  himself,  his  movement,  and  his  government  under
intense  pressure.  From  within  the  nation,  the  Chinese-backed  Viet  parties  attacked
communist  domination  of  his  government.  For  the  sake  of  national  unity,  Ho
dissolved  the  Communist  Party,  avoided  communist  cant,  announced  general
elections,  and  assured  the  contending  factions  representation  in  the  government
well  out  of  proportion  to  their  popular  support.  External  pressures  from  France
and  from  China  proved  more  difficult.  The  French  capitalized  on  the  relative
weakness  of  the  Viet  Minh  in  South  Vietnam,  and  the  dissension  among  the  Viet-
namese there  to  overthrow  the  DRV  government  in  Saigon,  and  to  force  the
Viet  Minh  to  resort  to  guerrilla  warfare.  In  famine-wracked  North  Vietnam,
Chinese  hordes  under  booty-minded  warlords  descended  on  the  DRV,  supplant-
ing its  local  government  with  committees  of  their  own  sponsoring  and  systemati-
cally looting.  Ho  vainly  sought  aid  abroad;  not  even  the  Soviet  Union  proved
helpful.  Ho  eventually  (March,  1946)  negotiated  with  the  French,  accepting
a  French  military  presence  in  North  Vietnam  for  a  period  of  five  years  in  return
for  vague  French  assurances  to  the  DRV  as  a  "Free  State  within  the  French
Union."  When  Ho  was  attacked  for  this  by  the  pro-Chinese  elements  within  the
DRV,  he  declared:

You  fools!  Don't  you  realize  what  it  means  if  the  Chinese  stay?  Don't
you  remember  your  history?  The  last  time  the  Chinese  came,  they  stayed
one  thousand  years!

The  French  are  foreigners.  They  are  weak.  Colonialism  is  dying  out.
Nothing  will  be  able  to  withstand  world  pressure  for  independence.  They
may  stay  for  a  while,  but  they  will  have  to  go  because  the  white  man  is
finished  in  Asia.  But  if  the  Chinese  stay  now,  they  will  never  leave.


50 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  I

As  for  me,  I  prefer  to  smell  French  shit  for  five  years,  rather  than
Chinese  shit  for  the  rest  of  my  life.

The  unresolved  historic  problem,  of  course,  is  to  what  extent  Ho's  nationalist
goals  over-rode  his  communist  convictions  in  these  maneuvers.  Ho  seemed  to
place  the  former  above  the  latter  not  solely  as  a  matter  of  dissemblance,  as  he
might  have  done  in  the  dissolution  of  the  Party  and  the  simultaneous  formation
of  a  "Marxist  Association,"  but  possibly  as  a  result  of  doubts  about  communism
as  a  political  form  suitable  for  Vietnam.  Bao  Dai  is  reputed  to  have  said  that:
"I  saw  Ho  Chi  Minh  suffer.  He  was  fighting  a  battle  within  himself.  Ho  had  his
own  struggle.  He  realized  communism  was  not  best  for  his  country,  but  it  was
too  late.  Ultimately,  he  could  not  overcome  his  allegiance  to  communism."
During  negotiations  for  a  modus  vivendi  with  the  French  in  Paris  in  autumn,
1946,  Ho  appealed  to  the  French  to  "save  him  from  the  extremists"  within  the
Viet  Minh  by  some  meaningful  concession  to  Vietnamese  independence,  and
he  told  the  U.S.  Ambassador  that  he  was  not  a  communist.  He  is  reputed  to
have  asserted  at  that  time  that  Vietnam  was  not  ready  for  communism,  and
described  himself  as  a  Marxist.  In  reply  to  a  journalist's  inquiry.  Ho  claimed
that  he  could  remain  neutral,  "like  Switzerland"  in  the  developing  world  power
struggle  between  communism  and  the  West.  But  these  and  other  such  statements
could  have  come  either  from  a  proper  Leninist  or  a  dedicated  nationalist.  Ho's
statements  and  actions  after  1949,  and  his  eventual  close  alignment  with  the
Sino-Soviet  Bloc,  support  the  Leninist  construction.  But,  then,  U.S.  insistence  on
Ho's  being  a  doctrinaire  communist  may  have  been  a  self-fulfilling  prophesy.

There  remains,  however,  the  matter  of  Ho's  direct  appeals  for  U.S.  inter-
vention in  Vietnam,  at  which  even  a  Leninist  might  have  scrupled.  These  oc-
curred (late  1945,  early  1946)  just  after  France  has  reasserted  itself  militarily
in  South  Vietnam,  while  Chinese  Nationalist  warlords  were  ensconced  in  Hanoi,
and  before  the  6  March  1946  Accord  with  France.  Desperately,  Ho  turned  to
the  United  States,  among  other  powers,  asking  for  "immediate  interference"  in
Vietnam.

There  were,  at  least,  eight  communications  from  Ho  to  the  President  of  the
United  States,  or  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  from  October,  1945,  to  February,
1946.  Ho  had  conveyed  earlier,  in  August  and  September,  1945,  via  O.S.S.
channels,  proposals  that  Vietnam  be  accorded  "the  same  status  as  the  Philip-
pines," for  an  undetermined  period  of  tutelage  preliminary  to  independence.
With  the  outbreak  of  hostilities  in  South  Vietnam,  September-October  1945,
he  added  formal  requests  for  U.S.  and  U.N.  intervention  against  French  aggres-
sion, citing  the  Atlantic  Charter,  the  U.N.  Charter,  and  a  foreign  policy  address
of  President  Truman  in  October,  1945,  endorsing  national  self-determination.
Ho's  last  direct  communication  with  the  U.S.  was  in  September,  1946,  when  he
visited  the  U.S.  Ambassador  in  Paris  to  ask  vaguely  for  U.S.  assistance  in  ob-
taining independence  for  Vietnam  within  the  French  Union.

There  is  no  record  of  U.S.  reply  to  any  of  Ho's  appeals  for  aid.  Extant  in-
structions to  a  U.S.  diplomat  in  contact  with  Ho  in  December,  1946,  reveal  U.S.
preoccupation  with  his  known  communist  background,  and  apprehension  that
he  might  establish  a  "communist-dominated,  Moscow-oriented  state."  Two
months  later,  when  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  war  in  North  Vietnam  was  underway.
Secretary  of  State  Marshall  emphasized  that  "we  do  not  lose  sight  [of  the]  fact
that  Ho  Chi  Minh  has  direct  Communist  connections  and  it  should  be  obvious
that  we  are  not  interested  in  seeing  colonial  empire  administrations  supplanted
by  philosophy  and  political  organizations  emanating  from  and  controlled  by  the


Background  to  the  Conflict,  1940-1950  51

Kremlin."  In  May,  1949,  Secretary  of  State  Acheson  admitted  that  as  a  "theo-
retical possibility"  the  establishment  of  a  "National  Communist  state  on  pattern
Yugoslavia  in  any  area  beyond  reach  [of  the]  Soviet  Army,"  but  pointed  out  that:

Question  whether  Ho  as  much  nationalist  as  Commie  is  irrelevant.  All
Stalinists  in  colonial  areas  are  nationalists.  With  achievement  national  aims
(i.e.,  independence)  their  objective  necessarily  becomes  subordination  state
to  Commie  purposes  and  ruthless  extermination  not  only  opposition  groups
but  all  elements  suspected  even  slightest  deviation.  .  .  .

When,  in  early  1950,  Ho's  DRV  lay  within  reach  of  Mao's  Chinese  Army,  and
Ho  had  openly  embraced  communism,  Secretary  Acheson  declared  that  bloc
recognition  of  the  DRV  "should  remove  any  illusion  as  to  the  nationalist  char-
acter of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  aims  and  reveals  Ho  in  his  true  colors  as  the  mortal
enemy  of  native  independence  in  Vietnam."

But  Ho's  behavior  in  1949-1950,  however  convincingly  it  endorsed  U.S.
policy  at  that  juncture,  does  not  necessarily  explain  away  his  earlier  eagerness  for
U.S.  and  U.N.  intervention  in  Vietnam,  nor  otherwise  gainsay  the  "Tito"  hy-
pothesis as  applied  to  the  1945-1947  period.  Of  that  period,  it  can  be  said  that
the  U.S.  offered  Ho  only  narrow  options.  He  received  no  replies  to  his  appeals.
After  1946,  not  only  were  Ho's  direct  communications  with  the  U.S.  cut,  but  also
the  signals  he  received  from  the  U.S.  were  hardly  encouraging.  By  the  time  the
Indochina  war  began  in  earnest  in  late  1946,  U.S.  military  equipment  had  already
been  used  by  French  forces  against  the  Vietnamese,  and  the  U.S.  had  arranged
credit  forj^rance  to  purchase  $160  million  worth  of  vehicles  and  miscellaneous
industrial  equipment  for  use  in  Indochina.  Secretary  of  State  George  C.  Mar-
shall's public  comment  on  the  outbreak  of  war  in  January,  1947,  was  limited  to
a  hope  that  "a  pacific  basis  for  adjustment  of  the  difficulties  could  be  found,"
and  within  six  months  the  Marshall  Plan  threw  even  greater  U.S.  resources  be-
hind France.

The  simple  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  U.S.  knew  little  of  what  was  transpiring
inside  Vietnam,  and  certainly  cared  less  about  Vietnam  than  about  France.
Knowing  little  and  caring  less  meant  that  real  problems  and  variety  of  choices
were  perceived  but  dimly.  For  example,  the  U.S.  could  have  asked  itself — "Did
we  really  have  to  support  France  in  Southeast  Asia  in  order  to  support  a  non-
communist  France  internally  and  in  Europe?"  Another  question  we  could  have
asked  ourselves  was — "If  the  U.S.  choice  in  Vietnam  really  came  down  to  either
French  colonialism  or  Ho  Chi  Minh,  should  Ho  automatically  be  excluded?"
Again,  "If  the  U.S.  choice  was  to  be  France,  did  France  have  any  real  chance  \
of  succeeding,  and  if  so,  at  what  cost?"

Even  before  World  War  II  was  over,  Washington  had  placed  the  decision
on  Ho's  fate  in  the  hands  of  France.  It  can  be  argued,  nonetheless,  that  the
U.S.  could  have  insisted  that  Paris  buy  Ho  and  provide  Indochinese  inde-
pendence without  endangering  the  more  basic  relationship  between  the  U.S.  and
France  in  Europe.  Just  as  the  U.S.  came  to  recognize  the  prime  importance  of
Europe  over  any  policy  it  pursued  elsewhere,  so  the  French  government  would
have  soon  realized  (if  it  had  not  already  done  so)  that  nothing  should  be  done
to  impair  seriously  U.S.  acceptance  of  common  interests  in  European  recovery
and  collective  security.  Moreover,  it  was  not  as  if  there  were  not  sizable  seg-
ments of  the  French  community  which  would  not  have  supported  graceful  U.S.
attempts  to  extricate  France  from  Indochina.  It  may  well  be,  however,  that  the
"Tito  hypothesis"  assumes  a  compliance  from  France  of  which  France  was


52 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

demonstrably  incapable.  No  French  government  is  likely  to  have  survived  a
genuinely  liberal  policy  toward  Ho  in  1945  or  1946;  even  French  communists
then  favored  redemption  of  control  in  Indochina.  From  '46  on,  however,  blood-
shed hardened  policy  in  France.  As  before,  the  Ho  alternative  was  never  seri-
ously contemplated.

French  representations  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  Ho  Chi  Minh  pos-
sessed real  political  strength  among  the  people  of  Vietnam.  While  calling  Ho
another  George  Washington  may  be  stretching  the  point,  there  is  no  doubt
about  his  being  the  only  popularly-recognized  wartime  leader  of  the  Vietnamese
resistance,  and  the  head  of  the  strongest  and  only  Vietnam-wide  political  move-
ment. There  can  be  no  doubt  either  that  in  a  test  by  ballot  only  Ho's  Viet  Minh
could  have  delivered  votes  at  the  hamlet  level.  Washington  and  Paris,  however,
did  not  focus  on  the  fact  of  Ho's  strength,  only  on  the  consequences  of  his
rule.  Paris  viewed  Ho  as  a  threat  to  its  regaining  French  economic,  cultural  and
political  prerogatives  in  Indochina.  The  U.S.,  wary  of  Ho's  known  communist
background,  was  apprehensive  that  Ho  would  lead  Vietnam  into  the  Soviet,  and
later  Chinese,  orbit.  President  Eisenhower's  later  remark  about  Ho's  winning  a
free  election  in  Vietnam  with  an  80%  vote  shone  through  the  darkness  of  our
vision  about  Vietnam;  but  U.S.  policy  remained  unillumined.

In  the  last  speculation,  U.S.  support  for  Ho  Chi  Minh  would  have  involved
perspicacity  and  risk.  As  clear  as  national  or  independent  or  neutral  communism
may  seem  today,  it  was  a  blurred  vision  in  1945-1948.  Even  with  the  benefit
of  seeing  Tito  successfully  assert  his  independence,  it  would  have  been  hard
for  Washington  to  make  the  leap  from  there  to  an  analogy  in  Asia.  Recourse
to  "national  communism"  in  Vietnam  as  an  eventual  bulwark  against  China,
indeed,  would  have  called  for  a  perspicacity  unique  in  U.S.  history.  The  risk  was
there,  too.  The  reality  of  Ho's  strength  in  Vietnam  could  have  worked  seriously
against  U.S.  interests  as  well  as  against  Chinese  Communist  interests.  Ho's  well-
known  leadership  and  drive,  the  iron  discipline  and  effectiveness  of  the  Viet
Minh,  the  demonstrated  fighting  capability  of  his  armies,  a  dynamic  Vietnamese
people  under  Ho's  control,  could  have  produced  a  dangerous  period  of  Viet-
namese expansionism.  Laos  and  Cambodia  would  have  been  easy  pickings  for
such  a  Vietnam.  Ho,  in  fact,  always  considered  his  leadership  to  extend  to  Indo-
china as  a  whole,  and  his  party  was  originally  called  the  Indochinese  Communist
Party.  Thailand,  Malaya,  Singapore,  and  even  Indonesia,  could  have  been  next.  It
could  have  been  the  "domino  theory"  with  Ho  instead  of  Mao.  And,  it  could
have  been  the  dominoes  with  Mao.  This  may  seem  implausible,  but  it  is  only
slightly  less  of  a  bad  dream  than  what  has  happened  to  Vietnam  since.  The
path  of  prudence  rather  than  the  path  of  risk  seemed  the  wiser  choice.

[Supporting  text  not  available]


53


2.  U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco- Viet  Minh  War,
1950-1954


Foreword

This  portion  of  the  study  treats  U.S.  poHcy  towards  the  war  in  Indochina  from
the  U.S.  decision  to  recognize  the  Vietnamese  NationaHst  regime  of  the  Emperor
Bao  Dai  in  February,  1950,  through  the  U.S.  dehberations  on  mihtary  interven-
tion in  late  1953  and  early  1954.

Summary

It  has  been  argued  that  even  as  the  U.S.  began  supporting  the  French  in  Indo-
china, the  U.S.  missed  opportunities  to  bring  peace,  stability  and  independence  to
Vietnam.  The  issues  arise  from  the  belief  on  the  part  of  some  critics  that  (a)  the
U.S.  made  no  attempt  to  seek  out  and  support  a  democratic-nationalist  alternative
in  Vietnam;  and  (b)  the  U.S.  commanded,  but  did  not  use,  leverage  to  move  the
French  toward  granting  genuine  Vietnamese  independence.

U.S.  POLICY  AND  THE  BAO  DAI  REGIME

The  record  shows  that  through  1953,  the  French  pursued  a  policy  which  was
based  on  military  victory  and  excluded  meaningful  negotiations  with  Ho  Chi
Minh.  The  French  did,  however,  recognize  the  requirement  for  an  alternative
focus  for  Vietnamese  nationalist  aspirations,  and  from  1947  forward,  advanced
the  "Bao  Dai  solution."  The  record  shows  that  the  U.S.  was  hesitant  through
1949  to  endorse  the  "Bao  Dai  solution"  until  Vietnam  was  in  fact  unified  and
granted  autonomy  and  did  consistently  support  the  creation  of  a  genuinely  inde-
pendent, noncommunist  Vietnamese  government  to  supplant  French  rule.  None-
theless, the  fall  of  China  and  the  deteriorating  French  military  position  in  Indo-
china caused  both  France  and  the  U.S.  to  press  the  "Bao  Dai  solution."  In  early
1950,  after  French  ratification  of  the  Ely  see  Agreement  granting  "Vietnam's
independence,"  the  U.S.  recognized  Bao  Dai  and  initiated  military  and  economic
aid,  even  before  transfer  of  governmental  power  actually  occurred.  Thereafter,
the  French  yielded  control  only  pro  forma,  while  the  Emperor  Bao  Dai  adopted
a  retiring,  passive  role,  and  turned  his  government  over  to  discreditable  poli-
ticians. The  Bat  Dai  regime  was  neither  popular  nor  efficient,  and  its  army,  de-
pendent on  French  leadership,  was  powerless.  The  impotence  of  the  Bao  Dai
regime,  the  lack  of  any  perceptible  alternatives  (except  for  the  communists),
the  fact  of  continued  French  authority  and  control 'ov'eFtHe  G'VN,  the  fact  that
the  French  alone  seemed  able  to  contain  communism  in  jndochina — all  these
constrained  U.S.  proniptings  for  a  democratic-nationalist  government  in  Vietnam.

LEVERAGE:  FRANCE  HAD  MORE  THAN  THE  UNITED  STATES

The  U.S.-French  ties  in  Europe  (NATO,  Marshall  Plan,  Mutual  Defense
Assistance  Program)  only  marginally  strengthened  U.S.  urgings  that  France
make  concessions  to  Vietnamese  nationalism.  Any  leverage  from  these  sources
was  severely  limited  by  the  broader  considerations  of  U'.S.  policy  for  the  con-


54 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  1

ftainment  of  communism  in  Europe  and  Asia.  NATO  and  the  Marshall  Plan  were
of  themselves  judged  to  be  essential  to  our  European  interests.  To  threaten
France  with  economic  and  military  sanctions  in  Europe  in  order  to  have  it  alter
its  policy  in  Indochina  was,  therefore,  not  plausible.  Similarly,  to  reduce  the

',  level  of  military  assistance  to  the  French  effort  in  Indochina  would  have  been

\|  counter-productive,  since  it  would  have  led  to  a  further  deterioration  in  the
French  military  position  there.  In  other  words,  there  was  a  basic  incompatibiUty
in  the  two  strands  of  U.S.  policy:  (1)  Washington  wanted  France  to  fight  the
anti-communist  war  and  win,  preferably  with  U.S.  guidance  and  advice;  and  (2)
Washington  expected  the  French,  when  battlefield  victory  was  assured,  to  mag-
nanimously withdraw  from  Indochina.  For  France,  which  was  probably  fighting
more  a  colonial  than  an  anti-communist  war,  and  which  had  to  consider  the
effects  of  withdrawal  on  colonial  holdings  in  Algeria,  Tunisia  and  Morocco,  mag-
nanimous withdrawal  was  not  too  likely.  "

France,  having  no  such  policy  incompatibilities,  could  and  did  pursue  a  con-
sistent course  with  the  stronger  bargaining  hand.  Thus,  the  French  were  able  to
resist  pressures  from  Washington  and  through  the  MAAG  in  Saigon  to  create  a
truly  Vietnamese  army,  to  grant  the  Vietnamese  more  local  autonomy  and  to
wage  the  war  more  effectively.  MAAG  was  relegated  to  a  supply  function  and
its  occasional  admonitions  to  the  French  were  interpreted  by  them  as  interfer-
ence in  their  internal  affairs.  Even  though  by  1954,  the  U.S.  was  financing  78%
of  the  costs  of  the  war,  the  French  retained  full  control  of  the  dispensation  of
military  assistance  and  of  the  intelligence  and  planning  aspects  of  the  military
struggle.  The  expectation  of  French  victory  over  the  Viet  Minh  encouraged  the
U.S.  to  "go  along"  with  Paris  until  the  conclusion  of  the  war.  Moreover,  the
U.S.  was  reluctant  to  antagonize  the  French  because  of  the  high  priority  given

j  in  Washington's  planning  to  French  participation  in  the  European  Defense  Com-
munity. France,  therefore,  had  considerable  leverage  and,  unless  the  U.S.  sup-
ported Paris  on  its  own  terms,  the  French  could,  and  indeed  did,  threaten  not  to

/  join  the  EDC  and  to  stop  fighting  in  Indochina.

PERCEPTIONS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  THREAT  TO  SOUTHEAST
ASIA  AND  TO  BASIC  U.S.  INTERESTS

American  thinking  and  policy-making  was  dominated  by  the  tendency  to  view
communism  in  monolithic  terms.  The  Viet  Minh  was,  therefore,  seen  as  part  of
the  Southeast  Asia  manifestation  of  the  world-wide  communist  expansionary
movement.  French  resistance  to  Ho  Chi  Minh,  in  turn,  was  thought  to  be  a
crucial  link  in  the  containment  of  communism.  This  strategic  perception  of  the
communist  threat  was  supported  by  the  espousal  of  the  domino  principle:  the
loss  of  a  single  nation  in  Southeast  Asia  to  communism  would  inexorably  lead
to  the  other  nations  of  the  area  falling  under  communist  control.  The  domino
principle,  which  probably  had  its  origin  at  the  time  of  the  Nationalist  withdrawal
from  mainland  China,  was  at  the  root  of  U.S.  policy.  Although  elements  of  a
domino-like  theory  could  be  found  in  NSC  papers  before  the  start  of  the  Korean
War,  the  Chinese  intervention  in  Korea  was  thought  to  be  an  ominous  confirma-
tion of  its  validity.  The  possibility  of  a  large-scale  Chinese  intervention  in  Indo-
china, similar  to  that  in  Korea,  was  feared,  especially  after  the  armistice  in
Korea.

The  Eisenhower  Administration  followed  the  basic  policy  of  its  predecessor,
but  also  deepened  the  American  commitment  to  containment  in  Asia.  Secretary
Dulles  pursued  a  forthright,  anti-communist  policy  and  made  it  clear  that  he
would  not  permit  the  "loss"  of  Indochina,  in  the  manner  the  Democrats  had


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  55

allegedly  allowed  the  "loss"  of  China.  Dulles  warned  China  not  to  intervene,
and  urged  the  French  to  drive  toward  a  military  victory.  Dulles  was  opposed  to
a  cease-fire  and  tried  to  dissuade  the  French  from  negotiations  with  the  Viet
Minh  until  they  had  markedly  improved  their  bargaining  position  through  action  ,
on  the  battlefield.  The  NSC  in  early  1954  was  persuaded  that  a  non-communist  J
coalition  regime  would  eventually  turn  the  country  over  to  the  Viet  Minh.  In  |
consequence  of  this  more  militant  policy,  the  U.S.  Government  tended  to  focus
on  the  military  rather  than  the  political  aspects  of  the  French-Viet  Minh  struggle.

Among  the  more  frequently  cited  misapprehensions  concerning  U.S.  policy  in
Vietnam  is  the  view  that  the  Eisenhower  Administration  flatly  rejected  inter-
vention in  the  First  Indochina  War.  The  record  shows  plainly  that  the  U.S.  did
seriously  consider  intervention,  and  advocated  it  to  the  U.K.  and  other  allies.
With  the  intensification  of  the  French-Viet  Minh  war  and  the  deterioration  of
the  French  military  position,  the  United  States  was  forced  to  take  a  position  on:
first,  a  possible  U.S.  military  intervention  in  order  to  avert  a  Viet  Minh  victory;
second,  the  increasingly  likely  contingency  of  negotiations  between  Paris  and
Ho  Chi  Minh  to  end  the  war  through  a  political  settlement.  In  order  to  avoid  a
French  sell-out,  and  as  an  alternative  to  unilateral  U.S.  intervention,  the  U.S.
proposed  in  1954  to  broaden  the  war  by  involving  a  number  of  aUies  in  a  col-
lective defense  effort  through  "united  action."

THE  INTERAGENCY  DEBATE  OVER  U.S.  INTERVENTION
IN  INDOCHINA

The  U.S.  Government  internal  debate  on  the  question  of  intervention  centered
essentially  on  the  desirability  and  feasibility  of  U.S.  military  action.  Indochina's
importance  to  U.S.  security  interests  in  the  Far  East  was  taken  for  granted.  The
Eisenhower  Administration  followed  in  general  terms  the  rationale  for  American
interest  in  Indochina  that  was  expressed  by  the  Truman  Administration.  With
respect  to  intervention,  the  Truman  Administration's  NSC  124  of  February  1952
recognized  that  the  U.S.  mi^ht  be  forced  to  take  some  military  action  in  order
to  prevent  the  subversion  of  Southeast  Asia.  In  late  1953-early  1954,  as  the  fall
of  Indochina  seemed  imminent,  the  question  of  intervention  came  to  the  fore.
The  Defense  Department  pressed  for  a  determination  by  highest  authority  of  the
size  and  nature  of  the  forces  the  U.S.  was  willing  to  commit  in  Indochina.  Some
in  DOD  questioned  the  then  operating  assumption  that  U.S.  air  and  naval  forces
would  suffice  as  aid  for  the  French.  The  Army  was  particularly  concerned  about
contingency  planning  that  assumed  that  U.S.  air  and  naval  action  alone  could
bring  military  victory,  and  argued  for  realistic  estimates  of  requisite  land  forces,
including  the  degree  of  mobilization  that  would  be  necessary.  The  State  Depart-
ment thought  that  Indochina  was  so  critical  from  a  foreign  policy  viewpoint  that
intervention  might  be  necessary.  But  DOD  and  the  ICS,  estimating  that  air-
naval  action  alone  could  not  stem  the  surging  Viet  Minh,  recommended  that
rather  than  intervening  directly,  the  U.S.  should  concentrate  on  urging  Paris  to
train  an  expanded  indigenous  army,  and  should  exert  all  possible  pressures — in
Europe  as  well  as  in  Asia — to  motivate  the  French  to  fight  hard  for  a  military
victory.  Many  in  the  U.S.  Government  (the  Ridgway  Report  stands  out  in  this
group)  were  wary  that  U.S.  intervention  might  provoke  Chinese  Communist
intervention.  In  the  latter  case,  even  a  considerable  U.S.  deployment  of  ground
forces  would  not  be  able  to  stem  the  tide  in  Indochina.  A  number  of  special
high-level  studies  were  unable  to  bridge  the  evident  disparity  between  those  who
held  that  vital  U.S.  interests  were  at  stake  in  Indochina,  and  those  who  were


56 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

unwilling  to  make  a  firm  decision  to  intervene  with  U.S.  ground  forces  to  assure
those  interests.  Consequently,  when  the  French  began  pressing  for  U.S.  inter-
vention at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  the  Eisenhower  Administration  took  the  position  that
the  U.S.  would  not  intervene  unilaterally,  but  only  in  concert  with  a  number  of
European  and  Far  Eastern  allies  as  part  of  a  combined  force.

THE  ATTEMPT  TO  ORGANIZE  "UNITED  ACTION"

This  "united  action"  proposal,  announced  publicly  by  Secretary  Dulles  on
March  29,  1954,  was  also  designed  to  offer  the  French  an  alternative  to  surrender
at  the  negotiating  table.  Negotiations  for  a  political  settlement  of  the  Franco-
Viet  Minh  war,  however,  were  assured  when  the  Big  Four  Foreign  Ministers
meeting  in  February  at  Berlin  placed  Indochina  on  the  agenda  of  the  impending
Geneva  Conference.  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  insisted  upon  this,  over  U.S.  ob-
jections, because  of  the  mounting  pressure  in  France  for  an  end  to  the  seemingly
interminable  and  costly  war.  The  "peace  faction"  in  Paris  became  stronger  in
proportion  to  the  "peace  feelers"  let  out  by  Ho  Chi  Minh,  and  the  lack  of  French
success  on  the  battlefield.  U.S.  policy  was  to  steer  the  French  away  from  negotia-
tions because  of  the  fear  that  Indochina  would  thereby  be  handed  over  to  the
communist  "empire."

Secretary  Dulles  envisaged  a  ten-nation  collective  defense  force  to  take  "united
action"  to  prevent  a  French  defeat — if  necessary  before  the  Geneva  Conference.
Dulles  and  Admiral  Radford  were,  at  first,  inclined  towards  an  early  unilateral
intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  as  requested  by  the  French  (the  so-called  "Opera-
tion Vulture").  But  Congressional  leaders  indicated  they  would  not  support  U.S.
military  action  without  active  allied  participation,  and  President  Eisenhower  de-
cided that  he  would  not  intervene  without  Congressional  approval.  In  addition  to
allied  participation,  Congressional  approval  was  deemed  dependent  upon  a  public
declaration  by  France  that  it  was  speeding  up  the  timetable  for  independence  for
the  Associated  States.

The  U.S.  was  unable  to  gather  much  support  for  "united  action"  except  in
Thailand  and  the  Philippines.  The  British  response  was  one  of  hesitation  in  gen-
eral, and  flat  opposition  to  undertaking  military  action  before  the  Geneva  Con-
ference. Eden  feared  that  it  would  lead  to  an  expansion  of  the  war  with  a  high
risk  of  Chinese  intervention.  Moreover,  the  British  questioned  both  the  U.S.
domino  principle,  and  the  belief  that  Indochina  would  be  totally  lost  at  Dien  Bien
Phu  and  through  negotiations  at  Geneva.  As  for  the  French,  they  were  less  inter-
ested in  "united  action"  than  in  immediate  U.S.  military  assistance  at  Dien  Bien
Phu.  Paris  feared  that  united  action  would  lead  to  the  internationalization  of  the
war,  and  take  control  out  of  its  hands.  In  addition,  it  would  impede  or  delay  the
very  negotiations  leading  towards  a  settlement  which  the  French  increasingly  de-
sired. But  repeated  French  requests  for  direct  U.S.  intervention  during  the  final
agony  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  failed  to  alter  President  Eisenhower's  conviction  that  it
would  be  an  error  for  the  U.S.  to  act  alone.

Following  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  during  the  Geneva  Conference,  the
"domino  theory"  underwent  a  reappraisal.  On  a  May  1 1  press  conference.  Secre-
tary Dulles  observed  that  "Southeast  Asia  could  be  secured  even  without,  perhaps,
Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia."  In  a  further  remark  that  was  deleted  from  the
official  transcript,  Dulles  said  that  Laos  and  Cambodia  were  "important  but  by
no  means  essential"  because  they  were  poor  countries  with  meager  populations.


{End  of  Summary)


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  57
I. U.S.  POLICY  AND  THE  BAO  DAI  REGIME

A. THE  BAO  DAI  SOLUTION

1.  The  French  Predicament

French  perceptions  of  the  conflict  which  broke  out  in  December,  1946,  be-
tween their  forces  in  Indochina  and  the  Viet  Minh  forces  of  the  Democratic
RepubHc  of  Vietnam  (DRV)  began  to  alternate  between  boundless  optimism  and
unbridled  gloom.  In  May,  1947,  Minister  of  War  Coste-Floret  announced  in
Paris  that:  "There  is  no  military  problem  any  longer  in  Indochina  .  .  .  the  f
success  of  French  arms  is  complete."  Within  six  months,  though  ambitious  |
armored,  amphibious,  and  airborne  drives  had  plunged  into  the  northern  moun-
tains and  along  the  Annam  coast,  Viet  Minh  sabotage  and  raids  along  lines  of
communication  had  mounted  steadily,  and  Paris  had  come  to  realize  that  France
had  lost  the  military  initiative.  In  the  meantime,  the  French  launched  political
forays  similarly  ambitious  and  equally  unproductive.  Leon  Pignon,  political  ad-
viser to  the  French  Commander  in  Indochina,  and  later  High  Commissioner,
wrote  in  January,  1947,  that:

Our  objective  is  clear:  to  transpose  to  the  field  of  Vietnamese  domestic
politics  the  quarrel  we  have  with  the  Viet  Minh,  and  to  involve  ourselves  as
little  as  possible  in  the  campaigns  and  reprisals  which  ought  to  be  the  work
of  the  native  adversaries  of  that  party.

Within  a  month,  an  emissary  journeyed  into  the  jungle  to  deliver  to  Ho  Chi
Minh's  government  demands  tantamount  to  unconditional  surrender.  About  the
same  time,  French  representatives  approached  Bao  Dai,  the  former  Emperor  of
Annam,  with  proposals  that  he  undertake  to  form  a  Vietnamese  government  as
an  alternate  to  Ho  Chi  Minh's.  Being  unable  to  force  a  military  resolution,  and
having  foreclosed  meaningful  negotiations  with  Ho,  the  French  turned  to  Bao
Dai  as  their  sole  prospect  for  extrication  from  the  growing  dilemma  in  Vietnam.

2.  The  Ha  Long  Bay  Agreement,  1948

Bao  Dai's  mandarinal  court  in  Hue,  Annam,  had  been  little  more  than  an
instrument  of  French  colonial  policy,  and — after  the  occupation  by  Japan — of
Japanese  policy.  Bao  Dai  had  become  Emperor  at  the  age  of  12,  in  1925,  but  did
not  actually  ascend  the  throne  until  1932,  after  education  in  France.  In  August,
1945,  when  the  Viet  Minh  arrived  in  Hue,  he  abdicated  in  favor  of  Ho's  Demo-
cratic Republic  of  Vietnam,  and  accepted  the  post  of  "Supreme  Adviser"  to  the
new  state.  In  1946,  he  left  Vietnam,  and  went  to  Hong  Kong.  There,  he  found
himself  solicited  not  only  by  French  representatives,  but  by  the  DRV,  who  sought
him  to  act  on  their  behalf  with  the  French.

Bao  Dai  attempted  at  first  to  maintain  a  central  position  between  the  two
protagonists,  but  was  soon  persuaded  to  decline  the  Viet  Minh  overtures  by  non-
Communist  nationalists.  A  group  of  these,  including  members  of  the  Cao  Dai,
Hoa  Hao,  Dong  Minh  Hoi,  Dai  Vet,  and  the  VNQDD  formed  a  National  Union,
and  declared  support  for  Bao  Dai.  One  authority  termed  the  National  Union  "a
fragile  coaHtion  of  discredited  collaborators,  ambitious  masters  of  intrigue,  in-
competent sectarians,  and  a  smattering  of  honest  leaders  without  a  following."


58 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Among  the  latter  were  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  who  "for  the  first  and  only  time,  joined
a  party  of  which  he  was  not  the  founder,"  and  pledged  to  back  the  Emperor  so
long  as  he  pursued  independence  for  Vietnam.  Now,  having  eliminated  the  Viet
Minh  support  option,  Bao  Dai  became  more  compliant  in  his  discussions  with
the  French,  and  the  French  became  correspondingly  stiffer  in  their  attitude
toward  the  Viet  Minh.  Yet,  little  came  of  the  talks.  On  December  7,  1947,  aboard
a  French  warship  in  Ha  Long  Bay,  Bao  Dai  signed  an  accord  with  the  French,
committing  the  French  to  Vietnamese  political  independence  so  minimally  that
it  was  promptly  condemned  not  only  by  Diem,  but  also  by  more  opportunistic
colleagues  in  the  National  Union.  Bao  Dai,  in  what  might  have  been  a  political
withdrawal,  removed  himself  from  the  developing  intrigue,  and  fled  to  European
pleasure  centers  for  a  four  month  jaunt  which  earned  him  the  sobriquet  "night
club  emperor."

The  French,  despite  lack  of  cooperation  from  their  elusive  Vietnamese  princi-
pal, sent  diplomats  to  pursue  Bao  Dai  and  publicized  their  resolve  "to  carry  on,
outside  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  Government,  all  activities  and  negotiations  necessary
for  the  restoration  of  peace  and  freedom  in  the  Vietnamese  countries" — in  effect,
committing  themselves  to  military  victory  and  Bao  Dai.  French  persistence
eventually  persuaded  Bao  Dai  to  return  to  Hong  Kong,  to  endorse  the  formation
of  a  Vietnamese  national  government  prior  to  independence,  and  finally,  to  return
to  Vietnam  as  the  Head  of  State.  French  negotiating  pressures  on  him  and  the
National  Union  included  both  spurious  "leaks"  of  Franco-Viet  Minh  settlement
talks,  and  further  assurances  of  intentions  to  grant  Vietnamese  autonomy.  On
June  5,  1948,  Bao  Dai  witnessed  the  signing  of  another  Bay  of  Ha  Long  Agree-
ment. Thereby,  France  publicly  and  "solemnly"  recognized  the  independence  of
Vietnam — but  specifically  retained  control  over  foreign  relations  and  the  Army,
and  deferred  transfer  of  other  governmental  functions  to  future  negotiations;  no
authority  was  in  fact  transferred  to  the  Vietnamese.  Again  Bao  Dai  retired  to
Europe,  while  in  Hanoi  the  French  assembled  a  transparently  impotent  semblance
of  native  government.  A  second  summer  of  war  passed  in  1948  without  dispelling
the  military  miasma  over  Indochina,  and  without  making  the  "Bao  Dai  solution"
any  less  repugnant  among  Vietnamese  patriots.  Opposition  to  it  began  to  mount
among  French  Leftists.  This  disenchantment,  combined  with  a  spreading  accept-
ance of  the  strategic  view  that  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  war  was  a  key  anti-
Communist  struggle,  influenced  French  leaders  to  liberalize  their  approach  to  the
"Bao  Dai  solution."

3. Ely  see  Agreement,  1949

On  March  8,  1949,  after  months  of  negotiations,  French  President  Auriol,  in
an  exchange  of  letters  with  Bao  Dai,  reconfirmed  independence  for  Vietnam  as
an  Associated  State  of  the  French  Union  and  detailed  procedures  for  unifying
Vietnam  and  placing  it  under  Vietnamese  administration.  Nonetheless,  in  the
Elysee  Agreement,  France  yielded  control  of  neither  Vietnam's  army  nor  its
foreign  relations,  and  again  postponed  arrangements  for  virtually  all  other  aspects
of  autonomy.  However,  Bao  Dai,  apparently  convinced  that  France  was  now
sufficiently  desperate  in  Indochina  that  it  would  have  to  honor  the  Agreements,
declared  that :

.  .  .  An  era  of  reconstruction  and  renovation  will  open  in  Vietnam.  The
country  will  be  given  democratic  institutions  that  will  be  called  on  primarily
to  approve  the  present  agreement.  .  .  .  Profound  economic  and  social  re-


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  59


forms  will  be  instituted  to  raise  the  general  standard  of  living  and  to  promote
social  justice,  which  is  the  condition  and  guarantee  of  order  ...  [I  look
for]  the  union  of  all  Vietnamese  regardless  of  their  political  and  religious
tendencies,  and  the  generous  support  of  France  on  which  I  can  count  .  .  .

His  public  stance  notwithstanding,  Bao  Dai  delayed  his  return  to  Vietnam  until
a  Cochinchinese  Assembly  had  been  elected  (albeit  in  a  farce  of  an  election),
and  did  not  proceed  to  Saigon  until  the  French  Assembly  had  approved  Cochin-
china's  joining  the  rest  of  Vietnam.  In  late  June,  1949,  Vietnam  was  legally  united
under  Bao  Dai,  but  the  related  alteration  of  administrative  functions  was  slow,
and  usually  only  pro  forma;  no  genuine  power  or  authority  was  turned  over  to
the  Vietnamese.  The  State  of  Vietnam  became  a  camouflage  for  continued  French
rule  in  Indochina.  As  Bao  Dai  himself  characterized  the  situation  in  1950,  "What
they  call  a  Bao  Dai  solution  turned  out  to  be  just  a  French  solution.  .  .  .  The
situation  in  Indochina  is  getting  worse  every  day  .  .  ."

4. Bao  Dai's  Governments

The  unsavory  elements  of  the  coalition  supporting  Bao  Dai  dominated  his
regime.  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  and  a  few  other  upright  nationalists  refused  high  gov-
ernment posts,  and  withdrew  their  support  from  Bao  Dai  when  their  expectations
of  autonomy  were  disappointed.  Diem's  public  statement  criticized  the  probity  of
those  who  did  accept  office:

The  national  aspirations  of  the  Vietnamese  people  will  be  satisfied  only
on  the  day  when  our  nation  obtains  the  same  political  regime  which  India
and  Pakistan  enjoy  ...  I  believe  it  is  only  just  to  reserve  the  best  posts  in
the  new  Vietnam  for  those  who  have  deserved  best  of  the  country;  I  speak
of  those .whoxesist  .  .  .

However,  far  from  looking  to  the  "resistance,"  Bao  Dai  chose  his  leaders  from
among  men  with  strong  identification  with  France,  often  men  of  great  and  dubi-
ous wealth,  or  with  ties  with  the  sub-worlds  of  French  neo-mercantiUsm  and
Viet  vice.  None  commanded  a  popular  following.  General  Georges  Revers,  Chief
of  Staff  of  the  French  Army,  who  was  sent  to  Vietnam  to  appraise  the  situation
in  May  and  June,  1949,  wrote  that:

If  Ho  Chi  Minh  has  been  able  to  hold  off  French  intervention  for  so  long,
it  is  because  the  Viet  Minh  leader  has  surrounded  himself  with  a  group  of
men  of  incontestable  worth  .  .  .  [Bao  Dai,  by  contrast,  had]  a  government
composed  of  twenty  representatives  of  phantom  parties,  the  best  organized
of  which  would  have  difficulty  in  rallying  twenty-five  adherents  .  .  .

Bao  Dai  himself  did  next  to  nothing  to  make  his  government  either  more  repre-
sentative or  more  efficient.  He  divided  his  time  among  the  pleasures  of  the  resort
towns  of  Dalat,  Nha  Trang,  and  Banmethuout,  and  for  all  practical  purposes,
remained  outside  the  process  of  government.

An  American  diplomat  serving  in  Vietnam  at  the  time  who  knew  Bao  Dai  well,
characterized  him  in  these  terms:

Bao  Dai,  above  all,  was  an  intelligent  man.  Intellectually,  he  could  discuss
the  complex  details  of  the  various  agreements  and  of  the  whole  involved


60 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

relationship  with  France  as  well  as  or  better  than  anyone  I  knew.  But  he
was  a  man  who  was  crippled  by  his  French  upbringing.  His  manner  was  too
impassive.  He  allowed  himself  to  be  sold  by  the  French  on  an  erroneous
instead  of  a  valid  evolutionary  concept,  and  this  suited  his  own  termpera-
ment.  He  was  too  congenial,  and  he  was  almost  pathologically  shy,  which
was  one  reason  he  always  liked  to  wear  dark  glasses.  He  would  go  through
depressive  cycles,  and  when  he  was  depressed,  he  would  dress  himself  in
Vietnamese  clothes  instead  of  European  ones,  and  would  mince  no  words
about  the  French.  His  policy,  he  said  to  me  on  one  of  these  dour  occasions,
was  one  of  "grignotage,"  or  "nibbling,"  and  he  was  painfully  aware  of  it.
The  French,  of  course,  were  never  happy  that  we  Americans  had  good  rela-
tions with  Bao  Dai,  and  they  told  him  so.  Unfortunately,  they  also  had  some
blackmail  on  him,  about  his  relationship  with  gambling  enterprises  in  Saigon
and  his  love  of  the  fleshpots.

Whatever  his  virtues,  Bao  Dai  was  not  a  man  who  could  earn  the  fealty  of  the
Vietnamese  peasants.  He  could  not  even  hold  the  loyalty  of  honest  nationalists,
one  of  whom,  for  example,  was  Dr.  Phan  Quang  Dan — a  prominent  and  able
non-Communist  leader  and  early  supporter  of  the  "solution,"  and  a  personal
friend  of  Bao  Dai — (Dr.  Dan  later  was  the  opposition  leader  of  the  Diem  era).
Dr.  Dan  reported  a  touching  conversation  with  Bao  Dai's  mother  in  which  she
described  her  son  at  a  loss  to  know  whom  to  trust,  and  heartsick  at  the  at-
mosphere of  hostility  which  surrounded  him.  Yet  Dr.  Dan  resigned  as  Bao  Dai's
Minister  of  Information  over  the  Elysee  Agreement,  and,  though  he  remained
close  to  the  Emperor,  would  not  reassume  public  office  for  him.  Bao  Dai  himself
furnished  an  apt  description  of  his  political  philosophy  which  may  explain  why
he  failed  to  capture  the  hearts  of  either  beleaguered  farmers  or  serious  political
leaders — neither  of  whom  could  stomach  "nibbling"  when  revolution  was  re-
quired. Said  Bao  Dai:

To  practice  politics  is  like  playing  a  game,  and  I  have  always  considered
life  a  game.

5. The  Pau  Negotiations,  1950

Yet  Bao  Dai  did  work  at  pressing  the  French.  French  officials  in  fact  com-
plained to  an  American  writer  that  Bao  Dai  spent  too  much  of  his  time  on  such
pursuits:

He  has  concentrated  too  much  on  getting  what  he  can  from  us  instead  of
building  up  his  support  among  the  people  of  the  country  .  .  .  History  will
judge  if  he  did  right  in  putting  so  much  stress  on  that  .  .  .

From  late  June,  1950,  until  the  end  of  November,  Bao  Dai  stayed  close  to  the
series  of  conferences  in  Pau,  France,  designed  to  arrange  the  transfer  to  the
Vietnamese  of  the  services  of  immigration,  communications,  foreign  trade,  cus-
toms, and  finances.  The  issue  of  the  finance  service  was  a  particularly  thorny
one,  involving  as  it  did  lucrative  foreign  exchange  controls.  While  the  French  did
eventually  grant  significant  concessions  to  the  Vietnamese,  Laotians,  and  Cam-
bodians in  each  area  discussed,  they  preserved  "rights  of  observation"  and  "inter-
vention" in  matters  that  "concerned  the  French  Union  as  a  whole."  Indeed,  the
French  assured  themselves  full  access  to  government  information,  license  to


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950^1954  61

participate  in  all  government  decisions,  and  little  reduction  in  economic  benefits.

Some  French  commentators  viewed  Pau  as  an  unmitigated  disaster  and  the
assurance  of  an  early  French  demise  in  Indochina.  As  one  writer  put  it:

By  accepting  the  eventual  restriction  of  trade  within  the  French  Union,
by  losing  all  effective  authority  over  the  issuance  of  money,  by  renouncing
control  over  foreign  trade,  by  permitting  a  system  of  controlled  prices  for
exports  and  imports,  we  have  given  the  Associated  States  all  the  power  they
need  if  they  wish  to  assure  the  ruin  of  our  enterprises  and  compel  their
withdrawal  without  in  any  way  molesting  our  compatriots.

But  a  contemporary  Vietnamese  critic  took  a  quite  different  view:

All  these  conventions  conserve  in  Indochina  a  privileged  position  for
French  capital,  supported  by  the  presence  of  a  powerful  fleet  and  army.
Even  if  no  one  talks  any  more  of  an  Indochinese  Federation,  it  is  still  a
federalism  both  administrative  and  economic  (Monetary  Union,  Customs
Union,  Communications  Union,  etc.)  which  co-ordinates  the  various  activi-
ties of  the  three  Associated  States.  France  always  exercises  control  through
the  representatives  she  has  in  all  the  organs  of  planning  or  of  federal
surveillance,  and  through  what  is  in  effect  the  right  of  veto,  because  the
president  or  the  secretary  general  of  these  committees  is  always  elected  by
joint  decision  of  the  four  governments  and,  further,  because  most  of  the
decisions  of  the  committees  are  made  by  unanimous  agreement.

Bao  Dai's  delegates  were,  however,  generally  pleased  with  the  outcome  of  Pau.
His  Prime  Minister,  Tran  Van  Huu  declared  as  he  signed  the  conventions  that
"our  independence  is  now  perfect."  But  to  the  ordinary  Vietnamese,  to  honest
Frenchmen,  and  to  the  Americans,  Tran  Van  Huu  was  proved  dramatically
wrong.

B. U.S.  POLICY  TOWARDS  BAO  DAI

1. Qualified  Approval,  1947-1950

The  "Bao  Dai  solution"  depended  on  American  support.  During  the  1950
negotiations  in  Pau,  France,  Bao  Dai's  Prime  Minister  Tran  Van  Huu  was  called
back  to  Indochina  by  a  series  of  French  military  reverses  in  Tonkin.  Tran  Van
Huu  seized  the  occasion  to  appeal  to  the  United  States  "as  the  leading  democratic
nation,"  and  hoped  that  the  U.S.  would;

.  .  .  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  France  in  order  to  achieve  democratic
freedom.  We  want  the  right  to  decide  our  own  affairs  for  ourselves,

Tran  demanded  the  Elysee  Agreement  be  superseded  by  genuine  autonomy  for
Vietnam :

It  is  not  necessary  for  young  men  to  die  so  that  a  French  engineer  can
be  director  of  the  port  of  Saigon.  Many  people  are  dying  every  day  because
Viet  Nam  is  not  given  independence.  If  we  had  independence  the  people
would  have  no  more  reason  to  fight.


62 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Tran's  addressing  the  U.S.  thus  was  realistic,  if  not  judicious,  for  the  U.S.  had
already  become  involved  in  Indochina  as  one  part  of  a  troubled  triangle  with
France  and  Bao  Dai's  regime.  Indeed,  there  had  been  an  American  role  in  the
"Bao  Dai  solution"  from  its  inception.  Just  before  the  Ha  Long  Bay  Agreements,
I  the  French  initiative  had  received  some  support  from  a  December,  1947,  Life
magazine  article  by  William  C.  Bullitt,  former  U.S.  Ambassador  to  France.
Bullitt  argued  for  a  policy  aimed  at  ending  "the  saddest  war"  by  winning  the
majority  of  Vietnamese  nationalists  away  from  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  from  the  Com-
munists through  a  movement  built  around  Bao  Dai.  Bullitt's  views  were  widely
accepted  in  France  as  a  statement  of  U.S.  policy,  and  a  direct  endorsement,  and
promise  of  U.S.  aid,  for  Bao  Dai.  Bao  Dai,  whether  he  accepted  the  Bullitt
canard  or  not,  seemed  to  sense  that  the  U.S.  would  inevitably  be  drawn  into
Southeast  Asia,  and  apparently  expected  American  involvement  to  be  accom-
panied by  U.S.  pressure  on  France  on  behalf  of  Vietnamese  nationalism.  But  the
U.S.,  though  it  appreciated  France's  dilemma,  was  reluctant  initially  to  endorse
the  Bao  Dai  solution  until  it  became  a  reality.  The  following  State  Department
messages  indicate  the  U.S.  position:

July  10,  1948  (Paris  3621  to  State):

.  .  .  France  is  faced  with  alternatives  of  unequivocally  and  promptly
approving  principle  [of]  Viet  independence  within  French  union  and  [the]
union  [of  the]  three  parts  of  Vietnam  or  losing  Indochina.

July  14,  1948  (State  2637  to  Paris) :

.  .  .  Once  [Bay  of  Ha  Long]  Agreement  together  with  change  in  status
[of]  Cochinchina  [is]  approved.  Department  would  be  disposed  [to]  consider
lending  its  support  to  extent  of  publicly  approving  French  Government's
action  as  forward  looking  step  toward  settlement  of  troubled  situation  [in]
Indochina  and  toward  realization  of  aspirations  Vietnamese  people.  It  ap-
pears to  Department  that  above  stated  U.S.  approval  would  materially  assist
in  strengthening  hands  of  nationalists  as  opposed  to  communists  in  Indo-
china .  .  .

August  30,  1948  (State  3368  to  Paris) :

Department  appreciates  difficulties  facing  any  French  Government  taking
decisive  action  vis-a-vis  Indochina,  but  can  only  see  steadily  deteriorating
situation  unless  [there  is]  more  positive  approval  [Bay  of  Ha  Long]  Agree-
ment, enactment  legislation  or  action  permitting  change  Cochinchina  status,
and  immediate  commencement  formal  negotiations  envisaged  that  Agree-
ment. Department  believes  [that]  nothing  should  be  left  undone  which  will
strengthen  truly  nationalist  groups  [in]  Indochina  and  induce  present  sup-
porters [of  the]  Viet  Minh  [to]  come  to  [the]  side  [of]  that  group.  No  such
inducement  possible  unless  that  group  can  show  concrete  evidence  [that]
French  [are]  prepared  [to]  implement  promptly  creation  Vietnamese  free
state  [which  is]  associated  [with  the]  French  Union  and  with  all  attributes
free  state  .  .  .

V~ January  17,  1949  (State  145  to  Paris) :

While  Department  desirous  Ftench  coming  to  terms  with  Bao  Dai  or  any
truly  nationalist  group  which  has  reasonable  chance  winning  over  preponder-
ance of  Vietnamese,  we  cannot  at  this  time  irretrevably  [sic]  commit  U.S.  to
support  of  native  government  which  by  failing  develop  appeal  among  Viet-
'  namese  might  become  virtually  puppet  government,  separated  from  people,
and  existing  only  by  presence  French  military  forces  .  .  .


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  63

The  Elysee  Agreement  took  place  in  March,  1949.  At  this  juncture,  the  fall  of
China  obtruded,  and  the  U.S.  began  to  view  the  "Bao  Dai  solution"  with  a  greater
sense  of  urgency:

May  10,  1949  (State  77  to  Saigon) :

Assumption  .  .  .  Department  desires  [the]  success  Bao  Dai  experiment
entirely  correct.  Since  [there]  appears  [to]  be  no _other  alternative  to  [estab-
lished] Commie  pattern  [in]  Vietnam,  Department  considers  no  effort  should
be  spared  by  France,  other  Western  powers,  and  non-Commie  Asian  nations
to  assure  experiment  best  chance  succeeding.

At  proper  time  and  under  proper  circumstances  Department  will  be  pre-
pared [to]  do  its  part  by  extending  recognition  [to  the]  Bao  Dai  Government
and  by  exploring  [the]  possibility  of  complying  with  any  request  by  such  a
Government  for  U.S.  arms  and  economic  assistance.  [It]  must  be  understood,
however,  [that]  aid  program  this  nature  would  require  Congressional  ap-
proval. Since  U.S.  could  scarcely  afford  backing  [a]  government  which  would
have  color  [of],  and  be  likely  [to  suffer  the]  fate  of,  [a]  puppet  regime,  it
must  first  be  clear  that  France  will  offer  all  necessary  concessions  to  make
Bao  Dai  solution  attractive  to  nationalists.

This  is  [a]  step  of  which  French  themselves  must  see  urgency  [and]  neces-
sity [in]  view  possibly  short  time  remaining  before  Commie  successes  [in]
China  are  felt  [in]  Indochina.  Moreover,  Bao  Dai  Government  must  through
own  efforts  demonstrate  capacity  [to]  organize  and  conduct  affairs  wisely  so
as  to  ensure  maximum  opportunity  of  obtaining  requisite  popular  support,
inasmuch  as  [any]  government  created  in  Indochina  analogous  [to  the]
Kuomintang  would  be  foredoomed  failure.

Assuming  essential  French  concessions  are  forthcoming,  best  chance  [of]
success  [for]  Bao  Dai  would  appear  to  be  in  persuading  Vietnamese  nation-
alists :

(1)  their  patriotic  aims  may  be  realized  promptly  through  French-
Bao  Dai  agreement

(2)  Bao  Dai  government  will  be  truly  representative  even  to  the  extent
of  including  outstanding  non-Commie  leaders  now  supporting  Ho,
and

(3)  Bao  Dai  solution  [is  the]  only  means  [of]  safeguarding  Vietnam
from  aggressive  designs  [of  the]  Commie  Chinese.

Through  1949,  the  southward  march  of  Mao's  legions  continued,  and  the  Viet
Minh  were  obviously  preparing  to  establish  relations  with  them.

2. Recognition,  1950

The  Elysee  Agreements  were  eleven  months  old  before  the  U.S.  considered
that  France  had  taken  the  concrete  steps  toward  Vietnamese  autonomy  which
the  U.S.  had  set  as  conditions  for  recognizing  Bao  Dai.  In  late  January,  1950,
events  moved  swiftly.  Ho  Chi  Minh  announced  that  his  was  the  "only  legal  gov-
ernment of  the  Vietnam  people"  and  indicated  DRV  willingness  to  cooperate
with  any  nation  willing  to  recognize  it  on  the  basis  of  "equality  and  mutual
respect  of  national  sovereignty  and  territory."  Mao  responded  promptly  with
recognition,  followed  by  Stalin.  In  France  there  was  an  acrimonious  debate  in
the  National  Assembly  between  leftist  advocates  of  immediate  truce  with  the


64 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Viet  Minh  and  government  supporters  of  the  Elysee  Agreement  to  proceed  with
the  Bao  Dai  solution.  Rene  Pleven,  Minister  of  National  Defense,  declared  that:

It  is  necessary  that  the  French  people  know  that  at  the  present  time  the
only  true  enemy  of  peace  in  Viet  Nam  is  the  Communist  Party.  Because
members  of  the  Communist  Party  know  that  peace  in  Indochina  will  be
established  by  the  policy  of  independence  that  we  are  following.

("Peace  with  Viet  Nam!  Peace  with  Viet  Nam!"  shouted  the  Commu-
nists.)

Jean  Letourneau  arose  to  assert  that:

It  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  approving  or  disapproving  a  government;
we  are  very  far  beyond  the  transitory  life  of  a  government  in  an  affair  of
this  gravity.  It  is  necessary  that,  on  the  international  level,  the  vote  that
takes  place  tonight  reveals  truly  the  major  importance  that  this  event  should
have  in  the  eyes  of  the  entire  world.

Frederic  Dupont  said:

The  Indochina  war  has  always  been  a  test  of  the  French  Union  before
international  Communism.  But  since  the  arrival  of  the  Chinese  Communists
on  the  frontier  of  Tonkin,  Indochina  has  become  the  frontier  of  Western
civilization  and  the  war  in  Indochina  is  integrated  into  the  cold  war.

Premier  Georges  Bidault  was  the  last  speaker:

The  choice  is  simple.  Moreover  there  is  no  choice.

The  National  Assembly  vote  on  January  29,  1950,  was  396  to  193.  From  the
extreme  left  there  were  cries  of  "Down  _with  the  war!"  and  Paul  Coste-Floret
replied:  "Long  live  peace."  On  February  2,  1950,  France's  formal  ratification  of
the  independence  of  Vietnam  was  announced.

The  U.S.  assessment  of  the  situation,  and  its  action,  is  indicated  in  the  fol-
lowing:


DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE

Washington

February  2,  1950

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

Subject:  U.S.  Recognition  of  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia

1.  The  French  Assembly  (Lower  House)  ratified  on  29  January  by  a  large
majority  (396  -  193)  the  bill  which,  in  effect,  established  Vietnam,  Laos  and
Cambodia  as  autonomous  states  within  the  French  Union.  The  opposition  con-
sisted of  1 8i_  Cojmmunist  votes  with  only  12  joining  in  from  other  parties.  The
Council  of  the  Republic  (Senate)  is  expected  to  pass  the  bills  by  the  same  ap-
proximate majority  on  or  about  February  3.  President  Auriol's  signature  is
expected  to  follow  shortly  thereafter.

2.  The  French  legislative  and  political  steps  thus  taken  will  transform  areas
which  were  formerly  governed  as  Protectorates  or  Colonies  into  states  within  the
French  Union,  with  considerably  more  freedom  than  they  enjoyed  under  their


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-^1954  65

prior  status.  The  French  Government  has  indicated  that  it  hopes  to  grant  greater
degrees  of  independence  to  the  three  states  as  the  security  position  in  Indochina
allows,  and  as  the  newly  formed  governments  become  more  able  to  administer
the  areas  following  withdrawal  of  the  French.

3.  Within  Laos  and  Cambodia  there  are  no  powerful  movements  directed
against  the  governments  which  are  relatively  stable.  However,  Vietnam  has  been
the  battleground  since  the  end  of  World  War  II  of  conflicting  political  parties
and  military  forces.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  who  under  various  aliases,  has  been  a  com-
munist agent  in  various  parts  of  the  world  since  1925  and  was  able  to  take  over
the  anti-French  nationalist  movement  in  1945.  After  failing  to  reach  agreement
with  the  French  regarding  the  establishment  of  an  autonomous  state  of  Vietnam,
he  withdrew  his  forces  to  the  jungle  and  hill  areas  of  Vietnam  and  has  harassed
the  French  ever  since.  His  followers  who  are  estimated_at^  approximately  75,000
armed_  men,  with  probably  the  same  number  unarmed.  His  headquarters  are  un-
known.

The  French  counter  efforts  have  included,  on  the  military  side,  the  deploy-
ment of  approximately  130,000  troops,  of  whom  the  approximately  50,000  are
local  natives  serving  voluntarily,  African  colonials,  and  a  hard  core  made  up  of
French  troops  and  Foreign  Legion  units.  Ho  Chi  Minh's  guerrilla  tactics  have
been  aimed  at  denying  the  French  control  of  Vietnam.  On  March  8,  1949  the
French  President  signed  an  agreement  with  Bao  Dai  as  the  Head  of  State,  grant-
ing independence  within  the  French  Union  to  the  Government  of  Vietnam.
Similar  agreements  were  signed  with  the  King  of  Laos  and  the  King  of  Cambodia.

Recent  developments  have  included  Chinese  Communist  victories  bringing
those  troops  to  the  Indochina  border;  recognition  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  as  the  head
of  the  legal  Government  of  Vietnam  by  Communist  China  (18  2anuary)  and  by
Soviet  Russia  (30  JanuaryJ .

4.  Recognition  by  the  United  States  of  the  three  legally  constituted  govern-
ments of  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  appears  desirable  and  in  accordance  with
United  States  foreign  policy  for  several  reasons.  Among  them  are:  encourage-
ment to  national  aspirations  under  non-Communist  leadership  for  peoples  of
colonial  areas  Th  Southeast  Asia;  the  establishment  of  stable  non-Communist  gov-
ernments in  areas  adjacent  to  Communist  China;  support  to  a  friendly  country
which  is  also  a  signatory  to  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty;  and  as  a  demonstration
of  displeasure  with  Communist  tactics  which  are  obviously  aimed  at  eventual
domination  of  Asia,  working  under  the  guise  of  indigenous  nationalism.

Subject  to  your  approval,  the  Department  of  State  recommends  that  the  United
States  of  America  extend  recognition  to  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia,  following
ratification  by  the  French  Government.

(signed)  DEAN  ACHESON

Approved
(signed)

Harry  S.  Truman
February  3,  1950


3. U.S.  Aid  to  Indochina

On  February  16,  1950,  France  requested  U.S.  military  and  economic  assistance
in  prosecuting  the  Indochina  War.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  in  a  Memorandum
for  the  President  on  March  6  stated  that:


66 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

I The  choice  confronting  the  United  States  is  to  support  the  legal  govern-
ments in  Indochina  or  to  face  the  extension  of  Communism  over  the  re-
mainder of  the  continental  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  possibly  west-
^  ward  .  .  .

The  same  month,  the  State  Department  dispatched  an  aid  survey  mission  under
R.  Allen  Griffin  to  Indochina  (and  to  Burma,  Indonesia,  Thailand,  and  Malaya).
The  Griffin  Mission  proposed  (inter  alia)  aid  for  the  Bao  Dai  government,  since
the  State  of  Vietnam  was  considered :

.  .  .  not  secure  against  internal  subversion,  political  infiltration,  or  mili-
tary aggression.

The  objective  of  each  program  is  to  assist  as  much  as  possible  in  building
strength,  and  in  so  doing  ...  to  assure  the  several  peoples  that  support  of
their  governments  and  resistance  to  communist  subversion  will  bring  them
direct  and  tangible  benefits  and  well-founded  hope  for  an  increase  in  living
standards.  Accordingly,  the  programs  are  of  two  main  types:  (1)  technical
and  material  aid  to  essential  services  and  (2)  economic  rehabilitation  and
development,  focused  primarily  on  the  provision  of  technical  assistance  and
material  aid  in  developing  agricultural  and  industrial  output.  .  .  .  These

j  activities  are  to  be  carried  on  in  a  way  best  calculated  to  demonstrate  that
the  local  national  governments  are  able  to  bring  benefits; to  their  own  people

sand  thereby  build  ..p.Qlitical .  support,  especially  among  the  rural  popula-

|tion.  .  .  .

The  aims  of  economic  assistance  to  Southeast  Asia  .  .  .  are  to  reinforce
the  non-Communist  national  governments  in  that  region  by  quickly  strength-
ening and  expanding  the  economic  life  of  the  area,  improve  the  conditions
under  which  its  people  live,  and  demonstrate  concretely  the  genuine  interest
of  the  United  States  in  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  Southeast  Asia.

In  a  strategic  assessment  of  Southeast  Asia  in  April,  1950,  the  ICS  recom-
mended military  assistance  for  Indochina,  provided :

.  .  .  that  United  States  military  aid  not  be  granted  unconditionally;  rather
that  it  be  carefully  controlled  and  that  the  aid  program  be  integrated  with
political  and  economic  programs  .  .  .  [Doc.  3]

On  May  1,  1950,  Presiden  Truman  approved  $10  million  for  urgently  needed
military  assistance  items  for  Indochina.  The  President's  decision  was  taken  in  the
context  of  the  successful  amphibious  invasion  of  Nationalist-defended  Hainan
by  a  Communist  Chinese  army  under  General  Lin  Piao — with  obvious  implica-
tions for  Indochina,  and  for  Taiwan.  One  week  later,  on  May  8,  the  Secretary  of
State  announced  U.S.  aid  for  "the  Associated  States  of  Indochina  and  to  France
in  order  to  assist  them  in  restoring  stability  and  permitting  these  states  to  pursue
their  peaceful  and  democratic  development."  Sixteen  days  later,  Bao  Dai's  govern-
ment and  France  were  notified  on  May  24  of  the  U.S.  intention  to  establish  an
economic  aid  mission  to  the  Associated  States.  [Doc.  6]  As  the  North  Korean
Army  moved  southward  on  June  27,  1950,  President  Truman  announced  that  he
had  directed  "acceleration  in  the  furnishing  of  military  assistance  to  the  forces
of  France  and  the  Associated  States  in  Indochina  .  .  ."  [Doc.  8]

The  crucial  issue  presented  by  the  American  decision  to  provide  aid  to  Indo-


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Vie t  Minh  War,  1950-^1954  67

china  was  who  should  be  the  recipient — Bao  Dai  or  France — and,  hence,  whose
policies  would  U.S.  aid  support?

4. French  Intransigence

While  the  U.S.  was  deliberating  over  whether  to  provide  economic  and  mili-
tary assistance  to  Indochina  in  early  1950,  negotiations  opened  at  Pau,  France,
among  France  and  the  Associated  States  to  set  the  timing  and  extent  of  granting
autonomy.  Had  these  talks  led  to  genuine  independence  for  Bao  Dai's  regime,
the  subsequent  U.S.-French  relationship  would  probably  have  been  much  less
complex  and  significantly  less  acerbic.  As  it  was,  however,  the  Pau  accords  led
to  little  more  independence  than  had  the  Ha  Long  Bay  or  Elysee  Agreements.
Moreover,  France's  reluctance  to  yield  political  or  economic  authority  to  Bao  Dai
was  reinforced  by  its  proclivity  to  field  strong-willed  commanders,  suspicious  of
the  U.S.,  determined  on  a  military  victory,  and  scornful  of  the  Bao  Dai  solution.
General  Marcel  Carpentier,  Commander  in  Chief  when  the  French  applied  for
aid,  was  quoted  in  the  New  York  Times  on  March  9,  1950,  as  follows:

I  will  never  agree  to  equipment  being  given  directly  to  the  Vietnamese.
If  this  should  be  done  I  would  resign  within  twenty-four  hours.  The  Viet-
namese have  no  generals,  no  colonels,  no  military  organization  that  could
effectively  utilize  the  equipment.  It  would  be  wasted,  and  in  China,  the
United  States  has  had  enough  of  that.

a. 1950-1951:  De  Lattre  and  "Dynamisme"

Carpentier's  successor.  High  Commissioner-Commander  in  Chief  •  General
Jean  de  Lattre  de  Tassigny,  arrived  in  December^,  1950,  following  the  severe  set-
back of  the  autumn.  De  Lattre  electrified  the  discouraged  French  forces  like
General  Ridgway  later  enheartened  U.S.  forces  in  Korea.  De  Lattre  saw  himself
as  leading  an  anti-communist  crusade.  He  calculated  that  he  could  win  a  decisive
victory  within  fifteen  months  in  Vietnam,  and  "save  it  from  Peking  and  Moscow."
He  deprecated  the  idea  that  the  French  were  still  motivated  by  colonialism,  and
even  told  one  U.S.  newsman  that  France  fought  for  the  West  alone:

We  have  no  more  interest  here  .  .  .  We  have  abandoned  all  our  colonial
positions  completely.  There  is  little  rubber  or  coal  or  rice  we  can  any  longer
obtain.  And  what  does  it  amount  to  compared  to  the  blood  of  our  sons  we
are  losing  and  the  three  hundred  and  fifty  million  francs  we  spend  a  day
in  Indochina?  The  work  we  are  doing  is  for  the  salvation  of  the  Vietnamese
people.  And  the  propaganda  you  Americans  make  that  we  are  still  colonial-
ists is  doing  us  tremendous  harm,  all  of  us — the  Vietnamese,  yourselves,  and
us.

Moreover,  De  Lattre  was  convinced  that  the  Vietnamese  had  to  be  brought
into  the  fight.  In  a  speech — "A  Call  to  Vietnamese  Youth" — he  declared:

This  war,  whether  you  like  it  or  not,  is  the  war  of  Vietnam  for  Vietnam.
And  France  will  carry  it  on  for  you  only  if  you  carry  it  on  with  her.  .  .  .
Certain  people  pretend  that  Vietnam  cannot  be  independent  because  it  is
part  of  the  French  Union.  Not  true!  In  our  universe,  and  especially  in  our
world  of  today,  there  can  be  no  nations  absolutely  independent.  There  are


68 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


only  fruitful  interdependencies  and  harmful  dependencies.  .  .  .  Young  men
of  Vietnam,  to  whom  I  feel  as  close  as  I  do  to  the  youth  of  my  native  land,
the  moment  has  come  for  you  to  defend  your  country.


Yet,  General  De  Lattre  regarded  U.S.  policy  vis-a-vis  Bao  Dai  with  grave
misgivings.  Americans,  he  held,  afflicted  with  "missionary  zeal,"  were  "fanning
the  fires  of  extreme  nationalism  .  .  .  French  traditionalism  is  vital  here.  You
cannot,  you  must  not  destroy  it.  No  one  can  simply  make  a  new  nation  over-
night by  giving  out  economic  aid  and  arms  alone."  As  adamantly  as  Carpentier,
De  Lattre  opposed  direct  U.S.  aid  for  Vietnamese  forces,  and  allowed  the
Vietnamese  military  little  real  independence.

Edmund  A.  Gullion,  U.S.  Minister  Counselor  in  Saigon  from  1950  on,
faulted  De  Lattre  on  his  inability  to  stimulate  in  the  Vietnamese  National  Army
either  the  elan  vital  or  dynamisme  he  communicated  to  the  rest  of  the  French
Expeditionary  Corps :


...  It  remained  difficult  to  inculcate  nationalist  ardor  in  a  native  army
whose  officers  and  non-coms  were  primarily  white  Frenchmen  .  .  .  The
Vietnamese  units  that  went  into  action  were  rarely  unsupported  by  the
French.  American  contact  with  them  was  mainly  through  the  French,  who
retained  exclusive  responsibility  for  their  training.  We  f^lt  we  needed  much
more  documentation  than  we  had  to  assess  the  army's  true  potential.  We
needed  battalion-by-battalion  reports  on  the  performance  of  the  Vietnamese
in  training  as  well  as  in  battle  and  a  close  contact  with  intelligence  and  com-
mand echelons,  and  we  never  got  this.  Perhaps  the  most  significant  and  sad-
dest manifestation  of  the  French  failure  to  create  a  really  independent  Viet-
namese Army  that  would  fight  in  the  way  de  Lattre  meant  was  the  absence,
at  Dienbienphu,  of  any  Vietnamese  fighting  elements.  It  was  a  French  show.


Gullion  is  not  altogether  correct  with  respect  to  Dien  Bien  Phu;  nonetheless,
statistics  on  the  ethnic  composition  of  the  defending  garrison  do  reveal  the
nature  of  the  problem.  The  5th  Vietnamese  Parachute  Battalion  was  dropped  to
reinforce  the  garrison  so  that  as  of  May  6,  1954,  the  troops  at  Dien  Bien  Phu
included  :


GARRISON  OF  DIEN  BIEN  PHU

Officers  NCO's EM's  Totals

Vietnamese  11  270 5,119  5,480

Total  393  1,666 13,026  15,105

Viet  %  of  Total  2.8  16.2  39.2  36.2


Thus,  the  Vietnamese  comprised  more  than  a  third  of  the  fighting  forces  (and
nearly  40%  of  the  enlisted  troops);  but  among  the  leaders,  they  provided  one-
sixth  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  less  than  3%  of  the  officers.

The  paucity  of  Viet  officers  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  reflected  the  general  condition
of  the  National  Army:  as  of  1953,  there  were  2,600  native  officers,  of  whom
only  a  handful  held  rank  above  major,  compared  to  7,000  French  officers  in  a
force  of  150,000  Vietnamese  troops.


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  69


b. 1951-1953:  Letourneau  and  "Dictatorship"

De  Lattre's  successor  as  High  Commissioner,  Jean  Letourneau,  was  also  the
French  Cabinet  Minister  for  the  Associated  States.  Letourneau  was  sent  to
Indochina  to  assume  the  same  power  and  privilege  in  the  "independent"  State
of  Vietnam  that  any  of  France's  Governor  Generals  had  ever  exercised  from
Saigon's  Norodom  Palace.  In  May,  1953,  a  French  Parliamentary  Mission  of
Inquiry  accused  the  Minister-High  Commissioner  of  "veritable  dictatorship,
without  limitation  or  control":

The  artificial  life  of  Saigon,  the  temptations  of  power  without  control,  the
security  of  a  judgment  which  disdains  realities,  have  isolated  the  Minister
and  his  entourage  and  have  made  them  insensible  to  the  daily  tragedy  of  the
war  .  .  .

It  is  no  longer  up  to  us  to  govern,  but  to  advise.  The  big  thing  was  not
to  draw  up  plans  irresponsibly,  but  to  carry  on  daily  a  subtle  diplomacy.
In  Saigon  our  representatives  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  inveigled  into
the  tempting  game  of  power  and  intrigue.

Instead  of  seeing  the  most  important  things  and  acting  on  them,  instead
of  making  on  the  spot  investigations,  of  looking  for  inspiration  in  the  vil-
lage and  in  the  ricefield,  instead  of  informing  themselves  and  winning  the
confidence  of  the  most  humble  people,  in  order  to  deprive  the  rebels  of  their
best  weapon,  the  Norodom  Palace  clique  has  allowed  itself  the  luxury  of
administering  a  la  francaise  and  of  reigning  over  a  country  where  revolution
is  smouldering  .  .  .

The  press  has  not  the  right  of  criticism.  To  tell  the  truth,  it  has  become
official,  and  the  principal  newspaper  in  Saigon  is  at  the  disposition  of  the
High  Commissariat.  Letters  are  censored.  Propaganda  seems  to  be  issued
just  to  defend  the  High  Commissariat.  Such  a  regime  cannot  last,  unless  we
are  to  appear  as  people  who  are  determined  not  to  keep  their  promises.

The  Parliamentary  Mission  described  Saigon:  "where  gambling,  depravity,
love  of  money  and  of  power  finish  by  corrupting  the  morale  and  destroying  will-
power .  .  .";  and  the  Vietnamese  government:  "The  Ministers  [of  the  Bao  Dai
regime]  appear  in  the  eyes  of  their  compatriots  to  be  French  officials  .  .  ."  The
report  did  not  hesitate  to  blame  the  French  for  Vietnamese  corruption:

It  is  grave  that  after  eight  years  of  laisser-aller  and  of  anarchy,  the  pres-
ence in  Indochina  of  a  resident  Minister  has  not  been  able  to  put  an  end
to  these  daily  scandals  in  the  life  in  regard  to  the  granting  of  licenses,  the
transfer  of  piastres,  war  damages,  or  commercial  transactions.  Even  if  our
administration  is  not  entirely  responsible  for  these  abuses,  it  is  deplorable
that  one  can  affirm  that  it  either  ignores  them  or  tolerates  them.

Commenting  on  this  report,  an  influential  French  editor  blamed  the  "natural
tendency  of  the  military  proconsulate  to  perpetuate  itself"  and  "certain  French
political  groups  who  have  found  in  the  war  a  principal  source  of  their  revenues
.  .  .  through  exchange  operations,  supplies  to  the  expeditionary  corps  and  war
damages  ...  He  concluded  that :

The  generally  accepted  theoxy  is  that  the  prolongation  of  the  war  in  Indo-
china is  a  fatality  imposed  by  events,  one  of  those  dramas  in  history  which


70 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

'  has  no  solution.  The  theory  of  the  skeptics  is  that  the  impotence  or  the  errors
of  the  men  responsible  for  our  policy  in  Indochina  have  prevented  us  from
finding  a  way  out  of  this  catastrophic  enterprise.  The  truth  is  that  the  facts
now  known  seem  to  add  up  to  a  lucid  _plan  worked  out  step  by  step  to  elim-
inate any  possibility  of  negotiation  in  Indochina  in  order  to^  assure  the  pro-
longation wUhoiU  limit  of  the  hostilities  and  of  the  military  occupation.

5. Bao  Dai,  Attentiste

Despite  U.S.  recognition  of  the  grave  imperfections  of  the  French  adminis-
tration in  Vietnam,  the  U.S.  was  constrained  to  deal  with  the  Indochina  situation
through  France  both  by  the  overriding  importance  of  its  European  policy  and
by  the  impotence  and  ineptitude  of  the  Bao  Dai  regime.  The  U.S.  attempted  to
persuade  Bao  Dai  to  exercise  more  vigorous  leadership,  but  the  Emperor  chose
differently.  For  example,  immediately  after  the  Pau  negotiations,  the  Depart-
ment of  State  sent  these  instructions  to  Edmund  Gullion:


OUTGOING  TELEGRAM
DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE

OCT  18  1950

PRIORITY

AMLEGATION
SAIGON
384

DEPT  wishes  to  have  FOL  MSG  delivered  to  Bao  Dai  personally  by  MIN
IMMED  after  Chief  of  State's  arrival  in  Saigon.  It  SHLD  be  delivered  informally
without  submission  written  text  with  sufficient  emphasis  to  leave  no  doubt  in
Emperor's  mind  that  it  represents  DEPTS  studied  opinion  in  matter  now  receiving
ATTN  highest  auths  US  GOVT.  Begin  MSG:

Bao  Dai  will  arrive  in  Saigon  at  moment  when  Vietnam  is  facing  grave  crisis
outcome  of  which  may  decide  whether  country  will  be  permitted  develop  inde-
pendence status  or  pass  in  near  future  to  one  of  Sino-Soviet  dominated  satelHte,

^.  a  new  forni_of  colony  irnrneasurably  worse  than  the  old  from  which  Vietnam  has

u  so  recently  separated  herself.

'  The  US  GOVT  is  at  present  moment  taking  steps  to  increase  the  AMT  of  aid
to  FR  Union  and  ASSOC  States  in  their  effort  to  defend  the  territorial  integrity
of  IC  and  prevent  the  incorporation  of  the  ASSOC  States  within  the  COMMIE-
dominated  bloc  of  slave  states  but  even  the  resources  of  US  are  strained  by  our
present  UN  commitments  in  Korea,  the  need  for  aid  in  the  defense  of  Western
Europe  and  our  own  rearmament  program.  We  sometimes  find  it  impossible  to
furnish  aid  as  we  WLD  wish  in  a  given  AMT  at  a  given  time  and  in  a  given
place.

Leadership  of  Vietnam  GOVT  during  this  crucial  period  is  a  factor  of  pre-
ponderant importance  in  deciding  ultimate  outcome.  GOVT  must  display  un-
usually aggressive  leadership  and  courage  before  a  discouraged  people,  distraught
and  floundering  in  the  wake  of  years  of  civil  war.  Lesser  considerations  concern-

_


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  71

ing  the  modalities  of  relations  between  the  States  of  the  FR  Union  and  the  REP
of  FR  must,  for  instance,  be  at  least  temporarily  laid  aside  in  face  of  serious
threat  to  very  existence  of  Vietnam  as  autonomous  state,  within  FR  Union  or
otherwise.

We  are  aware  (as  in  Bao  Dai)  that  present  Vietnamese  GOVT  is  so  Hnked  with
person  of  Chief  of  State  that  leadership  and  example  provided  by  latter  takes  on
extraordinary  importance  in  determining  degree  of  efficiency  in  functioning  of
GOVT.  Through  circumstances  of  absence  in  FR  of  Bao  Dai  and  other  Vietna-
mese leaders  for  prolonged  period,  opportunity  for  progress  in  assumption  of
responsibilities  from  FR  and  extension  authority  and  influence  of  GOVT  with
people  was  neglected.  Many  people,  including  great  number  AMERS,  have  been
unable  understand  reasons  for  Emperor's  GTE  prolonged  holiday  UNQTE  on
Riviera  and  have  misinterpreted  it  as  an  indication  of  lack  of  patriotic  attachment
to  his  role  of  Chief  of  State.  DEPT  is  at  least  of  opinion  that  his  absence  did
not  enhance  the  authority  and  prestige  of  his  GOVT  at  home.

Therefore,  DEPT  considers  it  imperative  Bao  Dai  give  Vietnamese  people  evi-
dence his  determination  personally  take  up  reins  of  state  and  lead  his  country
into  IMMED  and  energetic  opposition  COMMIE  menace.  Specifically  he  SHLD
embark  upon  IMMED  program  of  visits  to  all  parts  Vietnam  making  numerous
speeches  and  public  appearances  in  the  process.  Chief  of  State  SHLD  declare  his
determination  plunge  into  job  of  rallying  people  to  support  of  GOVT  and  oppo-
sition to  VM  IMMED  upon  arrival  Saigon.  He  SHLD  announce  US,  FR  support
for  formation  NATL  armies  and  his  own  intention  assume  role  Commander  in
Chief.  He  SHLD  take  full  advantage  of  FR  official  declaration  of  intention  to
form  NATL  armies  (confirmed  yesterday  by  MIN  ASSC  States  Letourneau)
and  set  up  precise  plan  for  such  formation  IMMED.

Finally,  it  SHLD  be  tactfully  suggested  that  any  further  display  procrastination
in  facing  realities  in  the  form  prolonged  periods  of  seclusion  at  Dalat  or  other-
wise WLD  confirm  impressions  of  those  not  as  convinced  of  Emperor's  serious-
ness of  purpose  as  DEPT  and  LEG  are  and  raise  questions  of  the  wisdom  of
continuing  to  support  a  Vietnamese  GOVT  which  proves  itself  incapable  of  exer-
cising the  autonomy  acquired  by  it  at  such  a  high  price.  End  of  MSG.

Endeavor  obtain  private  interview  soonest  possible  after  arrival  for  DEPT
regards  timing  as  of  prime  importance.  Simultaneously  or  IMMED  FOL  inform
Letourneau  and  Pignon  of  action.  Saigon  advise  Paris  in  advance  to  synchronize
informing  FONOFF

ACHESON


Whatever  Bao  Dai's  response — probably  polite  and  obscure — he  did  not  act  on
the  U.S.  advice.  He  subsequently  told  Dr.  Phan  Quang  Dan,  aboard  his  imperial
yacht,  that  his  successive  governments  had  been  of  little  use,  and  added  that  it
would  be  dangerous  to  expand  the  Vietnamese  Army  because  it  might  defect  en
masse  and  go  to  the  Viet  Minh:

I  could  not  inspire  the  troops  with  the  necessary  enthusiasm  and  fighting  j
spirit,  nor  could  Prime  Minister  Huu  .  .  .  Even  if  we  had  an  able  man,  the  j
present  political  conditions  would  make  it  impossible  for  him  to  convince  1
the  people  and  the  troops  that  they  have  something  worth  while  to  fight  I
for  .  .  .


72 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Dr.  Dan  agreed  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  National  Army  was  a  central  issue;
he  pointed  out  that  there  were  but  three  Viet  generals,  non  of  whom  had  ever
held  operational  command,  and  neither  they  nor  the  20  colonels_or  lieutenant
colonels  could  exercise  initiative  of  any  sort.  Dr.  Dan  held  that:  "The  Vietnamese
Army  is  without  responsible  Vietnamese  leaders,  without  ideology,  without  ob-
jective, without  enthusiasm,  without  fighting  spirit,  and  without  popular  backing."
But  it  was  very  clear  that  Bao  Dai  did  not  propose  to  alter  the  conditions  of  his
army  except  by  the  long,  slow  process  of  "nibbling"  at  French  military  preroga-
tive. On  other  vital  issues  Bao  Dai  was  no  more  aggressive.  For  all  practical  pur-
poses, the  Emperor,  in  his  own  fashion,  like  Dr.  Dan  and  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  as-
sumed the  posture  of  the  attentiste — a  spectator  as  the  French  and  Americans
tested  their  strength  against  each  other,  and  against  the  Viet  Minh.

6. The  American  Predicament

Among  the  American  leaders  who  understood  the  vacuity  of  the  Bao  Dai  solu-
tion, and  recognized  the  pitfalls  in  French  intransigence  on  genuine  independence
was  the  then  Senator  John  F.  Kennedy.  Kennedy  visited  Vietnam  in  1951  and
evidently  weighed  GuUion's  views  heavily.  In  November,  1951,  Kennedy  declared
that:

^ In  Indochina  we  have  allied  ourselves  to  the  desperate  effort  of  the  French
regime  to  hang  on  to  the  remnants  of  an  empire.  There  is  no  broad  general
1 support  of  the  native  Vietnam  Government  among  the  people  of  that  area.

In  a  speech  to  the  U.S.  Senate  in  June,  1953,  he  pointed  out  that:

\ Genuine  independence  as  we  understand  it  is  lacking  in  Indochina  .  .  .
local  government  is  circumscribed  in  its  functions  ...  the  government  of
Vietnam,  the  state  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in  this  area,  lacks
popular  support,  that  the  degree  of  military,  civil,  political,  and  economic
control  maintained  by  the  French  goes  well  beyond  what  is  necessary  to
fight  a  war  ...  It  is  because  we  want  the  war  to  be  brought  to  a  successful
conclusion  that  we  should  insist  on  genuine  independence  .  .  .  Regardless
1 of  our  united  effort,  it  is  a  truism  that  the  war  can  never  be  successful  unless
j- large  numbers  of  the  people  of  Vietnam  are  \y on  over  from  their  sullen
I neutrality  and  open  hostility  to  it  and  fully  support  its  successful  conclusion
...  I  strongly  believe  that  the  French  cannot  succeed  in  Indochina  without
\ giving  concessions  necessary  to  make  the  native  army  a  reliable  and_crusa_d-
J ing  force.

Later,  Kennedy  criticized  the  French :

Every  year  we  are  given  three  sets  of  assurances :  first,  that  the  independ-
ence of  the  Associated  States  is  now  complete;  second,  that  the  independence
of  the  Associated  States  will  soon  be  completed  under  steps  "now"  being
taken;  and  third,  that  military  victory  for  the  French  Union  forces  is  assured,
or  is  just  around  the  corner.

Another  American  knowledgeable  concerning  the  U.S.-French  difficulties  and
with  the  Bao  Dai  solution  was  Robert  Blum,  who  headed  the  economic  aid
program  extended  to  the  Bao  Dai  regime  in  1950.  General  De  Lattre  viewed
U.S.  economic  aid  as  especially  pernicious,  and  told  Blum  that:  "Mr.  Blum,  you


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  73


are  the  most  dangerous  man  in  Indochina."  De  Lattre  resented  the  American  in-
trusion. "As  a  student  of  history,  I  can  understand  it,  but  as  a  Frenchman  I  don't
like  it."  In  1952,  Blum  analyzed  the  Bao  Dai-French- American  triangle  as  follows:

The  attitude  of  the  French  is  difficult  to  define.  On  the  one  hand  are  the
repeated  official  affirmations  that  France  has  no  selfish  interests  in  Indochina
and  desires  only  to  promote  the  independence  of  the  Associated  States  and
be  relieved  of  the  terrible  drain  of  France's  resources.  On  the  other  hand  are
the  numerous  examples  of  the  deliberate  continuation  of  French  controls,
the  interference  in  major  policy  matters,  the  profiteering  and  the  constant
bickering  and  ill-feeling  over  the  transfer  of  powers  and  the  issues  of  in-
dependence .  .  .  There  is  unquestionably  a  contradiction  in  French  ac-
tions between  the  natural  desire  to  be  rid  of  this  unpopular,  costly  and  ap-
parently fruitless  war  and  the  determination  to  see  it  through  with  honor
while  satisfying  French  pride  and  defending  interests  in  the  process.  This
distinction  is  typified  by  the  sharp  difference  between  the  attitude  toward
General  de  Lattre  in  Indochina,  where  he  is  heralded  as  the  political  genius
and  military  savior  .  .  .  and  in  France,  where  he  is  suspected  as  a  per-
son who  for  personal  glory  is  drawing  off  France's  resources  on  a  perilous
adventure  .  .  .

It  is  difficult  to  measure  what  have  been  the  results  of  almos^two  years  of
actrye  American  participation  in  the  affairs  of  Indochina.  Although  we  em-
barked upon  a  course  of  uneasy  association  with  the  "colonialisf'-tainted
but  indispensable  French,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  indigenous,  weak  and
divided  Vietnamese,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  not  been  able  fully  to
reconcile  these  two  allies  in  the  interest  of  a  single-minded  fight  against
Communism.  Of  the  purposes  which  we  hoped  to  serve  by  our  actions  in
Indochina,  the  one  that  has  been  most  successful  has  been  the  strengthening
of  the  French  military  position.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Vietnamese,  many
of  whom  thought  that  magical  solutions  to  their  advantage  would  result
from  our  appearance  on  the  scene,  are  chastened  but  disappointed  at  the
evidence  that  America  is  not  omnipotent  and  not  prepared  to  make  an  un-
diluted effort  to  support  their  point  of  view  .  .  .  Our  direct  influence  on
political  and  economic  matters  has  not  been  great.  We  have  been  reluctant  ^
to  become  directly  embroiled  and,  though  the  degree  of  our  contribution
has  been  steadily  increasing,  we  have  been  content,  if  not  eager,  to  have  the
French  continue  to  have  primary  responsibility,  and  to  give  little,  if  any,
advice.

Blum  concluded  that:

The  situation  in  Indochina  is  not  satisfactory  and  shows  no  substantial
prospect  of  improving,  that  no  decisive  military  victory  can  be  achieved,
that  the  Bao  Dai  government  gives  little  promise  of  developing  competence
and  winning  the  loyalty  of  the  population  .  .  .  and  that  the  attainment  of
American  objectives  is  remote.

Shortly  before  his  death  in  1965,  Blum  held  that  a  clash  of  French  and  U.S.
interests  was  inevitable:

We  wanted  to  strengthen  the  ability  of  the  French  to  protect  the  area
against  Communist  infiltration  and  invasion,  and  we  wanted  to  capture  the


74 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

nationalist  movement  from  the  Communists  by  encouraging  the  national
aspirations  of  the  local  populations  and  increasing  popular  support  of  their
governments.  We  knew  that  the  French  were  unpopular,  that  the  war  that
had  been  going  on  since  1946  was  not  only  a  nationalist  revolt  against  them
but  was  an  example  of  the  awakening  self-consciousness  of  the  peoples  of
Asia  who  were  trying  to  break  loose  from  domination  by  the  Western  world.
We  recognized  right  away  that  two-pronged  policy  was  beset  with  great
difficulties.  Because  of  the  prevailing  anti-French  feeling,  we  knew  that  any
bolstering  by  us  of  the  French  position  would  be  resented  by  the  local  peo-
ple. And  because  of  the  traditional  French  position,  and  French  sensitivity
at  seeing  any  increase  of  American  influence,  we  know  they  would  look
with  suspicion  upon  the  development  of  direct  American  relations  with
local  administrations  and  peoples.  Nevertheless,  we  were  determined  that
our_aid  program  would  not  be  used  as  a  means  of  forcing  co-ordination
upon  unwilling  governments,  and  we  were  equally  determined  that  our
emphasis  would  be  on  types  of  aid  that  would  appeal  to  the  masses  of  the
population  and  not  on  aid  that,  while  economically  more  sophisticated,
would  be  less  readily  understood.  Ours  was  a  political  program  that  worked
with  the  people  and  it  would  obviously  have  lost  most  of  its  effectiveness  if
it  had  been  reduced  to  a  role  of  French-protected  anonymity  .  .  .  [The  pro-
gram was]  greatly  handicapped  and  its  beneficial  psychological  results  were
largely  negated  because  the  United  States  at  the  same  time  was  pursuing  a
program  of  [military]  support  to  the  French  ...  on  balance,  we  came  to  be
looked  upon  more  as  a_^upporter  of  colonialism  than  as  a  friend  of  the
new  nation.

In  1965,  Edmund  Gullion,  who  was  also  very  close  to  the  Bao  Dai  problem,
took  this  retrospect:

We  really  should  have  pushed  the  French  right  after  the  Elysee  agree-
ments of  March,  1949.  We  did  not  consider  the  exchange  of  letters  care-
fully enough  at  the  time.  It  was  understandable.  We  obviously  felt  it  was
going  to  be  a  continuing  process,  and  we  hoped  to  be  able  to  have  some
influence  over  it.  But  then  we  got  involved  in  Korea,  and  since  the  French
were  in  trouble  in  Indochina,  we  pulled  our  punches  .  .  .  The  French
could  have  said  unequivocally,  as  we  did  with  regard  to  the  Philippines,  that
.jf-  in  such-and-such  a  number  of  years  Vietnam  would  be  totally  free,  and  that
it  could  thereupon  join  the  French  Union  or  stay  out,  as  it  desired  .  .  .  An
evolutionary  solution  was  the  obvious  one,  and  it  should  have  been  con-
fronted openly  and  honestly  without  all  the  impossible,  protracted  pre-
liminary negotiations  involving  efforts  to  bring  the  three  Associated  States
together,  to  get  them  to  agree  among  each  other,  and  with  France,  separately
and  collectively.  The  French,  in  arguing  against  any  kind  of  bilateral  agree-
ments, claimed  that  their  attempt  at  federation  in  Indochina  was  like  our
effort  to  build  some  sort  of  federated  system  in  Europe.  But  their  involve-
ment and  interest  in  Indochina  was  obviously  different,  and  they  used  the
formula  they  devised  to  avoid  any  real  agreement  on  Vietnam.  The  prob-
lem grew  more  complex  as  the  military  and  political  aspects  of  the  situation
became  unavoidably  tied  together,  and  the  Korean  War,  of  course,  com-
plicated it  further.  From  the  outset,  the  French  sought  to  regard  the  war
in  Korea  and  the  war  in  Indochina  as  related  parts  of  one  big  fight  against
Communism,  but  it  wasn't  that  simple.  Actually,  what  the  Korean  War  did


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  75

do  was  make  it  more  difficult  for  us  to  urge  an  evolutionary  settlement  in
Vietnam.  By  1951,  it  may  have  been  too  late  for  us  to  do  anything  about
this,  but  we  could  still  have  tried  much  harder  than  we  did.  The  trouble
was  the  world  by  then  had  begun  to  close  in  on  us.  The  E.D.C.  formula  in
Europe  was  being  rejected  by  the  French,  just  as  in  1965  they  were  rejecting
the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  concept.  Our  degree  of  leverage
was  being  drastically  reduced.

Had  Bao  Dai  been  willing  or  capable  of  more  effective  leadership,  the  U.S.
role  in  the  war  might  not  have  fallen  into  what  Edmund  Gullion  called  thej'pat-
tern  of  j^edictionand  disappointm^in  :

It  can  be  timed  almost  to  the  month  to  coincide  with  the  rainy  season
and  the  campaign  season.  Thus,  in  May  or  June,  we  usually  get  French
estimates  of  success  in  the  coming  campaign  season,  based  partly  on  an
assessment  of  losses  the  Vietminh  are  supposed  to  have  suffered  in  the
preceding  fall,  which  are  typically  claimed  as  the  bright  spot  in  an  other-
wise gloomy  fighting  season.  The  new  set  of  estimates  soon  proves  equally
disappointing;  by  October,  French  Union  troops  are  found  bottled  up  in
mountain  defiles  far  from  their  bases  .  .  .  There  are  rumblings  about  late
or  lacking  American  aid  and  lack  of  American  understanding.  Some  time
around  the  first  of  the  new  year,  special  high-level  United  States-French
conferences  are  called.  We  ask  some  questions  about  the  military  situation
but  only  a  few  about  the  political  situation.  There  is  widespread  speculation
that  the  French  may  pull  out  of  Indochina  if  we  press  them  for  explanations
of  their  political  and  economic  program.  We  promise  the  French  more  aid.
The  French  make  a  stand:  they  claim  great  casualties  inflicted  on  the  enemy.
They  give  us  new  estimates  for  the  following  campaign  season — and  the
round  begins  once  more.

In  that  bleak  pattern,  Bao  Dai  played  only  a  passive  role;  the  "Bao  Dai  solu-
tion" ultimately  solved  nothing.  The  outcome  rested  rather  on  France's  military
struggle  with  the  Viet  Minh,  and  its  contest  of  leverage  with  the  United  States.

II. LEVERAGE:  FRANCE  HAD  MORE  THAN  THE  UNITED  STATES

It  is  sometimes  asserted  that  France  could  not  have  continued  the  war  in
Indochina  without  American  aid,  but  that  the  United  States  failed  to  use  its
considerable  leverage  on  the  French  to  force  them  to  take  more  positive  steps
towards  granting  complete  independence  to  the  Associated  States.  An  examina-
tion of  Franco- American  relations  between  1950-1954  suggests,  however,  that
American  leverage  was  severely  limited  and  that,  given  the  primacy  accorded  in
U.S.  policy  to  the  containment  of  communism  in  Southeast  Asia,  French  leverage
on  the  United  States  was  the  stronger  of  the  two.

A. AMERICAN  LEVERAGE  ON  FRANCE

1. NATO  and  Marshall  Plan

In  the  first  postwar  decade,  France  was  relatively  weak  and  depended  upon
the  United  States  through  NATO  and  the  Marshall  Plan  for  its  military  security


76 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

and  economic  revival.  But  neither  NATO  nor  the  Marshall  Plan  offered  usable
fulcrums  for  influencing  French  policy  on  Indochina.  Both  were  judged  by  the
U.S.  Government  and  public  to  be  strongly  in  the  American  national  interest  at
a  time  when  the  Soviet  threat  to  Western  Europe,  either  through  overt  aggression
or  internal  subversion,  was  clearly  recognizable.  A  communist  take-over  in
France  was  a  real  possibihty.  (The  French  Communist  Party  was  the  largest
political  party  in  the  nation,  and,  at  the  time,  quite  militant  in  character.)  Thus,
an  American  threat  to  withdraw  military  and  economic  support  to  metropolitan
France  if  it  did  not  alter  its  policies  in  Indochina  was  not  plausible.  To  threaten
France  with  sanctions  in  NATO  or  through  the  Marshall  Plan  would  have
jeopardized  a  U.S.  interest  in  Europe  more  important  than  any  in  Indochina.

2. Military  Assistance  Program

The  chief  remaining  source  of  influence  was  the  military  assistance  program
to  the  French  in  Indochina.  Announced  by  President  Truman  on  May  8,  1950,
in  response  to  an  urgent  French  request  of  February  16,  1950,  for  military  and
economic  assistance,  the  purpose  of  the  aid  was  to  help  the  French  in  the  prose-
cution of  the  war  against  the  Viet  Minh.  The  American  Ambassador  in  Paris
was  called  to  the  Quay  d'Orsay,  following  a  determination  by  the  French  Gov-
ernment that  "it  should  set  forth  to  the  United  States  Government  fully  and
frankly  the  extreme  gravity  of  the  situation  in  Indochina  from  French  point  of
view  as  a  result  of  recent  developments  and  the  expectation  that  at  least  increased
military  aid  will  be  furnished  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  from  Communist  China."  He  was
told:

.  .  .  that  the  effort  in  Indochina  was  such  a  drain  on  France  that  a
long-term  program  of  assistance  was  necessary  and  it  was  only  from  the
United  States  that  it  could  come.  Otherwise  ...  it  was  very  likely  that
France  might  be  forced  to  reconsider  her  entire  policy  with  the  possible
view  to  cutting  her  losses  and  withdrawing  from  Indochina  .  .  .  looking
into  the  future  it  was  obvious  .  .  .  that  France  could  not  continue  indefi-
nitely to  bear  this  burden  alone  if  the  expected  developments  in  regard  to
increased  assistance  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  came  about.  .  .  .

Although  the  decision  to  extend  aid  to  the  French  military  effort  in  Indochina
was  taken  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Korean  War,  it  clearly  was  heavily  in-
fluenced by  the  fall  of  Nationalist  China  and  the  arrival  of  Communist  Chinese
troops  on  the  Indochina  border  in  December,  1949.  The  Ho  Chi  Minh  regime
was  recognized  as  the  legal  government  of  Vietnam  by  the  Chinese  Communists
on  January  18,  1950,  and  twelve  days  later  the  Soviet  Government  similarly
announced  its  recognition.  The  NSC  was  thereupon  asked  "to  undertake  a  deter-
mination of  all  practicable  United  States  measures  to  protect  its  security  in  Indo-
china and  to  prevent  the  expansion  of  communist  aggression  in  that  area."  In
NSC64  (February  27,  1950)  it  concluded  that:

It  is  important  to  United  States  security  interests  that  all  practicable
measures  be  taken  to  prevent  further  communist  expansion  in  Southeast
Asia.  Indochina  is  a  key  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  is  under  immediate
threat.

The  neighboring  countries  of  Thailand  and  Burma  could  be  expected  to
fall  under  Communist  domination  if  Indochina  were  controlled  by  a


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  11

Communist-dominated  government.  The  balance  of  Southeast  Asia  would
then  be  in  grave  hazard.  [Doc.  1]

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  referring  on  April  5,  1950,  to  intelligence  estimates
indicating  that  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  had  deteriorated,  noted  that  "with-
out United  States  assistance,  this  deterioration  will  be  accelerated."  Therefore,
the  rationale  for  the  decision  to  aid  the  French  was  to  avert  Indochina's  sliding
into  the  communist  camp,  rather  than  aid  for  France  as  a  colonial  power  or  a
fellow  NATO  ally.

U.S.  assistance,  which  began  modestly  with  $10  million  in  1950,  reached
$1,063  milHon  j^n_^sca]_jear  1_95^  at  which  time  it  accounted  for  78%  of  the
cost  oFtHe  French  war  burden.  The  major  portion  of  the  increase  came  in  the
last  year  of  the  war,  following  the  presentation  in  1953  of  the  Navarre  Plan,
which  called  for  the  enlargement  of  Franco-Vietnamese  forces  and  a  dynamic
strategy  to  recapture  the  initiative  and  pave  the  way  for  victory  by  1955.  The
optimistic  endorsement  of  the  Navarre  Plan  by  Lt.  General  John  W.  O'Daniel,
head  of  the  MAAG  in  Indochina,  as  being  capable  of  turning  the  tide  and  leading
to  a  decisive  victory  over  the  Viet  Minh  contributed  to  Washington's  agreement
to  substantially  raise  the  level  of  assistance.  But  equally  important,  the  Navarre
Plan,  by  being  a  concrete  proposal  which  held  out  the  promise  of  ending  the
long  war,  put  France  in  a  position  to  pressure  the  United  States  for  more  funds
to  underwrite  the  training  and  equipping  of  nine  additional  French  battalions
and  a  number  of  new  Vietnamese  units.

3. U.S.  Supports  Independence  for  Associated  States

Throughout  the  period  of  assistance  to  the  French  military  effort,  American
policy  makers  kept  in  mind  the  necessity  of  encouraging  the  French  to  grant  the
Associated  States  full  independence  and  to  take  practical  measures  in  this  direc-
tion, such  as  the  training  of  Vietnamese  officers  and  civil  servants.  Such  active
persuasion  was  delicate  and  difficult  because  of  the  high  sensitivity  of  the  French
to  any  "interference"  in  their  "internal"  affairs.

A  reading  of  the  NSC  memorandum  and  the  France-American  diplomatic
dialogue  of  the  time  indicates  that  Washington  kept  its  eyes  on  the  ultimate  goal
of  the  de-colonialization  of  Indochina.  Indeed,  it  was  uncomfortable  in  finding
itself — forced  by  the  greater^  necessity  of  resisting  Viet  Minh  communism — in
the  same  bed  as  the  French.  American  pressure  may  well  have  helped  account
for  the  public  declaration  of  Premier  Joseph  Laniel  of  July  3,  1953,  that  the
independence  and  sovereignty  of  the  Associated  States  would  be  "perfected"  by
transferring  to  them  various  functions  which  had  remained  under  French  control,
even  though  no  final  date  was  set  for  complete  independence.  At  an  NSC  meet-
ing on  August  6,  1953  President  Eisenhower  stated  that  assistance  to  the  French
would  be  determined  by  three  conditions:

( 1 )  A  public  French  commitment  to  "a  program  which  will  insure  the  support
and  cooperation  of  the  native  Indochina";

(2)  A  French  invitation  for  "close  [U.S.]  military  advice";

(3)  Renewed  assurances  on  the  passage  of  the  EDC.

Consistent  with  these,  Washington's  decision  of  September  9,  1953,  to  grant  $385
million  towards  implementation  of  the  Navarre  Plan  was  made  dependent  upon
a  number  of  conditions.  The  American  Ambassador  was  instructed  to  inform
Prime  Minister  Laniel  and  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  that  the  United  States  Gov-
ernment would  expect  France  to:


78 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

.  .  .  continue  pursue  policy  of  perfecting  independence  of  Associated
States  in  conformity  with  July  3  declaration;

facilitate  exchange  information  with  American  military  authorities  and
take  into  account  their  views  in  developing  and  carrying  out  French  military
plans  Indochina;

assure  that  no  basic  or  permanent  alteration  of  plans  and  programs  for
NATO  forces  will  be  made  as  result  of  additional  effort  Indochina;  ....

4. Limitation  on  American  Leverage

The  United  States  attempted  to  use  its  military  assistance  program  to  gain
leverage  over  French  policies,  but  was  severely  constrained  in  what  it  could  do.
The  U.S.  military  mission  (MAAG)  in  Saigon  was  small  and  limited  by  the
French  in  its  functions  to  a  supply-support  group.  Allocation  of  all  U.S.  aid  to
the  Associated  States  had  to  be  made,  by  agreement,  solely  through  the  French.
Thus,  MAAG  was  not  allowed  to  control  the  dispensing  of  supplies  once  they
arrived  in  Vietnam.  MAAG  officers  were  not  given  the  necessary  freedom  to
develop  intelligence  information  on  the  course  of  the  war;  information  supplied
by  the  French  was  limited,  and  often  unreliable  or  deliberately  misleading.  The
French  resisted  repeated  U.S.  admonitions  that  the  native  armies  of  the  Associ-
ated States  be  built  up  and  consequently  they  did  not  create  a  true  national  Viet-
namese army.  With  some  minor  exceptions,  the  French  excluded  American  ad-
visors from  participating  in  the  training  for  the  use  of  the  materials  being  fur-
nished by  the  U.S.

General  Navarre  viewed  any  function  of  MAAG  in  Saigon  beyond  bookkeep-
ing to  be  an  intrusion  upon  internal  French  affairs.  Even  though  i^  wquld_have
been  difficult  bey ojnd_  19^  Arnerican  aid,  the  French

never  permitted  participation  by  U.S.  oifficials  in  strategic  planning  or  policy  mak-
ing. Moreover,  the  French  suspected  the  economic  aid  mission  of  being  over-
sympathetic  to  Vienamese  nationalism.  The  director  of  the  economic  aid  program,
Robert  Blum,  and  the  DCM  of  the  American  Embassy,  Edmund  Gullion,  were
subjected  to  French  criticisms  of  their  pro- Vietnamese  views,  although  the  Ameri-
can Ambassador,  Donald  Heath,  remained  staunchly  pro-French.  Thus,  French
officials  insisted  that  American  assistance  be  furnished  with  "no  strings  attached"
and  with  virtually  no  control  over  its  use.  Underlying  this  attitude  was  a  deep-
seated  suspicion  that  the  United  States  desjred  to  totally  supplant  the  French,
economically  as  well  as  politically,  in  Indochina.

B. FRENCH  LEVERAGE  ON  THE  UNITED  STATES

French  leverage  over  the  United  States  was  made  possible  by  the  conviction,
apparently  firmly  held  in  Washington,  that  the  maintenance  of  a  non-Communist
Indochina  was  vital  to  Western — and  specifically  American — interests.

1. Primarily  It  Was  France's  War

The  most  fundamental  fact  was  that  the  French  were  carrying  on  a  war  which
the  United  States  considered,  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  be  essential.  Thus,  the  French
were  always  able  to  threaten  simply  to  end  the  war  by  pulling  out  of  Indochina.
By  the  early  1950's,  with  the  French  nation  tired  of  the  "la  sale  guerre,"  this
would  not  have  been  an  unpopular  decision  within  France.  Paris  was  thereby  able
to  hint — which  it  did — that  if  U.S.  assistance  was  not  forthcoming,  it  would


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  79

simply  withdraw  from  Indochina,  leaving  to  the  United  States  alone  the  task  of
the  containment  of  communism  in  Southeast  Asia.  When  the  Laniel  Government
requested  in  the  fall  of  1953  a  massive  increase  in  American  assistance,  the  State
Department  representative  at  an  NSC  meeting  asserted  that  "if  this  French  Gov- .
ernment,  which  proposes  reinforcing  Indochina  with  our  aid,  is  not  supported  by '
us  at  this  time,  it  may  be  the  last  such  government  prepared  to  make  a  real  effort '
to  win  in  Indochina."  In  effect,  then,  because  of  the  overriding  importance  given
by  Washington  to  holding  the  communist  line  in  Indochina,  the  French  in  being
able  to  threaten  to  withdraw  possessed  an  important  instrument  of  blackmail.

The  upshot  of  this  was  that  U.S.  leverage  was  quite  minimal.  Since  the  French
were,  in  a  way,  fighting  a  U.S.  battle  as  well  as  their  own  to  prevent  communist
control  of  Indochina,  any  ham-fisted  U.S.  pressure  was  bound  to  weaken  the
French  resolve  and  capability.  Consequently,  the  leverage  which  the  U.S.  attained
through  its  aid  could  be  used  for  little  more  than  to  urge  greater  efficiency  and
determination  on  France.  In  other  words,  Washington  could  move  Paris  to  for-
mulate a  Navarre  type  plan,  but  could  not  influence  the  way  France  conducted
the  war,  nor  could  it  move  France  on  political  issues  in  dispute.

2.  Expectation  of  French  Success

The  temptation  to  "go  along"  with  the  French  until  the  Viet  Minh  was  de-
feated was  all  the  more  attractive  because  of  the  expectation  of  victory  which
pervaded  official  Washington.  Before  Dien  Bien  Phu,  General  O'Daniel  con-
sistently reported  that  victory  was  within  reach  if  the  United  States  continued
its  support.  In  November,  1953,  General  O'Daniel  submitted  a  progress  report
on  the  Navarre  Plan  which  summarized  what  the  French  had  been  doing  and
what  remained  to  be  accomplished.  The  report  said  that  French  Union  forces
held  the  initiative  and  would  begin  offensives  in  mid-January,  1954  in  the  Me-
kong Delta  and  in  the  region  between  Cape  Varella  and  Da  Nang.  Meanwhile,
a  relatively  small  force  would  attempt  to  keep  the  Viet  Minh  off  balance  in  the
Tonkin  Delta  until  October,  1954,  when  the  French  would  begin  a  major  offen-
sive North  of  the  19th  parallel.  The  report  concluded  by  assessing  that  the  Na-
varre Plan  was  basically  sound  and  should  be  supported  since  it  would  bring  a
decisive  victory.

O'Daniel's  optiniism  was  not  duplicated  by  other  observers.  CINCPAC,  for  one,
considered  the  report  over-optimistic,  stating  that  political  and  psychological  fac-
tors were  of  such  crucial  importance  that  no  victory  would  be  possible  until  the
Vietnamese  were  able  to  capture  villages  and  until  psychological  warfare  opera-
tions could  be  undertaken  to  win  over  the  people.  The  Army  attache  in  Saigon
was  even  less  sanguine.  He  flatly  stated  that  the  French,  after  six  months  of  the
Navarre  Plan,  were  still  on  the  defensive  and  showed  no  sign  of  being  able  to
win_.lhe  war  in  the  future.  The  attache's  views  were,  moreover,  concurred  in  by
the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff  for  Intelligence,  who  observed  that  other  high  U.S. ;
military  officers  in  Indochina  agreed  with  the  attache  and  found  O'Daniel's  re-
port  unwarrantedly  optimistic.

3.  American  Policy  in  Europe:  The  EDC

An  important  source  of  French  leverage  was  to  be  found  outside  of  Far  East-
ern affairs.  A  primary  objective  of  American  foreign  policy  in  1953-1954  was
the  creation  of  a  European  Defense  Community  (E.D.C.).  The  purpose  of  the
EDC  was  to  "envelope"  a  new  West  German  Army  into  an  integrated  six  nation


80 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

army  which  would  go  a  long  way  towards  providing  for  the  defense  of  Western
Europe.  Washington  officials  expected  that  the  EDC  would  permit  a  reduction
(but  not  complete  elimination)  of  American  ground  forces  in  Europe.  The  mem-
bership of  France  in  the  EDC — as  a  counter-weight  to  the  proposed  re-arming
of  Germany — was  essential  to  its  adoption  by  the  five  other  European  nations.
Because  of  the  high  priority  given  to  EDC  in  American  planning,  there  was  a
strong  reluctance  to  antagonize  the  French  in  Indochina.  This  was  reinforced
by  knowledge  that  the  French  placed  a  far  lower  priority  on  EDC,  in  part  be-
cause of  the  traditional  French  fear  of  an  armed  Germany,  in  part  because  the
French  estimate  of  Soviet  intentions  in  Western  Europe  differed  from  that  of  the
United  States  in  that  it  placed  a  low  probability  on  a  direct  Soviet  intervention.

Apparently  unnoticed  at  the  time  was  an  implicit  contradiction  in  the  Ameri-
can policy  of  pushing  the  French  simultaneously  on  both  adopting  the  EDC  and
on  making  a  greater  effort  in  Indochina.  The  latter  required  increased  French
forces  in  the  Far  East.  But  the  French  National  Assembly  would  not  adopt  the
EDC  unless,  at  a  minimum,  it  was  assured  that  French  forces  in  Europe  would
be  on  parity  with  those  of  Germany.  Thus,  the  French  argued  that  the  possible
coming  into  effect  of  the  EDC  prevented  them  from  putting  larger  forces  into
Indochina.  After  the  loss  of  North  Vietnam  and  the  French  rejection  of  EDC,
the  Chairman  of  an  Interdepartmental  Working  Group  set  up  to  formulate  a
new  American  policy  on  Indochina  for  the  post-Geneva  period  observed  that
"our  policies  thus  far  have  failed  because  we  tried  to  hit  two  birds  with  one
stone  and  missed  both."

4. French  Desire  for  Negotiations

French  leverage  was  also  demonstrated  by  their  ability  to  have  the  Indochina
problem  placed  on  the  agenda  for  the  Geneva  Conference  at  the  time  of  the
Quadripartite  Foreign  Minister's  meeting  in  February  1954  in  Berlin.  The  Geneva
Conference  had  been  called  to  work  out  a  political  settlement  for  the  Korean
War.  Dulles  did  not  wish  to  negotiate  on  Indochina  until  there  was  a  marked
improvement  in  the  military  situation  of  the  French  and  they  could  negotiate
from  a  position  of  far  greater  strength.  But  the  Laniel  Government  was  under
mounting  pressure  from  French  public  opinion  to  end  the  Indochinese  war.  At
Berlin  the  French  delegation  insisted,  despite  American  objections,  that  Indo-
china be  inscribed  on  the  Geneva  agenda.  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  reportedly
warned  that  if  the  United  States  did  not  acquiesce  on  this  point,  EDC  would
doubtlessly  be  scuttled.

Dulles  did  succeed  in  opposing  Soviet  efforts  to  gain  for  Communist  China  the
status  of  a  sponsoring  power  at  Geneva  and  forced  the  acceptance  in  the  Berlin
communique  of  a  statement  that  no  diplomatic  recognition  would  be  implied  in
the  Chinese  invitation  to  the  conference.  In  return  for  this  concession,  however,
the  French  were  able  to  give  highly  visible  evidence  of  their  interest  in  ending
the  war  soon  through  negotiations.  Ironically,  this  had  a  double-edged  effect:  in
Paris  the  "peace  faction"  was  mollified;  but  in  Hanoi  plans  were  made  to  step
up  the  intensity  of  the  war  so  as  to  make  a  show  of  strength  prior  to  the  begin-
ning of  the  Geneva  Conference.  Thus,  the  coming  battle  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  came
to  have  a  crucial  significance  in  large  measure  because  of  the  very  inclusion  of
the  Indochina  item  for  the  Geneva  Conference.  As  Ellen  Hammer  has  written:

This  was  the  last  opportunity  before  the  Geneva  Conference  for  the  Viet
Minh  to  show  its  military  strength,  its  determination  to  fight  until  victory.


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950^1954  81


And  there  were  those  who  thought  that  General  Giap  was  resolved  on  vic-
tory, no  matter  the  cost,  not  only  to  impress  the  enemy  but  also  to  con-
vijice Jiis  Communist  allies  that  the  Viet  Minh  by  its  own  efforts  had  earned
a  seat  at  Fhe  conference  table  and  the  right  to  a  voice  in  its  own  future.
For  the  French  .  .  .  upon  the  outcome  of  the  battle  depended  much  of
the  spirit  in  which  they  would  send  their  representatives  to  Geneva,

5. Conclusion:  Incompatibility  of  American  and  French  Objectives

In  summary,  one  must  take  notice  of  the  paradox  of  U.S.  policy  vis-a-vis  the
French  with  respect  to  Indochina,  1950-1954.  American  interests  and  objectives
were  basicall^^jdUfferem  from  those  of  the  French.  The  United  States  was  con-
cerned with  the  containment  of  communism  and  restricting  the  spread  of  Chi-
nese influence  in  Southeast  Asia.  The  immediate  U.S.  objective  was  supporting  a
domino.  France,  on  the  other  hand,  was  fighting  primarily  a  colonial  war  de-
signed to  maintain  the  French  presence  in  Southeast  Asia  and  avoid  the  crumb-
ling of  the  French  Union.  Despite  occasional  pledges  to  the  "perfectionment"  of
independence  for  the  Associated  States — pledges  which  were  usually  given  under
circumstances  which  were  forcing  France  to  "justify"  the  war,  in  part  to  receive
further  American  assistance — France  was  not  fighting  a  long  and  costly  war  in
order  to  thereafter  completely  pull  out.

The  fact  that  the  American  and  French  means — pushing  for  military  victory
— converged  in  1950-1954  obscured  the  fact  that  the„.eiids  of  the  two  nations
were  inherently  incompatible.  This  further  led  to  a  basic  incompatibility  in  the
two  strands  of  American  policy:  (1)  Washington  wanted  France  to  fight  the  war
and  win,  preferably  with  American  guidance  and  advice;  and  (2)  having  achieved
success  at  great  cost  in  what  the  French  viewed  at  least  initially  as  more  a
"colonial"  than  "anti-communist"  war,  Washington  expected  the  French  to  with-
draw magnanimously.  (A  Frenchman  might  have  asked  how  France,  even  if  it
wished  to,  could  have  left  Indochina  without  creating  similar  pressures  for  with-
drawal from  Algeria,  Tunisia,  and  Morocco,  where  over  one  million  Frenchmen
lived.)  In  this  inherent  inconsistency  can  be  found  much  of  the  explanation  for
the  lack  of  American  leverage  over  France  during  the  pre-Geneva  years.

III. PERCEPTIONS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  THREAT  TO
SOUTHEAST  ASIA  AND  TO  BASIC  U.S.  INTERESTS

Three  major  perceptions  dominated  U.S.  thinking  and  policy-making  on  Indo-
china during  the  years  1950-1954.  The  first  was  the  growing  importance  of  Asia
in  world  politics.  The  process  of  devotion  from  colonial  empires  to  independent
states,  it  was  thought,  would  create  power  vacuums  and  conditions  of  instability
which  would  make  Asia  susceptible  to  becoming  a  battleground  in  the  growing
East-West  cold  war  conflict.  Second,  there  was  an  undeniable  tendency  to  view
the  worldwide  "communist  threat"  in  monolithic  terms.  This  was  perhaps  under-
standable given  the  relatively  extensive  influence  then  exerted  by  the  Soviet
Union  over  other  communist  nations,  and  the  communist  parties  in  non-commu-
nist states.  Moreover,  the  West,  and  especially  the  U.S.,  was  challenged  by  the
expansionist  policies  openly  proclaimed  by  leaders  of  virtually  all  the  communist
movements.  Third,  the  attempt  of  the  patently  Communist  Ho  Chi  Minh  regime
to  evict  the  French  from  Indochina  was  seen  as  part  of  the  Southeast  Asian
manifestation  of  the  communist  world-wide  aggressive  intent.  The  resistance  of
France  to  Ho,  therefore,  was  seen  as  a  crucial  stand  on  the  line  along  which  the
West  would  contain  communism.


82 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


A. "DOMINO  PRINCIPLE  "  BEFORE  KOREA

These  three  perceptions  help  explain  the  widely  held  assumption  in  official
Washington  that  if  Indochina  was  ''lost"  to  communism,  the  remaining  nations
of  Southeast  Asia  would  inexorably  succumb  to  communist  infiltration  and  be
taken  over  in  a  chain  reaction.  This  strategic  conception  of  the  communist  threat
to  Southeast  Asia  pre-dated  the  outbreak  in  June  1950  of  the  Korean  War,  It
probably  had  its  period  of  gestation  at  the  time  of  the  Nationalist  withdrawal
from  mainland  China.  NSC  48/1  was  the  key  document  in  framing  this  concep-
tion. Drawn  up  in  June  1949,  after  Secretary  of  Defense  Louis  Johnson  had
expressed  concern  at  the  course  of  events  in  Asia  and  had  suggested  a  widening
of  the  previous  country-by-country  memorandum  approach  to  a  regional  plan,
NSC  48/1  included  the  statements  that  "the  extension  of  communist  authority
in  China  represents  a  grievous  political  defeat  for  us  ...  If  Southeast  Asia  is
also  swept  by  communism,  we  shall  have  suffered  a  major  political  rout  the
repercussions  of  which  will  be  felt  throughout  the  rest  of  the  world,  especially
in  the  JVlidcile  East  and  in  a  then  critically  exposed  Australia."

It  was  Russia  rather  than  China  that  was  seen  in  1949  as  being  the  principal
source  of  the  communist  threat  in  Asia.  Although  it  was  conceded  that  in  the
course  of  time  China  (or  Japan  or  India)  may  attempt  to  dominate  Asia:

now  and  for  the  foreseeable  future  it  is  the  USSR  which  threatens  to  dom-
inate Asia  through  the  complementary  instruments  of  communist  conspiracy
and  diplomatic  pressure  supported  by  military  strength.  For  the  foreseeable
future,  therefore,  our  immediate  objective  must  be  to  contain  and  where
feasible  to  reduce  the  power  and  influence  of  the  USSR  in  Asia  to  such  a
degree  that  the  Soviet  Union  is  not  capable  of  threatening  the  security  of
the  United  States  from  that  area  and  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  encounter
serious  obstacles  should  it  attempt  to  threaten  the  peace,  national  inde-
pendence or  stability  of  the  Asiatic  nations.

NSC  48/1  also  recognized  that  "the  colonial-nationalist  conflict  provides  a  fer-
tile field  for  subversive  communist  movements,  and  it  is  now  clear  that  South-
east Asia  is  the  target  for  a  coordinated  offensive  directed  by  the  Kremlin."

At  this  time,  the  NSC  believed  that  the  United  States,  as  a  Western  power
in  any  area  where  the  bulk  of  the  population  had  long  been  suspicious  of  West-
ern influence,  should  insofar  as  possible  refrain  from  taking  any  lead  in  South-
east Asia.  The  United  States  should  instead  "encourage  the  peoples  of  India,
Pakistan,  the  Philippines  and  other  Asian  states  to  take  the  leadership  in  meeting
the  common  problems  of  the  area,"  recognizing  "that  the  non-communist  gov-
ernments of  South  Asia  already  constitute  a  bulwark  against  communist  expan-
sion in  Asia."  NSC  48/2  pointed  out  that  particular  attention  should  be  given
to  the  problem  of  Indochina  where  "action  should  be  taken  to  bring  home  to
j!  the  French  the  urgency  of  removing  the  barriers  to  the  obtaining  by  Bao  Dai  or
other  non-communist  nationalist  leaders  of  the  support  of  a  substantial  propor-
tion of  the  Vietnamese."

B. IMPORTANCE  OF  INDOCHINA

Indochina  was  of  special  importance  because  it  was  the  only  area  adjacent  to
China  which  contained  a  large  European  army  which  was  in  armed  conflict  with
"communist"  forces.  The  Chinese  Communists  were  believed  to  be  furnishing


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Fmnco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950^1954  83


the  Viet  Minh  with  substantial  material  assistance.  Official  French  sources  re-
ported that  there  were  some  Chinese  troops  in  Tonkin,  as  well  as  large  numbers
ready  for  action  against  the  French  on  the  Chinese  side  of  the  border.  The  first
NSC  memorandum  dealing  solely  with  Indochina  (NSC  64)  [Doc.  1]  was
adopted  as  policy  on  February  27,  1950.  This  paper  took  note  of  Chinese  as-  ^
sistance  to  the  Viet  Minh  and  estimated  that  it  was  doubtful  that  the  French  \
Expeditionary  forces,  combined  with  Indochinese  troops,  could  successfully  con-
tain Ho  Chi  Minh's  forces  should  they  be  strengthened  by  either  Chinese  troops  j
crossing  the  border,  or  by  communist-supplied  arms  and  material  in  quantity.

NSC  64 — written,  it  should  be  noted,  by  the  Truman  Administration  and  be-
fore the  outbreak  of  the  Korean  War — observed  that  "the  threat  of  Commu-
nist aggression  against  Indochina  is  only  one  phase  of  anticipated  communist
plans  to  seize  all  of  Southeast  Asia."  It  concluded  with  a  statement  of  what  came
to  be  known  as  the  "domino  principle"  :

It  is  important  to  United  States  security  interests  that  all  practicable  meas-
ures be  taken  to  prevent  further  communist  expansion  in  Southeast  Asia.
Indochina  is  a  key  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  is  under  immediate  threat.

The  neighboring  countries  of  Thailand  and  Burma  could  be  expected  to
fall  under  Communist  domination  if  Indochina  were  controlled  by  a  Com-
munist-dominated government.  The  balance  of  Southeast  Asia  would  then  |
be  in  grave  hazard.

C. IMPACT  OF  START  OF  KOREAN  WAR

The  outbreak  of  the  Korean  War,  and  the  American  decision  to  resist  North
Korean  aggression,  sharpened  overnight  our  thoughts  and  actions  with  respect
to  Southeast  Asia.  The  American  military  response  symbolized  in  the  most  con-
crete manner  possible  the  basic  belief  that  holding  the  line  in  Southeast  Asia
was  essential  to  American  security  interests.  The  French  struggle  in  Indochina
came  far  more  than  before  to  be  seen  as  an  integral  part  of  the  containment  of
communism  in  that  region  of  the  world.  Accordingly,  the  United  States  inten-
sified and  enlarged  its  programs  of  aid  in  Indochina.  Military  aid  shipments  to
Indochina  acquired  in  1951  the  second  highest  priority,  just  behind  the  Korean
war  program.

A  consequence  of  the  Korean  War,  and  particularly  the  Chinese  intervention,  |
was  that  China  replaced  the  Soviet  Union  as  the  principal  source  of  the  per-  j
ceived  communist  threat  in  Southeast  Asia.  This  was  made  explicit  in  NSC  f
124/2  (June  1952)  [Doc.  13]  which  stated  that  "the  danger  of  an  overt  military  i
attack  against  Southeast  Asia  is  inherent  in  the  existence  of  a  hostile  and  aggres-
sive Communist  China."

The  "domino  principle"  in  its  purest  form  was  written  into  the  "General  Con-
siderations" section  of  NSC  124/2.  It  linked  the  loss  of  any  single  state  of
Southeast  Asia  to  the  stabiljty_of  Europe  and  the  security  of  the  United  States:

2.  Communist  domination,  by_  whatever  means,  of  all  Southeast  Asia
would  seriously  endanger  in  the  short  term,  and  critically  endanger  in  the
longer  term,  United  States  security  interests.

a.  The  loss  of  ^.nj^  of  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  communist
control  as  a  consequence  of  overt  or  covert  Chinese  Communist  aggres-
sion would  have  critical  psychological,  political  and  economic  consequences.
In  the  absence  of  effective  and  timely  counteraction,  the  loss  of  any  single


84 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

1  country  would  probably  lead  to  relatively  swift  submission  to  or  an  align-
ment with  communism  by  the  remaining  countries  of  this  group.  Further-
more, an  alignment  with  communism  of  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  and  India,
and  in  the  longer  term,  of  the  Middle  East  (with  the  probable  exceptions  of
at  least  Pakistan  and  Turkey)  would  in  all  probability  progressively  follow.
Such  widespread  alignment  would  endanger  the  stability  and  security  of
Europe.

b.  Communist  control  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia  would  render  the
U.S.  position  in  the  Pacific  offshore  island  chain  precarious  and  would
seriously  jeopardize  fundamental  U.S.  security  interests  in  the  Far  East.

c.  Southeast  Asia,  especially  Malaya  and  Indonesia,  is  the  principal
world  source  of  natural  rubber  and  tin,  and  a  producer  of  petroleum  and
other  strategically  important  commodities.  The  rice  exports  of  Burma  and
Thailand  are  critically  important  to  Malaya,  Ceylon  and  Hong  Kong  and
are  of  considerable  significance  to  Japan  and  India,  all  important  areas  of
free  Asia.

d.  The  loss  of  Southeast  Asia,  especially  of  Malaya  and  Indonesia,
could  result  in  such  economic  and  political  pressures  in  Japan  as  to  make
it  extremely  difficult  to  prevent  Japan's  eventual  accommodation  to  commu-

^  nism.

The  possibility  of  a  large-scale  Chinese  intervention  in  Indochina,  similar  to
the  Chinese  intervention  in  Korea,  came  to  dominate  the  thinking  of  American
policy-makers  after  the  start  of  the  Korean  War.  Such  an  intervention  would
not  have  been  surprising  given  the  larger  numbers  of  Chinese  troops  massed
along  the  Tonkin  border  and  the  material  assistance  being  given  to  the  Viet
Minh.  The  NIE  of  December  1950  considered  direct  Chinese  intervention  to
be  "impending."  The  following  year  it  was  estimated  that  after  an  armistice  in
Korea  the  Chinese  would  be  capable  of  intervention  in  considerable  strength,
but  would  be  inhibited  from  acting  overtly  by  a  number  of  factors,  including
the  risk  of  American  retaliation  and  the  disadvantages  attendant  upon  involve-
ment in  another  protracted  campaign.  By  early  1952,  as  the  French  position
showed  signs  of  deterioration,  intelligence  authorities  believed  that  the  Chinese
would  be  content  to  continue  aiding  the  Viet  Minh  without  undertaking  direct
involvement  (except  for  material  aid)  unless  provoked  into  it.  Thus,  the  intelli-
gence community,  after  estimating  a  high  risk  of  Chinese  intervention  at  the
start  of  the  Korean  War,  gradually  reduced  its  estimate  of  Indochina  being
broadened  into  a  wider  war  as  the  Viet  Minh  showed  signs  of  doing  well  enougjh
on  their  own.

Nevertheless,  the  NSC  undertook  in  1952  to  list  a  course  of  action  for  the
"resolute  defense"  of  Indochina  in  case  of  a  large-scale  Chinese  intervention.  It
included  the  provision  of  air  and  naval  forces;  the  interdiction  of  Chinese  com-
munication lines,  including  those  in  China  proper;  and  a  naval  blockade  of  the
China  coast.  If  these  "minimum  courses  of  action"  did  not  prove  to  be  suffi-
cient, the  U.S.  should  take  air  and  naval  action  "against  all  suitable  military
targets  in  China,"  when  possible  in  conjunction  with  British  and  French  forces.

In  prescribing  these  recommended  actions,  the  NSC  focused  on  the  less  likely
contingency  of  a  Chinese  intervention  rather  than  the  more  likely  contingency
of  the  continued  deterioration  of  the  French  position  in  Indochina  itself.  It
did  so  despite  the  fact  that  NSC  124/2  conceded  that  the  "primary  threat"
was  the  situation  in  Indochina  itself  (increasing  subversive  efforts  by  indigenous
communist  forces,  increased  guerrilla  activity,  and  increased  Viet  Minh  civil


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950^1954  85

control  over  population  and  territory).  Apparently,  the  NSC  wanted  to  make
clear  that  direct  U.S.  involvement  in  Indochina  was  to  be  limited  to  dealing
with  direct  Chinese  involvement.  In  the  absence  of  this  contingency,  however,
and  to  meet  the  existing  situation  in  Indochina,  the  NSC  recommended  that
the  United  States  increase  its  level  of  aid  to  French  Union  forces  but  "without
relieving  the  French  authorities  of  their  basic  military  responsibility  for  the  de-
fense of  the  Associated  States."

D. REPUBLICAN  ADMINISTRATION  AND  FAR  EAST

Two  events  in  1953  served  to  deepen  the  American  commitment  in  Indo-
china. The  first  was  the  arrival  of  a  Republican  Administration  following  a
long  period  in  which  the  G.O.P.  had  persistently  accused  the  Truman  Adminis-
tration of  being  responsible  for  the  "loss"  of  China  to  communism.  The  writings
and  speeches  of  John  Foster  Dulles  before  the  election  left  no  doubt  that  he
regarded  Southeast  Asia  as  a  key  region  in  the  conflict  with  communist  "im-
perialism," and  that  it  was  important  to  draw  the  line  of  containment  north
of  the  Rice  Bowl  of  Asia — the  Indochina  peninsula.  In  his  first  State  of  the
Union  Message  on  February  3,  1953,  President  Eisenhower  promised  a  "new,
positive  foreign  policy."  He  went  on  to  link  the  communist  aggression  in  Korea
and  Malaya  with  Indochina.  Dulles  subsequently  spoke  of  Korea  and  Indo-
china as  two  flanks,  with  the  principal  enemy — Red  China — in  the  center.  A
special  study  mission  headed  by  Representative  Walter  Judd,  a  recognized
Republican  spokesman  on  Asia,  surveyed  the  Far  East  and  reported  on  its  view
of  the  high  stakes  involved:

The  area  of  Indochina  is  immensely  wealthy  in  rice,  rubber,  coal,  and
iron  ore.  Its  position  makes  it  a  strategic  key  to  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia.
If  Indochina  should  fall,  Thailand  and  Burma  would  be  in  extreme  danger,
Malaya,  Singapore  and  even  Indonesia  would  become  more  vulnerable  to
the  Communist  power  drive.  .  .  .  Communism  would  then  be  in  an  ex-
ceptional position  to  complete  its  perversion  of  the  political  and  social
revolution  that  is  spreading  through  Asia.  .  .  .  The  Communists  rnust  be
prevented  from  achieving  their  objectives  in  Indochina.

The  Republican  Administration  clearly  intended  to  prevent  the  loss  of  Indo-
china by  taking  a  more  forthright,  anti-communist  stand.

^  E. IMPACT  OF  KOREAN  ARMISTICE

Second,  the  armistice  in  Korea  created  apprehension  that  the  Chinese  Com-
munists would  now  turn  their  attention  to  Indochina.  President  Eisenhower
warned  in  a  speech  on  April  16,  1953,  that  any  armistice  in  Korea  that  merely
released  armed  forces  to  pursue  an  attack  elsewhere  would  be  a  fraud.  Secretary
Dulles  continued  this  theme  afer  the  Korean  armistice  in  a  speech  on  September
2,  1953,  on  the  war  in  Indochina,  After  noting  that  "a  single  Communist  aggres-|
sive  front  extends  from  Korea  on  the  north  to  Indochina  in  the  south"  he  said:  i

Communist  China  has  been  and  now  is  training,  equipping  and  supply-
ing the  Communist  forces  in  Indochina.  There  is  the  risk  that,  as  in  Korea,
Red  China  might  send  its  own  Army  into  Indochina.  The  Chinese  Com-
munist regime  should  realize  that  such  a  second  aggression  could  not


86 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  1

/occur  without  grave  consequences  which  might  not  be  confined  to  Indo-
china.  I  say  this  soberly  ...  in  the  hope  of  preventing  another  aggressor
'  miscalculation.

Underlying  these  warnings  to  China  was  the  belief  that  the  difference  between
success  or  failure  in  avoiding  a  takeover  of  all  Vietnam  by  Ho  Chi  Minh  prob-
.ably  depended  upon  the  extent  of  Chinese  assistance  or  direct  participation.
Signaling  a  warning  to  China  was  probably  designed  to  deter  further  Chinese
involvement.  Implicit  in  the  signals  was  the  threat  that  if  China  came  into  the
war,  the  United  States  would  be  forced  to  follow  suit,  preferably  with  allies  but,
if  necessary,  alone.  Furthermore,  the  Eisenhower  Administration  implied  that
in  keeping  with  its  policy  of  massive  retaliation  the  United  States  would  ad-
minister a  punishing  nuclear  blow  to  China  without  necessarily  involving  its  land
forces  in  an  Asian  war.

F. DEEPENING  OF  U.S.  COMMITMENT  TO  CONTAINMENT

In  addition  to  the  new  mood  in  Washington  created  by  the  strategic  percep-
tions of  a  new  Administration  and  the  Korean  armistice,  the  Viet  Minh  invasion
of  Laos  in  the  spring  of  1953  and  the  deepening  war  weariness  in  France  served
to  strengthen  those  who  favored  a  more  assertive  policy  in  Indochina.  The
United  States  rushed  supplies  to  Laos  and  Thailand  in  May  1953  and  provided
si2c_C-119's  wiyi^iyi^ianjcrews  for  the  airlift  into  Laos.  It  increased  substantially
the  volume  and  tempo  of  American  military  assistance  to  French  Union  forces.
For  fiscal  year  1954,  $460  million  in  military  assistance  was  planned.  Congress
only  appropriated  $400  million,  but  following  the  presentation  by  the  French
of  the  Navarre  Plan  an  additional  $385  million  was  decided  upon  by  the  NSC.
No  objection  was  raised  when  France  asked  our  views  in  August,  1953,  on  the
transfer  of  its  battalion  in  Korea  to  Indochina  and  subsequently  took  this  action.
The  Navarre  Plan,  by  offering  a  format  for  victory  which  promised  success
without  the  direct  involvement  of  American  military  forces,  tended,  because  of
its  very  attractiveness,  to  have  the  effect  of  enlarging  our  commitment  to  assist
the  French  towards  achieving  a  military  solution.

In  the  last  NSC  paper  approved  before  the  Indochina  situation  was  totally
transformed  by  the  French  defeat  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  the  Geneva  Conference,
the  "successful  defense  of  Tonkin"  was  said  to  be  the  "keystone  of  the  defense
of  mainland  Southeast  Asia  except  possibly  Malaya."  NSC  5405  [Doc.  20]  took
some,  but  probably  not  sufficient,  account  of  the  deterioration  in  the  French
position  which  had  occurred  since  NSC  124/2  was  approved  eighteen  months
earlier.  It,  nevertheless,  repeated  the  domino  principle  in  detail,  including  the
admonition  that  "such  is  the  interrelation  of  the  countries  of  the  area  that  effec-
tive counteraction  would  be  immediately  necessary  to  prevent  the  loss  of  any
single  country  from  leading  to  submission  to,  or  an  alignment  with,  communism
by  the  remaining  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  and  Indonesia."  The  document  also
noted  that:

In  the  conflict  in  Indochina,  the  Communists  and  non-Communists  worlds
clearly  confront  one  another  in  the  field  of  battle:  The  loss  of  the  struggle
in  Indochina,  in  addition  to  its  impact  in  Southeast  Asia  and  South  Asia,
would  therefore  have  the  most  serious  repercussions  on  U.S.  and  free
world  interests  in  Europe  and  elsewhere.


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950^1954  87

The  subject  of  possible  negotiations  was  broached  in  NSC  5405,  following
the  observation  that  political  pressures  in  France  may  impel  the  French  Gov-
ernment to  seek  a  negotiated  rather  than  a  military  settlement.  It  was  noted
(before  Dien  Bien  Phu)  that  if  the  Navarre  Plan  failed  or  appeared  doomed  to
failure,  the  French  might  seek  to  negotiate  simply  for  the  best  possible  terms,
irrespective  of  whether  these  offered  any  assurance  of  preserving  a  non-com-
munist Indochina.

In  this  regard  the  NSC  decided  the  U.S.  should  employ  every  feasible  means
to  influence  the  French  Government  against  concluding  the  struggle  on  terms
"inconsistent"  with  the  basic  U.S.  objectives.  The  French  should  be  told  that:
(1)  in  the  absence  of  a  marked  improvement  in  the  military  situation,  there
was  no  basis  for  negotiation  on  acceptable  terms;  (2)  the  U.S.  would  "flatly
oppose  any  idea"  of  a  cease-fire  as  a  preliminary  to  negotiations,  because  such
a  cease-fire  would  result  in  an  irretrievable  deterioration  of  the  Franco— Viet-
namese military  position  in  Indochina;  (3)  a  nominally  non-communist  coalition
regime  would  eventually  turn  the  country  over  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  with  no  oppor-
tunity for  the  replacement  of  the  French  by  the  United  States  or  the  United
Kingdom.  [Emphasis  Added]

G.  CONCLUSION

In  conclusion,  two  comments  can  be  made:

a.  With  the  growing  perception  of  a  Chinese  threat  to  Indochina,  and,  there-
fore, to  all  of  Southeast  Asia,  the  U.S.  Government  tended  to  concentrate  on
the  military  rather  than  the  political  aspects  of  the  French-Viet  Minh  struggle.
In  consequence,  American  attention  focused  on  (1)  deterring  external  interven-
tion from  China,  and  (2)  assisting  the  French  in  successfully  prosecuting  the
war  through  the  implementation  of  the  Navarre  Plan.  The  result  of  this  was  that
the  encouragement  and  support  of  the  non-communist  nationalist  governments
in  the  Associated  States  was  almost  inadvertently  given  lower  priority.  The
United  States  was  reluctant  to  press  the  French  too  strongly  on  taking  measures
to  foster  Vietnam  nationalism  because  of  its  overriding  interest  in  halting  the
potential  sweep  of  communism  through  Southeast  Asia.  Moreover,  it  was  easier
to  develop  a  policy  for  dealing  with  the  external  threat  of  intervention  than  to
meet  the  internal  threat  of  subversion,  or  the  even  more  difficult  process  of
finding  and  sustaining  a  genuine  nationalist  alternative  to  the  Viet  Minh.

b.  The  "domino  theory"  and  the  assumptions  behind  it  were  jiever  questioned.
The  homogeneity  of  the  nations  of  Southeast  Asia  was  taken  as  a  given,  as  was
the  linkage  in  their  ability  to  remain  democratic,  or  at  an  acceptable  minimum,
non-communist,  nations.  Undoubtedly,  in  the  first  decade  of  the  cold  war  there
existed  an  unfortunate  stereotype  of  a  monolithic  communist  expansionary  bloc.
It  was  reinforced  by  a  somewhat  emotional  approach  on  the  part  of  many  /
Americans  to  communism  in  China  and  Asia.  This  "syndrome"  was,  in  part,  the  i
result  of  the  "fall"  of  China,  which  some  felt  could  have  been  averted,  and  a  (
few  hoped  would  still  be  reversed.

Accordingly,  not  sufficient  j^ognizance  was  taken  of  the  individuality  of  the
states  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  separateness  of  their  societies.  Probably  there
was  some  lack  of  knowledge  in  depth  on  the  part  of  Washington  policy-makers
about  the  area.  No  one  before  World  War  II  had  expected  that  the  United  States
would  be  called  upon  to  take  a  position  of  leadership  in  these  remote  colonial
territories  of  our  European  allies.  In  hindsight,  these  shortcomings  may  have  led
to  the  fallacious  belief  that  a  neutralist  or  communist  Indochina  would  inevit-


88 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

ably  draw  the  other  states  of  Asia  into  the  communist  bloc  or  into  neutralism.
But  the  "fallacy"  was  neither  evident  then,  nor  Jsjt, demonstrable  now  in  retro-
spect.

IV. THE  INTERAGENCY  DEBATE  OVER  U.S.  INTER-
VENTION IN  INDOCHINA

A.  THE  GENERAL  POLICY  CONTEXT

The  debate  over  the  wisdom  and  manner  of  American  intervention  in  Indo-
china was  based  primarily  on  the  desirability  of  military  involvement,  not  on
questions  concerning  Indochina's  value  to  United  States  security  interests  in  the

I  Far  East.  The  Eisenhower  Administration  was  in  general  agreement  with  the
rationale  for  American  interest  in  Indochina  expressed  by  the  Truman  Adminis-
tration. The  United  States  Government  first  came  to  full  grips  with  the  question

'  of  intervention  in  late  1953-early  1954  as  the  fall  of  Indochina  seemed  to
become  imminent.  ^

1.  The  Final  Truman  Program  {NSC  124)

NSC  124  (February,  1952)  considered  imperative  the  prevention  of  a  Com-
munist take-over  in  Indochina.  It  recognized  that  even  in  the  absence  of  "iden-
tifiable aggression"  by  Communist  China,  the  U.S.  might  be  forced  to  take  some
action  in  order  to  prevent  the  subversion  of  Southeast  Asia.  In  case  of  overt
Chinese  intervention,  NSC  124  recommended:  (1)  naval,  air  and  logistical  sup-
port of  French  Union  forces;  (2)  naval  blockade  of  Communist  China;  (3)
attacks  by  land  and  carrier-based  aircraft  on  military  targets  in  Mainland  China.
It  stopped  short  of  recommending  the  commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces  in
Indochina.

2.  Eisenhower  Administration's  "Basic  National  Security  Policy*'

NSC  162/2  [Doc.  18],  adopted  in  October,  1953,  ten  months  after  the  Repub-
lican Administration  took  office,  was  the  basic  document  of  the  "New  Look."
After  commenting  on  U.S.  and  Soviet  defense  capabilities,  the  prospect  of  jiu-
cleax  parity  and  the  need  to  balance  domestic  economic  policy  with  military  ex-
penditures, it  urged  a  military  posture  based  on  the  ability  "to  inflict  massive
retaliatory  damage"  on  the  enemy.  Indochina  was  listed  as  an  area  of  "strategic
importance"  to  the  U.S.  An  attack  on  such  important  areas  "probably  would
(Compel  the  United  States  to  react  with  military  force  either  locally  at  the  point
I  of  attack  or  generally  against  the  military  power  of  the  aggressor."  The  use  of
;  tactical  nuclear  weapons  in  conventional  war  situations  was  recommended,  but
they  were  not  specifically  suggested  for  use  in  Indochina.

B.  THE  QUESTION  OF  INTERVENTION  WITH  GROUND
FORCES

1. The  Problem  Is  Presented

In  late  1953,  the  Army  questioned  prevalent  assumptions  that  ground  forces
would  not  be  required  in  Indochina  if  the  area  was  as  important  to  U.S.  security
interests  as  the  NSC  papers  stated.  The  Army  urged  that  the  issue  be  faced
squarely  in  order  to  provide  the  best  possible  preparation  for  whatever  courses


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1 950-^1954  89

of  action  might  be  undertaken.  The  Plans  Division  of  the  Army  General  Staff
pointed  out  that  under  current  programs  the  Army  did  not  have  the  capability
of  providing  divisional  forces  for  operations  in  Indochina  while  maintaining  its
existing  commitments  in  Europe  and  the  Far  East.  Army  also  suggested  a  "re-
evaluation,  of  the  importance  of  Indochina  and  Southeast  Asia  in  relation  to  the
possibk.  cost  of  saving  it."

With  the  deterioration  of  the  French  military  situation  in  Indochina,  the  first
serious  attention  came  to  be  given  to  the  manner  and  size  of  a  U.S.  intervention.  ^
The  question  to  be  faced  was:  how  far  was  the  U.S.  prepared  to  go  in  terms  of
force  commitments  to  ensure  that  Indochina  stayed  out  of  Communist  hands?
The  Defense  Department,  though  not  of  a  single  mind  on  this  question,  pressed
for  an  early  determination  of  the  forces  the  U.S.  would  be  willing  to  dispatch  in
an  emergency  situation.  The  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  Admiral  Robert  Ander-
son, proposed  to  Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson  on  January  6,  1954,  that  the  U.S.
decide  immediately  to  employ  combat  forces  in  Indochina  on  the  "reasonable
assurance  of  strong  indigenous  support  of  our  forces,"  whether  or  not  the  French
Government  approved.  But  Vice  Admiral  A.  C.  Davis,  Director  of  the  Office  of
Foreign  Military  Affairs  in  OSD,  wrote:

.  .  .  Involvement  of  U.S.  forces  in  the  Indochina  war  should  be  avoided
at  all  practical  costs.  If,  then.  National  Policy  determines  no  other  alterna-
tive, the  U.S.  should  not  be  self-duped  into  believing  the  possibility  of  par-
tial involvement — such  as  "Naval  and  Air  units  only."  One  cannot  go  over
Niagara  Falls  in  a  barrel  only  slightly.

Admiral  Davis  then  went  on:

Comment:  If  it  is  determined  desirable  to  introduce  air  and  naval  forces
in  combat  in  Indochina  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  involvement  of
ground  forces  could  be  avoided.  Air  strength  sufficient  to  be  of  worth  in
such  an  effort  would  require  bases  in  Indochina  of  considerable  magnitude.
Protection  of  those  bases  and  port  facilities  would  certainly  require  U.S.
ground  force  personnel,  and  the  force  once  committed  would  need  ground
combat  units  to  support  any  threatened  evacuation.  It  must  be  understood
that  there  is  no  cheap  way  to  fight  a  war,  once  committed.

2. NSC:  State  and  Defense  Views

The  evident  disparity  between,  on  the  one  hand,  our  high  strategic  valuation
of  Indochina,  and  on  the  other,  our  unwillingness  to  reach  a  firm  decision  on  the
forces  required  to  defend  the  area  became  the  subject  of  the  NSC's  179th  meet-
ing on  January  8,  1954.  At  this  meeting  the  Council  discussed  NSC  177  on
Southeast  Asia,  but  it  decided  not  to  take  up  the  Special  Annex  to  NSC  177
which  laid  out  a  series  of  choices  which  might  face  the  United  States  if  the
French  military  position  in  Indochina  continued  to  deteriorate.  Nevertheless,  the
NSC  at  that  time  did  make  some  headway  on  the  problem  it  had  posed  for  itself.

According  to  summary  notes  taken  of  the  meeting.  State  and  Defense  were  at
considerable  variance  on  what  should  be  done  in  either  of  two  contingencies:
first,  French  abandonment  of  the  struggle;  second,  a  French  demand  for  sub-
stantial U.S.  forces  (ground,  sea,  and  air).  The  State  view  considered  the  French
position  so  critical  already  as  (in  the  rapporteur's  words)  to  "force  the  U.S.  to  i
decide  now  to  utilize  U.S.  forces  in  the  fighting  in  Southeast  Asia."  The  Defense  1


90 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

representative  refused  to  underwrite  U.S.  involvement.  He  reportedly  stated  that
the  French  could  win  by  the  spring  of  1955  given  U.S.  aid  and  given  "improved
French  political  relations  with  the  Vietnamese  .  .  .  The  commitment  of  U.S.
forces  in  a  'civil,  war'  in  Indochina  will  be  an  admission  of  the  bankruptcy  of  our
political  policies  re  Southeast  Asia  and  France  and  should  be  resorted  to  only
in  extremity."  He  urged  that  every  step  be  taken  to  avoid  a  direct  American
commitment.

The  Council  meeting  reached  two  important  conclusions,  both  fully  in  keeping
with  the  Defense  position.  First,  it  decided  that  a  discussion  of  contingencies  for
U.S.  involvement  missed  the  essential  point  that  the  French  were  capable  of
winning  provided  they  gained  native  political  and  military  cooperation.  Second,
NSC  177  was,  as  Defense  suggested,  inadequate  in  that  the  study  failed  to  come
to  grips  with  the  fact  that  eventual  success  in  Indochina  depended  upon  French
ability  to  solve  the  problem  of  how  to  obtain  Vietnamese  support  for  the  war
effort.

3.  The  JCS  View

The  NSC  meeting  of  January  8  still  left  open  the  question  of  U.S.  action  in
the  event  troops  were  indisputably  necessary  to  prevent  the  "loss"  of  Indochina.
In  this  regard,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  kept  their  options  open.  The  Chiefs
thought  that  the  Navarre  Plan  was  fundamentally  sound,  but  was  being  steadily
undercut  by  the  gulf  separating  the  French  from  the  Vietnamese,  by  General
Navarre's  failure  to  implement  U.S.  recommendations,  and  by  hesitancy  in  Paris
over  the  necessary  political  concessions  to  the  Bao  Dai  government.  Yet  JCS
refused  either  to  rule  out  the  use  of  U.S.  combat  forces  or  to  back  unequivocally
their  employment.

4.  Formation  of  Special  Working  Group  on  Indochina

Dissatisfaction  with  NSC  177  and  the  NSC's  subsequent  failure  in  NSC  5405
to  resolve  the  ground  force  commitment  issue  led  to  the  formation  of  a  working
group  to  evaluate  the  French  military  effort,  to  make  recommendations  concern-
ing future  U.S.  contributions  to  it,  and  to  devote  attention  to  the  various  con-
tingencies under  which  the  U.S.  might  be  called  upon  to  intervene  directly  in
the  war.  The  working  group,  under  the  chairmanship  of  General  G.  B.  Erskine
(USMC,  Ret.),  was  composed  of  representatives  from  the  Departments  of  State
and  Defense,  the  Joint  Chiefs,  and  CIA.  The  group  was  responsible  to  NSC
through  General  W.  Bedell  Smith,  Under  Secretary  of  State,  who  had  been  ap-
pointed by  the  Council  to  head  the  Special  Committee  on  the  U.S.  and  Indo-
china.


5. The  Erskine  Report,  Part  I:  Motivate  the  French

The  first  section  of  Erskine's  two-part  report,  dated  February  6,  1954,  was
based  on  the  assumption  that  U.S.  policy  toward  Indochina  would  not  require
resort  to  overt  combat  operations  by  U.S.  forces.  Within  that  framework,  the
report  adhered  closely  to  the  Defense  Department  position  that  the  French,  if
properly  motivated,  could  win  in  Indochina,  but  that  their  failure  to  carry
through  on  needed  reforms  would  require  U.S.  consideration  of  active  involve-
ment. The  report  noted  that:


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  91


There  is  in  Indo-China,  or  programmed  for  Indo-China  .  .  .  ,  a  sufficient
amount  of  equipment  and  supplies  and  a  potential  manpower  pool  sufficient
eventually  to  defeat  the  Communists  decisively  if  properly  utilized  and
maintained  and  //  the  situation  continues  to  permit  this  manpower  to  be
converted  into  military  effectiveness.  Success  will  ultimately  be  dependent
upon  the  inspiration  of  the  local  population  to  fight  for.  their  own  freedom
from  Communist  domination  and  the  willingness  of  the  French  both  to  take
the  measures  to  stimulate  Jhatjnspimtion  and  to  more  fully  utilize  the  na-
tive potential.

The  Erskine  Report  (Part  I)  recommended:  (1)  augmentation  of  the  French
air  force,  but  not  using  American  personnel;  (2)  additional  U.S.  military  assist-
ance support  of  $124  million  (supplementing  FY  1954  commitments  of  $1,115
billion);  (3)  elevation  of  MA  AG's  status  to  that  of  Military  Mission,  with  ex-
panded personnel  and  advisory  authority  over  training  and  planning;  (4)  assign-
ment of  additional  U.S.  personnel  with  the  mission  of  acting  as  instructors  and
performing  other  key  duties  within  the  French  forces;  (5)  Presidential  letters  to
the  Heads  of  State  of  the  Associated  States  reaffirming  our  support  of  their  in-
dependence and  explaining  our  motivations  in  assisting  them  through  the  French;
(6)  an  effort  be  undertaken  to  persuade  Bao  Dai  to  take  a  more  active  part  in
the  anti-Viet  Minh  struggle.  The  report  concluded  that  the  program  of  recom-
mended changes  could  bring  about  victory  over  the  Viet  Minh  if  it  received  full
French  approval  and  barring  Chinese  intervention.

6.  The  Erskine  Report,  Part  11:  Intervention  Only  After  Geneva?

The  second  part  of  the  Erskine  Report  [Doc.  24]  did  not  appear  until  March
17,  1954,  and  unlike  the  first,  was  the  responsibility  only  of  the  Defense  Depart-
ment and  the  Joint  Chiefs,  with  the  State  Department  position  "reserved."  The
report  confirmed  previous  determinations  that  the  loss  of  Indochina  would  be  a
major  military  and  political  setback  for  the  United  States.  It  recommended  that
prior  to  the  start  of  the  Geneva  Conference,  the  U.S.  should  inform  Britain  and
France  that  it  was  interested  onjiy  in  military  victory  in  Indochina  and  would
not  associate  ourselves  with  any  settlement  which  falls  short  of  that  objective.  It
further  recommended  that  in  the  event  of  an  unsatisfactory  outcome  at  Geneva,
the  U.S.  should  pursue  ways  of  continuing  the  struggle  in  concert  with  the  As-
sociated States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  other  allies.  The  National  Security
Council  was  therefore  requested  to  determine  the  extent  of  American  willingness
to  commit  combat  forces  to  the  region  with  or  without  French  cooperation.  But
with  the  Dien  Bien  Phu  siege  just  beginning,  and  the  Geneva  Conference  six
weeks  away,  the  Erskine  Report  suggested  that  the  United  States  influence  and
observe  developments  at  the  Geneva  Conference  before  deciding  on  active  in-
volvement.

7.  NSC  177  Annex  Raises  Intervention  Question  Anew

Following  the  second  part  of  the  Erskine  Report,  the  President  evidently  de-
cided that  the  Special  Annex  to  NSC  1 77,  which  had  been  withdrawn  in  January
1954,  should  be  redistributed  for  consideration  by  the  Council's  Planning  Board.
The  Annex  to  NSC  177  posed  the  fundamental  choice  between  (a)  acceptance
of  the  loss  of  Indochina,  which  would  be  followed  by  U.S.  efforts  to  prevent
further  deterioration  of  our  security  position  in  Southeast  Asia,  or  (b)  direct


92 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

military  action  to  save  Indochina  before  the  French  and  Vietnamese  became
committed  to  an  unacceptable  political  settlement  at  Geneva.

Among  the  alternative  courses  of  action  outlined  in  the  Annex,  two  in  par-
ticular— both  geared  to  direct  U.S.  action  prior  to  a  Geneva  settlement — were
discussed.  Under  the  first,  based  on  French  consent  to  continue  fighting,  the  U.S.
was  urged  to  (1)  seek  a  Franco- Vietnamese  settlement  of  the  independence  is-
sue, (2)  insist  upon  a  build-up  of  indigenous  forces  with  U.S.  advisory  and  ma-
terial support,  (3)  demand  the  maintenance  of  French  forces  in  the  field  at  their
then  present  level,  and  (4)  prepare  to  provide  sufficient  U.S.  forces  to  make  pos-
sible the  success  of  a  joint  effort.  Full  internationalization  of  the  war  would  be
discussed  with  the  French  later,  thereby  discounting  immediate  action  in  concert
with  the  British  or  Asian  nations.

The  second  alternative  assumed  a  French  pull-out.  In  such  a  case  the  United
States  could  either  accept  Jhe  loss_of  Indochina,  or  adopt  an  active  policy  while
France  gradually  witTidrew  its  troops.  Should  we  accept  the  latter  course,  our
"most  positive"  step  offering  "the  greatest  assurance  of  success"  would  be,  NSC
estimated,  to  join  with  indigenous  forces  in  combatting  the  Viet  Minh  until  they
were  reduced  "to  the  status  of  scattered  guerrilla  bands."  U.S.  land,  sea,  and  air
forces  would  be  involved.

The  Annex  was  based  upon  assumptions  that  U.S.  involvement  against  the
Viet  Minh  would  not  provoke  massive  Chinese  intervention,  would  not  lead  to
direct  Soviet  involvement,  and  that  there  would  be  no  resumption  of  hostilities
in  Korea.  It  acknowledged  that  any  change  in  these  assumptions  would  seriously
jeopardize  the  success  of  the  alternatives  proposed.  In  particular,  it  noted  that
U.S.  participation  heightened  the  risk  of  Chinese  intervention,  and  Chinese  entry
would  alter  radically  both  the  immediate  military  situation  and  U.S.  force  re-
quirements.

8. Army  Questions  Feasibility  of  Air-Naval  Intervention
and  Outlines  Ground  Forces  Requirements

The  principal  result  of  the  discussions  on  the  NSC  177  Special  Annex  was  to
bring  into  the  open  the  issue  of  the  costs  in  manpower  and  materiel  of  a  U.S.
involvement.  The  Army  was  critical  of  contingency  planning  that  was  based  on
the  assumption  that  U.S.  air  and  naval  forces  could  be  used  in  Indochina  with-
out the  commitment  of  ground  combat  forces.  General  Matthew  B.  Ridgway,
Army  Chief  of  Staff,  later  wrote  in  his  Memoirs  that  he  was  quite  disturbed  at
talk  in  high  government  circles  about  employing  air-naval  power  alone  in  Indo-
china. An  Army  position  paper  [Doc.  31]  submitted  to  the  NSC  in  the  first  week
of  April,  1954,  argued  as  follows:

A 1.  U.S.  intervention  with  combat  forces  in  Indochina  is  not  militarily  de-
sirable .  .  .

2.  A  victory  in  Indochina  cannot  be  assured  by  U.S.  intervention  with
air  and  naval  forces  alone.

3.  The  use  of  atomic  weapons  in  Indochina  would  not  reduce  the  num-
ber of  ground  forces  required  to  achieve  a  victory  in  Indochina.

4.  Seven  U.S.  divisions  or  their  equivalent,  with  appropriate  naval  and
air  support,  would  be  required  to  win  a  victory  in  Indochina  if  the  French
withdraw  and  the  Chinese  Communists  do  not  intervene.  However,  U.S.
intervention  plans  cannot  be  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  Chinese  Com-
munists will  not  intervene.


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  93


5.  The  equivalent  of  12  U.S.  divisions  would  be  required  to  win  a  victory
in  Indochina,  if  the  French  withdraw  and  the  Chinese  Communists  inter-
vene.

6.  The  equivalent  of  7  U.S.  divisions  would  be  required  to  win  a  victory
in  Indochina  if  the  French  remain  and  the  Chinese  Communists  intervene.

7.  Requirements  for  air  and  naval  support  for  ground  force  operations
are:

a.  Five  hundred  fighter-bomber  sorties  per  day  exclusive  of  interdic-
tion and  counter-air  operations.

b.  An  airlift  capability  of  a  one  division  drop.

c.  A  division  amphibious  lift.

8.  Two  U.S.  divisions  can  be  placed  in  Indochina  in  30  days,  and  an
additional  5  divisions  in  the  following  120  days.  This  could  be  accomplished
without  reducing  U.S.  ground  strength  in  the  Far  East  to  an  unacceptable
degree,  but  the  U.S.  ability  to  meet  its  NATO  commitment  would  be  seri-
ously affected  for  a  considerable  period.  The  amount  of  time  required  to
place  12  divisions  in  Indochina  would  depend  upon  the  industrial  and  per-
sonnel mobilization  measures  taken  by  the  government  .  .  .

9. Defense-JCS  "Solution" :  Rectify  French  Deficiencies

Faced  with  estimates  that  U.S.  air-naval  action  could  not  turn  the  tide,  and
that  U.S.  ground  forces  of  appropriate  size  would  impinge  upon  other  commit-
ments, DoD  and  the  JCS  took  the  position  that  an  alternative  military  solution
existed  within  the  reach  of  the  French  which  required  no  U.S.  intervention.  DoD
argued  that  the  three  reasons  for  France's  deteriorating  position  were  (1)  lack  !
of  the  will  to  win;  (2)  reluctance  to  meet  Indochinese  demands  for  true  inde-  I
pendence;  (3)  refusal  to  train  indigenous  personnel  for  military  leadership.  De-  \
fense  believed  that  premature  U.S.  involvement  would  therefore  beg  the  basic
question  of  whether  the  U.S.  was  prepared  to  apply  the  strongest  pressure  on
France,  primarily  in  the  European  context,  to  attempt  to  force  the  French  in
Paris  and  in  Indochina  to  take  appropriate  measures  to  rectify  these  deficiencies.
Only  if  these  measures  were  forthcoming,  DoD  held,  should  the  U.S.  seriously
consider  committing  ground  forces  in  defense  of  the  interests  of  France  and  the
Associated  States.  The  net  effect  of  the  Defense-JCS  position  was  to  challenge
the  notion  that  a  quick  U.S.  military  action  in  Indochina  would  be  either  feasi-
ble or  necessary.

C. THE  NEW  APPROACH:  ''UNITED  ACTION"

At  this  juncture  the  Eisenhower  Administration  began  giving  serious  consid-
eration to  broadening  any  American  military  intervention  in  Indochina  by  mak-
ing it  part  of  a  collective  venture  along  with  its  European  and  Asian  allies.  Sec-
retary of  State  Dulles  in  a  speech  on  March  29  warned  the  public  of  the  alarm-
ing situation  in  Indochina  and  called  for  "united  action" — without  defining  it
further — in  these  words:

Under  the  conditions  of  today,  the  imposition  on  Southeast  Asia  of  the
political  system  of  Communist  Russia  and  its  Chinese  Communist  ally,  by
whatever  means,  would  be  a  grave  threat  to  the  whole  free  community.  The
United  States  feels  that  the  possibility  should  not  be  passively  accepted  but
should  be  met  by  united  action.  This  might  involve  serious  risks.  But  these


94 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

risks  are  far  less  than  those  that  will  face  us  a  few  years  from  now  if  we
dare  not  be  resolute  today.

Under  Secretary  of  State  W.  Bedell  Smith's  Special  Committee  on  the  U.S.
and  Indochina,  to  which  the  Erskine  working  group  had  reported,  issued  a  study
on  April  2.  This  report  went  beyond  the  question  of  holding  Indochina  and
agreed  that  whatever  that  area's  fate,  the  U.S.  should  begin  developing  a  system
of  mutual  defense  for  Southeast  Asia.  For  the  short  term,  the  Smith  Committee
favored  American  sponsorship  of  a  mutual  defense  treaty  directed  against  Com-
munist aggression  in  Indochina  and  Thailand.  In  the  long  run,  it  recommended
promotion  of  a  "regional  and  Asian  mutual  defense  arrangement  subscribed  and
underwritten  by  the  major  European  powers  with  interests  in  the  Pacific."

The  State  Department's  thinking  in  early  April  1954  was  not  greatly  at  vari-
ance from  that  of  Defense  and  the  Smith  Committee.  Perhaps  more  so  than
Defense,  State  was  concerned  about  the  Chinese  reaction  to  a  U.S.  military
intervention.  It  urged  caution  and  suggested  that  in  any  type  of  "united  action"
the  U.S.  make  clear  to  both  the  Chinese  and  the  allies  that  the  intervention
would  not  be  aimed  at  the  overthrow  or  destruction  of  the  Peking  regime.
State  recommended:  (1)  no  U.S.  military  intervention  for  the  moment,  nor
should  it  be  promised  to  the  French;  (2)  planning  for  military  intervention
continue;  (3)  discussions  with  potential  allies  on  possibility  of  forming  a  re-
gional grouping  in  the  event  of  an  unacceptable  settlement  at  Geneva.

1.  Presidential  Decision  to  Support  Only  "United  Action"

Meanwhile,  the  President  decided,  following  a  meeting  of  Secretary  Dulles
and  Admiral  Radford,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs,  with  Congressional  leaders
on  April  3,  that  the  U.S.  would  not  undertake  a  unilateral  intervention.  Any
U.S.  military  involvement  in  Indochina  would  be  contingent  upon  (1)  forma-
tion of  a  coalition  force  with  U.S.  allies  to  pursue  "united  action";  (2)  declara-
tion of  French  intent  to  accelerate  independence  of  Associated  States;  (3)  Con-
gressional approval  of  U.S.  involvement  (which  was  throught  to  be  dependent
upon  (1)  and  (2)).

These  policy  guidelines  undoubtedly  influenced  the  NSC  which,  at  a  meeting
on  April  6,  developed  the  somewhat  incompatible  objectives  that  the  U.S.
(a)  "intervene  if  necessary  to  avoid  the  loss  of  Indochina,  but  advocate  that  no
steps  be  left  untaken  to  get  the  French  to  achieve  a  successful  conclusion  of
the  war  on  their  own"  and  (b)  support  as  the  best  alternative  to  U.S.  inter-
vention a  regional  grouping  with  maximum  Asian  participation.

The  President  accepted  the  NSC  recommendations  but  decided  that  henceforth
the  Administration's  primary  efforts  would  be  devoted  toward:  (1)  organizing
regional  collective  defense  against  Communist  expansion;  (2)  gaining  British
support  for  U.S.  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia;  (3)  pressing  France  to  accelerate
its  timetable  for  Indochinese  independence.  The  President  would  seek  Con-
gressional approval  for  U.S.  participation  in  a  regional  arrangement,  if  it  could
be  put  together,  and  meanwhile  contingency  planning  for  mobilization  would
commence.

2.  Rejection  of  Unilateral  Intervention

Thus,  as  the  curtain  began  to  fall  on  the  French  effort  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,
and  the  question  of  what  the  U.S.  would  do  became  critical,  the  U.S.  Govern-


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  95

ment  backed  away  from  unilateral  intervention.  The  Defense  Department  was
reluctant  to  intervene  following  the  Army's  presentation  of  the  view  that  air-
naval  action  alone  would  not  do  the  job  and  ground  forces  would  be  needed.
The  very  recent  experience  of  the  Korean  War  mitigated  strongly  against
another  American  involvement  in  an  Asian  land  war.  Furthermore,  the  Presi-
dent was  not  willing  to  enter  into  such  a  venture  unless  it  was  cloaked  with
Congressional  approval.  Such  approval,  in  turn,  depended  upon  the  participation
of  the  allies.  Hence,  Secretary  Dulles  undertook  the  task  of  persuading  Britain,
France  and  the  Asian  allies  to  participate  in  a  coalition  for  "united  action"  in
Indochina.

V. THE  ATTEMPT  TO  ORGANIZE  "UNITED  ACTION"

A. THE  BERLIN  CONFERENCE  OF  1954

Negotiations  for  a  political  settlement  of  the  French-Viet  Minh  war  were
practically  assured  when  it  was  decided  at  the  Big  Four  meeting  in  Berlin  in
February  1954  that  the  Indochina  question  would  be  added  to  the  agenda  of  an
upcoming  international  conference  at  Geneva  which  was  to  discuss  primarily  a
settlement  of  the  Korean  War.  The  period  between  the  Berlin  and  Geneva  con-
ferences (i.e.,  between  February  and  May  1954)  unexpectedly  witnessed  a
denouement  of  the  Indochina  drama  with  the  siege  and  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,
the  U.S.  decision  not  to  intervene,  and  the  unsuccessful  U.S.  attempt  to  rally  its
allies  together  in  order  to  form  a  collective  force  in  pursuance  of  "united  action."

1. Viet  Minh  Strategy  and  French  Attitudes

The  half-year  before  the  Berlin  Foreign  Ministers  conference  of  February
1954  saw  both  a  marked  step  up  of  Viet  Minh  military  activity  and  the  presenta-
tion of  a  peace  feeler  from  Ho  Chi  Minh.  The  Vietnam  Peoples  Army  (VPA)
began  to  change  its  strategy  against  the  French  from  guerrilla  activities  to  con-
ventional battle  deployments.  This  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  amount
of  Chinese  military  assistance,  no  doubt  facilitated  by  the  end  of  armed  conflict
in  Korea.  Thus,  the  Viet  Minh  appeared  to  be  showing  a  newly  found  strength  j
and  confidence,  although  at  the  time  the  French  refused  to  recognize  this  either  '
publicly  or  to  themselves.

Meanwhile,  Ho  Chi  Minh  put  out  a  peace  feeler  in  late  November  1953  in
reply  to  a  questionnaire  submitted  by  a  correspondent  for  the  Swedish  newspaper
Expressen.  The  one  pre-condition  set  by  Ho  for  negotiations  was  French  recog-
nition of  Vietnamese  independence.  In  subsequent  weeks,  the  peace  feeler  was
repeated  on  several  occasions,  but  each  time  it  failed  to  indicate  the  place  at
which  talks  might  be  held,  nor  did  it  propose  a  scope  for  the  talks.

Nothing  resulted  directly  from  these  peace  feelers,  but  indirectly  they  added
to  the  mounting  public  and  political  sentiment  in  France  for  an  end  to  the  seem-
ingly interminable  and  costly  war.  The  armistice  agreement  negotiated  at  Pan-
munjom  in  July^  l953  served  as  an  example  which  many  Frenchmen  hoped  could
be  followed  in  the  negotiation  of  a  cease-fire  with  the  DRV.  A  widespread  dis-
enchantment with  the  Indochina  war  pervaded  France.  This  was  reflected  in
public  statements  by  Prime  Minister  Laniel  that  Paris  would  be  satisfied  with
an  "honorable  solution"  to  the  war.

The  French  then  adopted  a  policy  toward  the  war  of  "keep  fighting — seek


96 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

talking."  There  was  an  increase  in  French  mihtary  activity  and  confidence  stim-
ulated by  the  Navarre  Plan,  but  this  was  offset  by  a  growth  in  the  size  and  in-
fluence of  the  peace  faction  in  France,  as  indicated  by  the  "dovish"  votes  of  the
National  Assembly  favoring  an  early  settlement  of  the  protracted  war.  Premier
Laniel  and  French  officials  told  the  U.S.  Embassy  that  they  considered  the  Ho
Chi  Minh  offer  pure  propaganda,  but  said  also  that  Ho's  move  had  produced  the
intended  impact  on  public  and  military  circles  in  France  and  Indochina.  Laniel
mentioned  that  President  Vincent  Auriol  had  become  so  excited  by  Ho's  proposal
that  he  told  Laniel  "to  consult  representatives  of  three  Associated  States  im-
mediately with  view  to  seeking  earliest  possible  opening  of  negotiations  with
representatives  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.  Laniel  had  flatly  refused  .  .  ."  But  American
officials  were  skeptical.  The  U.S.  Embassy  reported  that  a  Laniel  speech  of
November  24,  1953,  "left  considerable  latitude  for  negotiations,"  and  that  Ho's
offers  had  increased  the  pressure  for  a  settlement.

2. Early  U.S.  Opposition  to  Negotiations

I The  consistent  U.S.  policy  was  to  attempt  to  steer  the  French  clear  of  the

j  negotiating  table  pending  substantial  military  gains  on  the  battlefield.  In  bilateral
U.S.-French  talks  in  July,  1953,  while  the  Korean  armistice  was  being  discussed
at  Panmunjom,  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  told  Secretary  Dulles  that  parallel  talks

I  should  be  pursued  on  Indochina.  Bidault  explained  that  the  French  public  would
never  understand  why  negotiations  were  fit  and  honorable  for  Korea  but  were  not
for  Indochina.  A  cease-fire  in  Korea,  with  nothing  similar  in  prospect  for  Indo-
china, would  make  his  government's  position  "absolutely  impossible."

r  Secretary  Dulles  in  reply  stressed  that  "negotiations  with  no  other  alternative
usually  end  in  capitulation."  In  the  Korean  case,  Dulles  said,  the  alternative  was
the  U.S.  threat  of  "other  and  unpleasant  measures"  which  the  Communists  real-
ized we  possessed.  He  urged  the  French  to  adopt  the  Navarre  Plan,  not  only  for
military  reasons,  but  because  it  would  improve  the  French  negotiating  position.
Dulles  made  it  clear  that  the  U.S.  felt  it  was  inadvisable  to  have  the  Indochina
war  inscribed  on  the  agenda  of  a  post-armistice  political  conference  on  Korea.
The  U.S.  position  at  this  time  foreclosed  negotiating  on  Indochina  until  after  a
! Chinese  decision  to  eliminate  or  cut  down  aid  to  the  Viet  Minh.  In  general,  the

■  U.S.  sought  to  convince  the  French  that  military  victory  was  the  only  guarantee
of  diplomatic  success.

Dulles  wished  the  French  to  continue  the  war  because  of  his  deep  conviction
that  Indochina  was  a  principal  link  in  the  line  of  the  containment  of  Communism.
In  addition,  Washington  was  undoubtedly  influenced  by  optimistic  reports  on
the  progress  of  the  war.  General  O'Daniel  reported  from  Saigon  that  a  French
victory  was  likely  if  U.S.  material  support  was  forthcoming.  On  February  6,
1954,  it  was  announced  that  forty  B-26  bombers  and  200  U.S.  technicians  to
service  them  would  be  sent  to  Indochina.  Admiral  Radford  told  a  House  Foreign
Relations  Subcommittee,  a  month  before  the  siege  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  began
(March,  1954),  that  the  Navarre  Plan  was  "a  broad  strategic  concept  which
within  a  few  months  should  insure  a  favorabJe  turn  in  the  course  of  the  war."

At  the  Berlin  Quadripartite  Foreign  Ministers  meeting  in  February,  however,
Secretary  Dufles  was  forced  to  give  in  on  the  French  demand  that  Indochina  be
placed  on  the  Geneva  agenda.  Bidault  pressured  the  U.S.  by  threatening  to  scuttle
the  project  for  the  European  Defense  Community  which  then  was  at  the  top
of  U.S.  priorities.  Dulles  could  not  block  Paris'  determination  to  discuss  Indo-
china at  Geneva  for  it  was,  in  the  last  analysis,  France's  war.  He  must  have


0^ ^^><r ^  ^  ^f^^  '


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  97

realized  that  the  Laniel  Government  could  not  completely  avoid  negotiations  j
without  alienating  itself  from  popular  opinion  and  bringing  about  its  downfall  1
at  the  hands  of  the  anti-war  opposition  parties.

The  United  States  successfully  opposed  Soviet  efforts  at  Berlin  to  gain  for
Communist  China  the  status  of  a  sponsoring  power,  and  successfully  held  out,
furthermore,  for  the  inclusion  in  the  Berlin  communique  of  a  statement  that  no
diplomatic  recognition,  not  already  accorded,  would  be  implied  either  in  the
invitation  to,  or  the  holding  of,  the  Geneva  Conference.

B. THE  ELY  MISSION  (MARCH  20-24)

1.  Dien  Bien  Phu  Begins

On  March  13,  1954,  the  VP  A,  under  the  direct  command  of  General  Giap,
began  its  assault  upon  Dien  Bien  Phu.  This  fortress  in  Northern  Vietnam  was
to  take  on  a  political  and  psychological  importance  far  out  of  proportion  to  its
actual  strategic  value  because  of  the  upcoming  Geneva  Conference.  The  Viet
Minh  correctly  foresaw  that  a  show  of  decisive  force,  not  to  mention  a  victory,
would  markedly  strengthen  their  hand  at  the  conference.  Further,  a  defeat  of
the  French  Union  forces  would  sap  the  will  of  the  French  nation  to  continue  the
struggle.  The  Viet  Minh  were  greatly  helped  by  a  substantial  increase  in  the
level  of  Chinese  military  aid  including  artillery  and  radar.  As  the  battle  developed,  \  g/u^^
the  optimism  which  had  pervaded  Washington  statements,  public  and  private,
on  the  war  was  replaced  with  the  conviction  that  unless  new  steps  were  taken  \
to  deal  with  Chinese  aid,  the  French  were  bound  to  go  under.

General  Paul  Ely,  French  Chief  of  Staff,  arrived  in  Washington  on  March  20
to  confer  with  U.S.  officials  on  the  war  situation.  Ely's  principal  aims  were  to
obtain  American  assurance  of  air  intervention  in  the  event  of  Chinese  aerial
attack,  and  to  obtain  further  U.S.  material  assistance,  especially  B-26  bombers.
Dulles  told  Ely  that  he  could  not  then  answer  regarding  U.S.  response  to  Chinese
air  intervention.  Ely  subsequently  contended  in  his  Memoires  that  he  received  a
promise  from  Admiral  Radford,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  to  push
for  prompt  American  approval  of  interdiction  should  the  contingency  arise.  As
to  the  supply  of  bombers,  twenty-five  additional  B-26's  were  promised.

2.  Operation  Vulture  {Vautour)

According  to  subsequent  French  reports.  General  Ely  was  asked  to  stay  24
hours  longer  than  planned  in  Washington,  during  which  time  Admiral  Radford
made  an  informal  but  major  proposal  to  him.  Radford  is  said  to  have  suggested  a
nighttime  raid  against  the  perimeter  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  by  aircraft  of  the  U.S.
Air  Force  and  U.S.  Navy.  The  plan,  named  Operation  Vulture,  called  for  about
sixty  B-29's  to  take  off  from  Clark  Field  near  Manila,  under  escort  of  150  fighters
of  the  U.S.  Seventh  Fleet,  to  conduct  a  massive  strike  against  VPA  positions  on
the  perimeter  of  Dien  Bien  Phu.

Operation  Vulture,  according  to  French  sources,  was  conceived  by  a  joint
American-French  military  staff  in  Saigon.  It  is  admitted  to  have  been  an  informal
proposal  which  had  not  as  yet  received  full  U.S.  Government  backing  as  policy.
No  record  of  Operation  Vulture  has  been  found  in  files  examined.  In  an  inter-
view in  1965,  Admiral  Radford  stated  that  no  plans  for  "Operation  Vulture"
existed,  since  planning  to  aid  Dien  Bien  Phu  by  an  air  strike  never  proceeded


98 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

beyond  the  conceptual  stage.  Nevertheless,  such  an  operation  probably  was  the
subject  of  informal  discussions  both  in  Vietnam,  and  between  Radford  and  Ely.

C. "UNITED  ACTION"  AS  AN  ALTERNATIVE  TO  EITHER

NEGOTIATIONS  OR  TO  UNILATERAL  U.S.  INTERVENTION

1. Formulation  of  U.S.  Policy

By  late  March  the  internal  debate  within  the  Eisenhower  Administration  had
reached  the  point  where  it  was  recognized  that:  (a)  unilateral  U.S.  intervention
in  the  Indochina  War  would  not  be  effective  without  ground  forces;  (b)  the
involvement  of  U.S.  ground  forces  was  logistically  and  politically  undesirable;
(c)  preferably,  "free  world"  intervention  in  Indochina  to  save  the  area  from
communism  would  take  the  form  of  a  collective  operation  by  allied  forces.  This
was  the  import  of  the  NSC  deliberations,  the  Ridgway  Report,  the  Report  of
Under  Secretary  of  State  W.  Bedell  Smith's  Special  Committee  on  the  U.S.  and
Indochina,  and  President  Eisenhower's  general  train  of  thought.

Accordingly,  Secretary  Dulles  in  his  discussions  with  General  Ely  went  beyond
the  question  of  immediate  assistance  to  the  French  garrison  at  Dien  Bien  Phu
and  broached  the  possible  establishment  of  a  regional  defense  arrangement  for
Southeast  Asia.

This  proposal  was  given  public  exposure  in  Secretary  Dulles'  speech  of  March
29  before  the  Overseas  Press  Club.  Dulles  described  the  importance  of  resisting
communist  aggression  in  Indochina  in  these  words :

If  the  Communist  forces  were  to  win  uncontested  control  over  Indo-China
or  any  substandal  part  thereof,  they  would  surely  resume  the  same  pattern
of  aggression  against  the  other  free  peoples  in  that  area.

The  propagandists  of  Red  China  and  of  Soviet  Russia  make  it  perfectly
apparent  that  the  purpose  is  to  dominate  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

Now  Southeast  Asia  is  an  important  part  of  the  world.  It  is  the  so-
called  "rice  bowl"  .  .  .  It  is  an  area  that  is  rich  in  many  raw  materials  .  .  .

And  in  addition  to  these  tremendous  economic  values,  the  area  has  great
strategic  value  .  .  .  Communist  control  of  Southeast  Asia  would  carry  a
grave  threat  to  the  Philippines,  Australia  and  New  Zealand  .  .  .  The  en-
tire western  Pacific  area,  including  the  so-called  "offshore  island  chain,"
would  be  strategically  endangered.

He  then  went  on  call  for  "united  action,"  and  after  noting  Chinese  assistance
to  the  Viet  Minh,  prophesied  that  aggression  would  "lead  to  action  in  places
by  means  of  the  free  world's  choosing,  so  that  the  aggression  would  surely  cost
more  than  it_would_-gain.'' ' ' :  < -  -'^x..-

In  the  following  weeks  the  aim  of  U.S.  diplomacy  was  to  escure  allied  agree-
ment to  a  collective  defense  pact  consisting  of  ten  nations:  the  U.S.,  France,
Britain,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Philippines,  Thailand,  and  the  three  Asso-
ciated States.  Secretary  Dulles  presented  his  proposal  in  discussions  with  British
Ambassador  Sir  Roger  Makins  and  French  Ambassador  Henri  Bonnet.  Presi-
dent Eisenhower  addressed  a  personal  message  to  Prime  Minister  Churchill  ex-
plaining the  proposed  coalition.  The  President  noted  that:

Geneva  is  less  than  four  weeks  away.  There  the  possibility  of  the  Com-
munists driving  a  wedge  between  us  will,  given  the  state  of  mind  in  France,


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  99


be  infinitely  greater  than  at  Berlin.  I  can  understand  the  very  natural  desire
of  the  French  to  seek  an  end  to  this  war  which  has  been  bleeding  them  for
eight  years.  But  our  painstaking  search  for  a  way  out  of  the  impasse  has
reluctantly  forced  us  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  negotiated  solution  of  )
the  Indochina  problem  which  in  its  essence  would  not  be  either  a  face-saving  /
device  to  cover  a  French  surrender  or  a  face-saving  device  to  cover  aj
Communist  retirement.  The  first  alternative  is  too  serious  in  its  broad  I
strategic  implications  for  us  and  for  you  to  be  acceptable.  ...  1
Somehow  we  must  contrive  to  bring  about  the  second  alternative.  |

President  Eisenhower  went  on  to  outline  the  need  for  a  coalition  willing  to
fight  the  Communists,  if  this  proved  necessary.  He  concluded  with  a  historical
question  certain  to  appeal  to  Churchill:

If  I  may  refer  again  to  history;  we  failed  to  halt  Hirohito,  Mussolini
and  Hitler  by  not  acting  in  unit  and  in  time.  That  marked  the  beginning
of  many  years  of  stark  tragedy  and  desperate  peril.  May  it  not  be  that  our
nations  have  learned  something  from  that  lesson?  .  .  .

In  these  discussions  the  United  States  sought  generally  to  stiffen  the  will  of
the  free  nations  in  the  Indochina  crisis.  It  emphasized  both  the  avowed  inten-
tion of  France  to  grant  real  independence  to  the  Associated  States,  and  the  con-
dition accepted  by  the  French  at  Berlin  for  the  United  States'  agreeing  to  discuss
Indochina  at  Geneva.  That  condition  was  that  France  would  not  agree  to  any
arrangement  which  would  directly  or  indirectly  result  in  the  turnover  of  Indo-
china to  the  Communists.  The  United  States  sought  solid  support  for  this
position,  especially  from  the  United  Kingdom,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand.
Although  the  possibility  was  held  out  of  future  involvement  of  the  United
Nations  in  the  Indochina  problem,  there  was  no  thought  of  immediate  UN
action.

2. Initial  Allied  Reaction  to  "United  Action"

Thailand  and  the  Philippines  gave  a  favorable  response  to  the  call  for  united
action.  The  British  response  was  one  of  caution  and  hesitancy.  Churchill  ac-
cepted Eisenhower's  suggestion  that  Secretary  Dulles  go  to  London  for  further
talks,  but  the  British  saw  dangers  in  pressing  for  a  defensive  coalition  before  the
Geneva  conference.  Eden  was  determined  not  to  be  "hustled  into  injudicious
military  decisions."  As  Eden  later  wrote:

I  welcomed  the  American  proposal  for  the  organization  of  collective
defence  in  South-East  Asia,  since  this  would  contribute  to  the  security  of
Malaya  and  Hong  Kong  and  would  remove  the  anomaly  of  our  exclusion
from  the  A.N.Z.U.S.  Pact,  to  which  the  United  States,  Australia  and
New  Zealand  were  party.  But  I  felt  that  to  form  and  proclaim  a  defensive
coalition,  before  we  went  to  the  conference  table,  would  be  unlikely  to
help  us  militarily  and  would  harm  us  politically,  by  frightening  off  important
potential  allies.  By  the  beginning  of  May,  the  rains  would  be  starting  in
Indo-China  and  extensive  campaigning  by  either  side  would  be  impossible
for  several  months.  Since  the  complete  collapse  of  the  French  military
effort  before  then  was  improbable,  I  did  not  think  that  concern  for  the
immediate  military  situation  should  be  the  guiding  factor  in  our  policy.


100 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol  I


3.  French  Call  for  U.S.  Intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  {April  4-5)

The  French  response  to  the  proposal  for  united  action  was  overtaken  by
military  events  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  contended  on  April
5  that  the  time  for  a  coalition  approach  had  passed  and  that  the  fate  of  Dien
Bien  Phu  would  be  decided  in  the  next  ten  days.  The  previous  day  Ambassador
Douglas  Dillon  was  called  to  an  emergency  Sunday  cabinet  meeting  and  was
informed  by  Bidault,  in  the  company  of  Laniel,  that  "immediate  armed  inter-
vention of  U.S.  carrier  aircraft  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  is  now  necessary  to  save  the
situation."  Bidault,  reporting  Navarre's  desperate  state  in  the  field  and  the  extent
of  Chinese  intervention  in  support  of  General  Giap's  forces,  asked  the  Ambassa-
dor point-blank  for  U.S.  action,  saying  that  "the  fate  of  Southeast  Asia  now
rested  on  Dien  Bien  Phu,"  and  that  "Geneva  would  be  won  or  lost  depending  on
outcome"  of  the  battle.  The  United  States  was  now  being  called  upon  to  act
quickly  and  unilaterally  to  save  a  local  situation,  rather  than,  as  Dulles  desired,
in  concert  with  Asian  and  Western  Allies.

4.  U.S.  Decision  Not  to  Intervene  Unilaterally

In  the  first  week  of  April  it  became  clear  that  the  question  of  U.S.  intervention
was  now  crucial.  Fighting  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  reached  major  proportions  as  Chi-
nese-supplied artillery  pounded  the  French  and  drove  them  backwards.  Without
an  early  intervention  by  an  external  power,  or  group  of  powers,  the  French  po-
sition  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  likely  to  be  overrun.  In  anticipation  of  the  French
I  request  for  intervention,  the  Eisenhower  Administration  decided  to  consult  with
\  Congressional  leaders.  The  President  appears  to  have  thought  that  Congressional
1  support  was  vital  for  whatever  active  role  the  U.S.  might  now  take  in  Indochina.

Available  Government  documents  do  not  provide  details  of  the  two  meetings
to  be  described  below.  However,  on  the  basis  of  seemingly  reliable  published
sources,  it  appears  that  on  April  3  Secretary  Dulles  and  Admiral  Radford  met
with  eight  Congressmen  (three  Republicans  and  five  Democrats)  at  the  State
Department.  Radford  apparently  outlined  a  plan  for  an  air  strike  on  the  Vietnam
People's  Army  (VPA)  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  using  200  planes  from  the  aircraft
carriers  Essex  and  Boxer,  stationed  on  maneuvers  in  the  South  China  Sea.  An
unsuccessful  air  strike  might  need  to  be  followed  by  a  second  air  strike,  but
ground  forces  were  not  envisaged  at  this  stage.  It  has  been  averred  that  there
were  atomic  bombs  on  the  aircraft  carriers  which  could  be  delivered  by  the
planes,  but  there  is  no  indication  that  there  was  any  serious  consideration  given
to  using  nuclear  weapons  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  or  elsewhere  in  Indochina.  In  the
event  of  a  massive  Chinese  troop  intervention,  however,  it  is  quite  possible  that
the  U.S.  would  have  retaliated  with  strategic  nuclear  weapons  against  targets  in
China.

The  Congressional  leaders  raised  questions  about  the  amount  of  allied  sup-
port for  such  an  action,  about  the  position  of  the  other  Joint  Chiefs,  about  the
need  for  ground  forces  if  a  second  air  strike  also  failed,  and  about  the  danger  of
a  mammoth  Chinese  intervention  which  could  transform  Indochina  into  another
Korean-type  war.  Radford  apparently  was  forced  to  admit  that  he  was  the  only
one  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  who  favored  the  intervention  plan.  Dulles  conceded  that
the  allies  had  not  as  yet  been  consulted.  In  consequence,  Dulles,  who  had  been
thinking  of  a  joint  Congressional  resolution  authorizing  Presidential  use  of  U.S.
air-naval  power  in  Indochina  (which  it  is  alleged  he  had  ready  in  his  pocket)


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Vie t  Minh  War,  1950-1954  101

left  the  meeting  without  the  vital  support  he  needed.  The  Congressional  leaders
laid  down  three  conditions  necessary  for  their  support:  (a)  formation  of  an
allied  "coalition"-type  force;  (b)  a  French  declaration  indicating  an  intent  to
accelerate  independence  for  the  Associated  States;  (c)  French  agreement  to
continue  their  Expeditionary  Corps  in  Indochina.  Thus  Congressional  opposition
put  the  brake  on  a  possible  unilateral  U.S.  intervention.  According  to  a  subse-
quent State  Department  Summary:

It  was  the  sense  of  the  meeting  that  the  U.S.  should  not  intervene  alone
but  should  attempt  to  secure  the  cooperation  of  other  free  nations  con-
cerned in  Southeast  Asia,  and  that  if  such  cooperation  could  be  assured,
it  was  probable  that  the  U.S.  Congress  would  authorize  U.S.  participation
in  such  "United  Action."

The  following  day,  April  4,  Dulles  and  Radford  met  with  the  President  at  the
White  House.  The  President  reached  the  decision  to  intervene  only  upon  the
satisfaction  of  the  three  conditions  necessary  for  the  U.S.  "to  commit  belligerent
acts"  in  Indochina.  There  would  have  to  be  a  coalition  "with  active  British  Com-
monwealth participation";  a  "full  political  understanding  with  France  and  other
countries,"  and  Congressional  approval.

President  Eisenhower  clearly  did  not  want  the  U.S.  to  intervene  alone.  He
also  was  very  concerned  with  having  broad  Congressional  support  for  any  step
which  might  involve  the  U.S.  in  a  war.  As  Sherman  Adams  later  observed:

Having  avoided  one  total  war  with  Red  China  the  year  before  in  Korea
when  he  had  United  Nations  support,  he  [Eisenhower]  was  in  no  mood  to
provoke  another  one  in  Indo-China  by  going  it  alone  in  a  military  action
without  the  British  and  other  Western  Allies.  He  was  also  determined  not
to  become  involved  militarily  in  any  foreign  conflict  without  the  approval
of  Congress.  He  had  had  trouble  enough  convincing  some  Senators  that  it
was  even  necessary  to  send  small  groups  of  noncombatant  Air  Force  tech-
nicians to  Indo-China.

5. British  Oppose  "United  Action"

From  April  11  to  14,  Secretary  Dulles  visited  London  and  Paris  to  attempt
to  obtain  British  and  French  commitments  to  support  his  proposal  for  "United
Action."  According  to  President  Eisenhower,  Dulles  felt  that  he  had  been  given
assurance  of  Congressional  support  for  "United  Action"  if  the  allies  approved
his  plan.

Dulles  found  the  British  opposed  to  any  type  of  collective  military  action  prior
to  the  Geneva  Conference.  Dulles  explained,  according  to  Eden's  account,  that
the  U.S.  had  concluded  that  the  French  could  no  longer  deal  with  the  situation
in  Indochina,  militarily  or  politically,  alone.  If  the  French  position  in  Indochina
collapsed,  the  consequences  in  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  would  be  grave.  U.S.
air  and  naval  forces  were  ready  to  intervene  and  some  aircraft  carriers  had
already  been  moved  from  Manila  to  the  Indochina  coast.  On  reflection,  said
Dulles,^  helhad  thought  that  the  U.S.  should  not  act  alone  in  this  matter  and
that  din  ad  hoc  coalition  might  be  formed  which  might  develop  later  into  a
Southeast  Asia  defense  organization.  This  in  itself  would  deter  China  from
further  interference  in  Indochina  and  would  strengthen  the  western  position  at
Geneva  by  giving  evidence  of  solidarity.


102 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I


Eden  was  not  convinced.  He  drew  a  distinction  between  the  long  term  issue
of  collective  security  in  Southeast  Asia — which  might  well  be  guaranteed  by
treaty  after  Geneva — and  the  more  immediate  question  of  "united  action"  in
Indochina.  He  was  opposed  to  any  military  action  or  warning  announcement  be-
fore Geneva.  The  British  were  willing  to  provide  the  French  with  full  diplomatic
support  at  Geneva,  either  as  a  guarantor  of  the  final  settlement  or  as  a  participant
in  multilateral  talks  if  a  settlement  failed  to  materialize.  In  the  latter  case,  the
British  were  prepared  to  discuss  a  collective  defense  formula  that  would  com-
prehend any  non-Communist  portion  of  Indochina  formed  as  the  result  of  the


.♦Tjeneva  deliberations.  But  they  would  not,  prior  to  Geneva,  commit  themselves
to  united  action.

Britain's  distinction  between  the  appropriateness  of  a  united  approach  after,
as  opposed  to  before,  the  Conference  was  founded  on  serious  doubts  about  the
true  import  of  united  action.  As  Dulles  correctly  judged,  behind  Britain's  push
for  a  settlement  was  the  "fear  that  if  fighting  continues,  we  will  in  one  way  or
another  become  involved,  thereby  enhancing  risk  of  Chinese  intervention  and
possibility  further  expansion  of  war."  Eden  charged  that  action  prior  to  the
Conference  would  not  only  destroy  chances  for  a  peaceful  settlement,  but  would
critically  raise  the  risk  of  a  wider  war.  American  planning  admitted  the  strong
possibility  of  direct  Chinese  intervention,  and  his  own  intelligence  staff  had  con-
cluded that  Western  involvement  would  bring  on  the  Chinese  by  land  and  air
once  the  Viet  Minh  effort  became  "seriously  endangered."

Thus,  while  Dulles  was  angered  at  the  way  he  felt  the  British  were  writing  off
Indochina,  Eden  was  highly  pessimistic  about  Dulles'  militancy  in  an  area  of
uncertain  value  for  which  the  United  States  had  ambiguous,  hi^h-risk  plans.
There  was  considerable  difference,  in  Eden's  mind,  between  warnings  to  Com-
munist China  against  direct  intervention  before  the  fact  (which  the  British  went
along  with  in  mid- 195 3)  and  united  action,  which  would,  despite  any  allied  as-
surances to  Peking,  be  interpreted  by  the  Chinese  as  proypcatory.

British  suspicions,  furthermore,  were  an  extension  of  the  belief  that  Indochina
need  not  be  entirely  lost  at  Geneva  in  the  absence  of  united  action.  London  was
f  apparently  puzzled  by  American  talk  of  the  "loss"  of  Indochina,  for  to  10  Down-
I  ing  Street,  "French  cannot  lose  the  war  between  now  [April  1954]  and  the  com-
I  ing  of  the  rainy  season  however  badly  they  may  conduct  it."  [Doc.  35]  While
Dulles  kept  telling  the  British  that  only  united  action  through  the  formation  of
a  coalition  could  ensure  against  a  complete  Communist  diplomatic  triumph  at
Geneva,  Eden  was  equally  convinced  that  theJbest^  way_to_  assure  continuation
of  the  war  would  be  united  action,  and  that  the  French,  even  after  Dien  Bien
Phu,  were  still  strong  enough  to  prevent  the  Communists  from  gaining  all  Indo-
china.

Even  before  Dulles'  April  flight  to  London  to  sound  out  the  British  on  united
action,  the  Churchill  government  was  closely  questioning  American  evaluations
of  Indochina.  In  an  April  1  cable,  for  instance,  Dulles  vented  his  disturbance  at
Britain's  refusal  to  accept  the  view  that  the  loss  of  Indochina  would  ultimately
affect  their  security  interests  in  Malaya,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand.  This  was
indeed  the  case,  as  Dulles  discovered  for  himself  once  he  talked  to  Eden  in  Lon-

/  don  and  later  at  Geneva.  Eden  steadfastly  refused  to  buy  Dulles'  analogy  between
Indochina  and  Malaya,  retorting  that  the  situation  in  Malaya  was  "well  in  hand"
while  that  in  Indochina  was  clearly  not.  Admiral  Radford  concluded  in  late

'  April  from  talks  with  the  British  chiefs  of  staff  that  the  U.K.  policy  seemed  "to
be  on  a  very  narrow  basis  strictly  in  terms  of  local  U.K.  interest  without  regard
to  other  areas  of  the  Far  East  such  as  Japan."


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  103

The  British  simply  could  not  accept  the  domino  principle  even  as  they  ad-
mitted Southeast  Asia's  security  value  to  the  free  world.  By  the  opening  of  the
Geneva  Conference,  the  U.S.-U.K.  relations  had  reached  a  low  point:  Dulles
was  insisting  that  the  British  were  the  major  roadblock  to  implementation  of
united  action,  while  Eden  was  clinging  to  the  notion  that  a  negotiated  settlement
leading  to  partition  would  be  the  best  outcome  of  an  impossibly  complex  politico-
military  situation  in  Indochina.

6.  French  Oppose  "United  Action"

Secretary  Dulles  fared  little  better  in  selling  "united  action"  in  Paris  than  he
did  in  London,  but  for  somewhat  different  reasons.  The  French  were  seeking  a
quick  action  to  avoid  an  imminent  military  defeat  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Dulles,  how-
ever, refused  to  be  torn  from  a  collective  allied  approach  to  the  Indochina  War.
The  French  feared  that  a  coalition  arrangement  would  lead  to  an  internationaliza-
tion of  the  war  and  take  control  of  it  out  of  their  hands.  They,  therefore,  only
desired  local  assistance  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  along  the  lines  of  Operation  Vulture.

Furthermore,  another  objection  to  "united  action"  from  the  French  viewpoint
was  that  it  would  only  delay  or  impede  the  very  negotiations  leading  towards  a
settlement  which  the  French  increasingly  desired.  The  U.S.  objective  was  to  keep
alive  the  French  determination  to  continue  the  war.  Dulles  feared  that  the  French
would  usF Geneva  to  find  a  face-saving  formula  for  a  French  surrender.  Premier
Laniel  reaffirmed  to  Dulles  in  Paris  that  his  government  would  take  no  action
which  directly  or  indirectly  turned  Indochina  over  to  the  Communists.  But  he
also  called  attention  to  the  increasing  desire  on  the  part  of  many  in  France  to
get  out  of  Indochina  at  any  cost.  The  French  stressed  that  it  was  necessary  to
await  the  results  of  the  Geneva  Conference  and  that  they  could  not  give  the  im-
pression in  advance  that  they  believed  Geneva  would  fail.

7.  Aborted  Working  Group  on  Collective  Defense
in  Southeast  Asia  {April  20)

Immediately  upon  returning  to  Washington  on  April  15  Secretary  Dulles  in-
vited representatives  of  the  United  Kingdom,  France,  the  Associated  States,  Aus-
tralia, New  Zealand,  the  Philippines,  and  Thailand  to  attend  a  meeting  on  the
20th  to  set  up  an  ad  hoc  defense  group  for  the  Southeast  Asia  region.  The  dele-
gates were  to  work  on  a  draft  for  a  future  organization.  The  Secretary  had  been
under  the  impression  from  his  talk  in  London  with  Eden  that  the  U.K.,  while
rejecting  immediate  "united  action"  in  Indochina,  would  have  no  objection  to
such  a  preliminary  meeting.

On  April  18,  just  two  days  before  the  scheduled  meeting,  the  British  Ambas-
sador informed  Dulles  that  there  would  be  no  British  participation.  The  reasons:
no  understanding  on  the  part  of  the  British  Foreign  Secretary  that  the  working
group  would  go  forward  at  once,  and  no  agreement  concerning  membership.
The  Department  expressed  amazement,  but  in  view  of  the  British  attitude  the
April  20  meeting  was  transformed  into  a  general  briefing  for  the  nations  com-
prising the  allied  side  at  the  Geneva  Conference.  In  a  later  explanation  of  the
shift  in  British  attitude.  Foreign  Secretary  Eden  said  that  in  agreeing  to  informal
working  group  talks  he  had  overlooked  the  pending  Colombo  Conference  and
that  he  felt  that  it  would  have  been  most  undesirable  to  give  any  public  indica-
tion of  membership  in  a  program  for  united  action  before  the  end  of  the  Colombo
discussions.  It  is  now  clear  that  the  British  were  restrained  by  India  and  by  a
fear  that  British  attendance  at  the  meeting  would  be  construed  as  assent  to


104 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I

"united  action."  Moreover,  London  could  not  have  been  reassured  by  a  "trial
balloon"  speech  of  Vice  President  Nixon  on  April  17  in  which  he  suggested  that
the  U.S.  might  have  to  "take  the  risk  by  putting  our  boys  in"  in  order  to  avoid
"further  Communist  expansion  in  Asia  and  Indochina."

8. Continued  French  Prodding  for  U.S.  Intervention  (April  21-25)

In  preparation  for  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Geneva  Conference,  tripartite
discussions  (U.S.,  U.K.,  France)  took  place  in  Paris  in  mid- April.  In  these  dis-
cussions, the  French  contended  that  a  successful  Geneva  settlement  was  depend-
ent on  a  favorable  outcome  of  the  battle  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  that  their  par-
ticipation in  a  Southeast  Asian  coalition  might  not  be  possible  if  Dien  Bien  Phu
fell.  There  could  be  no  guarantee  what  position  France  would  take  in  the  event
of  a  collapse  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  The  French  argued  that  only  large-scale  United
States  air  and  naval  intervention  could  retrieve  the  situation  in  Indochina.  They
made  no  formal  request  for  intervention  in  the  tripartite  discussions,  but  on  sev-
eral occasions  suggested  or  implied  to  the  Americans  that  such  action  was  neces-
sary.

On  April  21,  Marc  Jacquet,  French  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Associated
States,  told  the  American  Ambassador  to  Indochina,  Donald  Heath,  then  in
Paris,  that  no  French  military  authority  still  believed  a  victory  was  possible  in
Indochina  without  United  States  air  and  naval  intervention,  and  that  such  action
should  be  indicated  after  the  impending  failure  of  the  Indochina  phase  of  the
Geneva  Conference.

On  April  22,  Foreign  Minister  Bidault,  with  General  Ely,  suggested  to  Secre-
tary Dulles  that  there  should  be  emergency  consultation  between  General  Navarre
and  American  military  commanders  in  Indochina.  The  Foreign  Minister  indicated
that,  although  he  had  been  opposed  to  internationalizing  the  war,  he  would  now
favor  it  with  United  States  participation  if  that  would  save  Dien  Bien  Phu.

On  April  23  the  French  Under  Secretary  of  State,  Andre  Bougenot,  in  the
presence  of  Premier  Laniel,  suggested  to  Douglas  MacArthur  II,  Counselor  of
the  Department  of  State,  that  the  United  States  could  commit  its  naval  aircraft
to  the  battle  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  without  risking  American  prestige  or  committing
an  act  of  belligerency  by  placing  such  aircraft,  painted  with  French  insignia  and
construed  as  part  of  the  French  Foreign  Legion,  under  nominal  French  command
for  an  isolated  action  consisting  of  air  strikes  lasting  two  or  three  days.

On  the  same  day  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  showed  the  Secretary  a  message
from  General  Navarre  in  which  the  French  commander  said  that  the  situation
at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  desperate  and  that  he  believed  that  the  only  alternatives
were  (1)  Operation  VAUTOUR,  massive  B-29  bombing  (which  Secretary  Dulles
understood  would  be  a  United  States  operation  from  bases  outside  Indochina),
or  (2)  a  French  Union  request  for  a  cease-fire  (which  the  Secretary  assumed
would  be  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  only,  but  which  General  Navarre,  as  it  turned  out,
meant  should  apply  to  all  of  Indochina) .

D. FINAL  U.S.  POSITION  BEFORE  GENEVA

1. Exchanges  with  the  French

The  American  response  to  these  various  suggestions  was  to  reiterate  to  the
French  the  necessary  preconditions  for  American  intervention:  (1)  complete  in-
dependence for  the  Associated  States;  (2)  Congressional  authorization;  (3)  a


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  105

coalition  that  would  include  the  United  Kingdom.  In  relation  to  the  need  for  a
coalition,  Secretary  Dulles  in  Paris  and  Under  Secretary  W.  Bedell  Smith  in
Washington  suggested  to  French  officials  that  France,  in  the  same  way  as  it  had
asked  for  American  air  intervention  in  Indochina,  should  appeal  for  British  in-
tervention there.

Before  leaving  Paris  for  Geneva,  Secretary  Dulles  gave  Foreign  Minister
Bidault  a  letter  replying  to  General  Navarre's  suggestion  that  United  States  air
intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  the  sole  alternative  to  a  cease-fire.  In  this
letter,  the  Secretary  stated  again  the  necessary  preconditions  for  United  States
intervention,  and  contended  that  if  Dien  Bien  Phu  fell  there  was  no  reason  that
this  should  make  it  necessary  to  plead  for  a  cease-fire.  The  French  Foreign  Min-
ister, in  a  letter  limited  to  the  military  consequences  of  United  States  intervention,
replied  that  in  the  opinion  of  French  military  experts  "a  massive  intervention  of
American  aviation  would  still  be  able  to  save  the  garrison."

2. Exchanges  with  the  U.K.

In  the  discussions  with  the  British,  meanwhile,  the  United  States  had  tried
both  to  induce  the  United  Kingdom  to  participate  in  a  joint  Anglo-American  air
and  naval  intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  to  persuade  the  United  Kingdom
that  the  prompt  organization  of  a  collective  defense  in  Southeast  Asia  was  neces-
sary to  bolster  the  French  in  Indochina.

But  the  British  indicated  that  they  would  make  no  commitment  to  intervene
militarily  in  Indochina  and  wished  to  postpone  conversations  on  collective  de-
fense arrangements  until  after  the  Geneva  Conference.  Foreign  Secretary  Eden
told  Secretary  Dulles  on  April  24  that  the  British  did  not  want  at  this  juncture
to  intervene  in  the  Indochina  War.  Immediately  afterward  Eden  returned  to
London  for  a  special  Cabinet  meeting  on  the  Indochina  crisis  which  was  held
on  April  25.  Prime  Minister  Churchill  reported  to  the  House  of  Commons  two
days  later  that  the  British  Government  was  "not  prepared  to  give  any  under-
takings about  United  Kingdom  military  action  in  Indochina  in  advance  of  the
results  of  Geneva,"  and  had  "not  entered  into  any  new  political  or  military  com-
mitments." Before  addressing  the  Commons,  Churchill  had  rejected  a  plea  from
French  Ambassador  Rene  Massigli,  made  on  behalf  of  Premier  Laniel,  for  a
statement  that  Great  Britain  would  join  the  United  States  and  France  in  defense
of  Dien  Bien  Phu.

The  United  Kingdom  was  willing,  however,  to  participate  in  early  military
discussions  to  consider  measures  which  might  be  taken  in  Southeast  Asia  if
Indochina  were  lost.  Along  these  lines.  Foreign  Secretary  Eden  and  Secretary
Dulles  had  discussed  tentatively  on  April  22  the  possibility  of  a  secret  military
appraisal — by  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  Australia,  New  Zealand,
and  Thailand — of  what  could  be  done  to  bolster  Thailand  in  the  event  of  a
French  collapse  in  Indochina.  The  Foreign  Secretary  had  returned  to  this  proposi-
tion in  another  conversation  with  Secretary  Dulles  the  next  day.

On  April  30,  indicating  that  the  British  were  prepared  to  defend  the  area  out-
side Indochina,  and  possibly  the  free  part  of  a  partitioned  Indochina,  Eden
proposed  to  Secretary  Dulles  "an  immediate  and  secret  joint  examination  of  the
political  and  military  problems  in  creating  a  collective  defense  for  Southeast
Asia,  namely:  (a)  nature  and  purpose;  (b)  membership;  (c)  commitments."  He
added  that  this  examination  should  also  cover  immediate  measures  to  strengthen
Thailand.

Secretary  Dulles  raised  the  question  of  early  military  talks  that  might


106 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

strengthen  the  French  position  at  the  Geneva  Conference  at  a  meeting  in  Geneva
on  May  2  with  the  Foreign  Ministers  of  Australia  and  Nev^  Zealand,  partners  of
the  United  States  in  the  ANZUS  organization.  The  three  agreed  at  this  meeting
that  there  should  be  five-power  military  talks  in  Washington  among  the  ANZUS
powers,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  France,  with  the  possible  participation  of
Thailand.

3. The  Washington  Viewpoint

In  Washington  in  the  meantime,  the  President  on  April  26,  the  opening  date
of  the  Geneva  Conference,  told  a  group  of  Republican  leaders  that  it  would  be
a  "tragic  error"  for  the  United  States  to  intervene  unilaterally  as  a  partner  of
France  in  the  Indochina  struggle.  Two  days  later,  in  a  discussion  with  Under
Secretary  W.  Bedell  Smith,  Presidential  Assistant  Robert  Cutler,  and  Admiral
Radford  (who  had  just  been  to  London  and  had  talked  with  the  British  Chiefs  of
Staff  and  Prime  Minister  Churchill) ,  the  President  expressed  disappointment  over
the  British  attitude  of  refraining  from  active  participation  in  discussions  on  a
Southeast  Asian  collective  security  arrangement  before  the  end  of  the  Geneva
Conference.  President  Eisenhower,  in  this  discussion,  reiterated  his  firm  decision
that  there  would  be  no  United  States  military  intervention  in  Indochina  by
executive  action.  He  urged  his  aides  to  provide  help  to  the  French  in  repairing
three  airfields  in  Indochina  but  to  avoid  any  undue  risk  of  involving  the  United
States  in  combat  operations.

The  feasibility  of  American  intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  finally  removed
with  the  fall  of  that  fortress  on  May  7.  President  Eisenhower  sent  messages  to
the  President  of  France,  Rene  Coty,  and  to  the  Chief  of  State  of  Vietnam,  Bao
Dai,  praising  the  defenders  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  stressing  the  determination  of
the  free  world  to  remain  "faithful  to  the  causes  for  which  they  fought."

E. REAPPRAISAL  OF  DOMINO  THEORY  AFTER  DIEN  BIEN  PHU

The  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,  and  the  failure  to  organize  an  intervention  through
"united  action"  prior  to  the  opening  of  the  Geneva  Conference  in  late  April,
1954,  led  ta  a  reappraisal  of  the  "domino  theory"  which  had  been  at  the  center
of  U.S.  policy  in  Southeast  Asia  since  the  late  1940's.  The  loss  of  Tonkin,  or
Vietnam,  or  perhaps  even  all  of  Indochina,  was  no  longer  considered  to  lead
inexorably  to  the  loss  to  Communism  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

Accordingly,  Secretary  Dulles  in  a  press  conference  on  May  11  (four  days
after  the  French  surrender  at  Dien  Bien  Phu)  observed  that  "Southeast  Asia

I  could  be  secured  even  without  perhaps  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia."  He  went
on  to  note  that  although  he  would  not  want  to  underestimate  the  importance  of

f  these  countries  he  would  not  want  either  to  give  the  impression  that  "if  events
that  we  could  not  control,  and  which  we  do  not  anticipate,  should  lead  to  their
being  lost  that  we  would  consider  the  whole  situation  hopeless  and  we  would
give  up  in  despair  .  .  ."  In  a  remark  at  the  press  conference  that  was  later
deleted  from  the  official  transcript,  Dulles  said  that  Laos  and  Cambodia  were
"important  but  by  no  means  essential"  because  they  were  poor  countries  with
meager  populations.

Later,  as  the  U.S.  became  reconciled  to  a  political  settlement  at  Geneva  which
would  yield  northern  Vietnam  to  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  regime,  the  concept  of
"united  action"  was  given  a  new  twist.  It  now  was  transformed  into  an  attempt
to  organize  a  long-range  collective  defense  alliance  which  would  offset  the  set-


U.S.  Involvement  in  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  1950-1954  107

back  in  Indochina  and  prevent  further  losses.  That  long-feared  setback  was  now
perceived  to  be  less  serious  than  had  once  been  envisaged.  The  loss  of  Tonkin
was  no  longer  seen  as  leading  necessarily  to  a  Communist  take-over  of  other
territory  between  China  and  the  American  shore.  Eventually,  in  SEATO,  the
U.S.  sought  to  create  an  alliance  which  would  be  strong  enough  to  withstand  the
fall  of  one  such  domino.


108 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I


3. The  Geneva  Conference,  May- July,  1954


I. BACKGROUND  TO  THE  CONFERENCE

On  February  18,  1954,  a  joint  communique  from  Berlin  issued  by  the
United  States,  Great  Britain,  the  Soviet  Union,  and  France  announced  that  in
late  April  the  Big  Four  and  other  parties  concerned  would  meet  at  Geneva
to  seek  a  peaceful  solution  of  the  eight-year-old  war  in  Indochina.  Between
those  dates,  the  Western  allies  engaged  in  a  series  of  discussions  centered  around
American  proposals  for  direct  intervention,  while  the  Communist  side — the
USSR,  Communist  China  (CPR),  and  the  Viet  Minh — worked  to  ensure  that
they  would  enter  the  forthcoming  Geneva  Conference  fi;om  a  position  of
strength.

The  Eisenhower  Administration  found  as  much  difficulty  in  persuading  France
and  Great  Britain  that  fundamental  changes  in  the  war  were  necessary  before
the  start  of  the  conference  as  in  accepting  the  notion  of  a  negotiated  solution
in  Indochina.  The  troubles  with  France  had  begun  in  mid- 1953  when  the  U.S.
Government  gave  its  conditional  approval  to  the  Navarre  Plan,  which  provided
for  radically  new  French  field  tactics  and  a  buildup  of  the  Vietnamese  National
Army  (VNA).  American  hopes  that  assistance  in  money  and  war  materiel
would  elicit  a  French  commitment  to  a  program  to  attract  native  Indochinese
into  close  military  and  political  collaboration  with  the  colonial  governments,
especially  in  Vietnam,  were  not  fulfilled.  Nor  was  France  hospitable  to  Amer-
ican suggestions  for  greater  involvement  of  the  Military  Advisory  Assistance
Group  (MAAG)  in  French  planning.  As  was  to  be  the  case  almost  throughout
the  Indochina  crisis,  France  capitalized  on  American  fears  of  National  Assembly
rejection  of  the  European  Defense  Community  (EDC)  treaty  and  of  a  French
pull-out  from  Indochina  to  gain  U.S.  aid  without  having  to  make  commensurate
concessions  on  Vietnamese  independence  or  tactical  planning.  American  attempts
to  tie  aid  to  such  concessions  were  never  followed  through,  and  whatever  lever-
age on  French  policy-making  in  Indochina  the  United  States  possessed  was  left
largely  unexploited.

For  the  most  part,  France's  rejection  of  American  conditions  and  suggestions
was  based  on  the  Laniel  government's  conviction,  implemented  zealously  by
French  civil  and  military  authorities  in  Indochina,  that  the  United  States  would
be  intruding  in  France's  domain.  A  policy  of  systematic  restrictions  on  American
officials  in  the  field  prevented  the  United  States  from  making  independent  evalu-
ations of  the  war's  progress,  with  the  result  that  the  Government  was  for  many
months  badly  informed  and  unwarrantedly  optimistic  about  the  French  Union
army's  chances  against  the  Viet  Minh.  In  late  March  and  April  1954,  when  it
became  clear  to  Washington  that  the  Navarre  Plan  had  failed  and  that  (in  Secre-
tary of  State  Dulles'  words)  "united  action"  was  necessary  to  prevent  Indo-
china from  falling  to  the  Communists,  the  French  revealed  that  their  distrust  of
American  "interference"  extended  to  any  plans  for  overt  American  air-naval
involvement.  The  Laniel  government  was  perfectly  amenable  to  localized  Amer-
ican intervention  at  Dienbienphu  to  save  the  besieged  French  army  from  dis-


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  109

aster;  but  it  stood  firmly  opposed  to  Dulles'  concept  of  collective  (Western-
Asian)  defense  in  a  security  organization  that  would,  if  necessary,  intervene  to
prevent  the  "loss"  of  Indochina.  France's  requests  for  assistance  at  Dienbienphu
were  entirely  consistent  with  long-standing  policy  in  Paris  that  looked  to  a
negotiated  settlement  of  the  war  on  "honorable"  terms  at  the  same  time  as  it
hoped  to  be  in  the  best  possible  military  position  at  the  time  negotiations  began.

Opposition  to  "united  action"  was  no  less  stubborn  in  London.  The  British,
like  the  French,  were  suspicious  of  American  intentions  in  calling  for  that
alternative,  though  for  different  reasons.  To  the  Churchill  government,  the
United  States,  even  while  proclaiming  a  strong  desire  to  avoid  open  conflict
with  Communist  China,  was  tending  precisely  in  that  direction  by  insisting  on
the  formation  of  a  collective  security  pact  prior  to  the  start  of  the  Geneva  Con-
ference. Eisenhower's  letter  to  Churchill  on  April  4,  1954,  could  only  have
reinforced  those  suspicions,  for  the  President  described  united  action  as  an
attempt  to  make  China  stop  supporting  the  Viet  Minh  rather  than  face  the
prospect  of  large-scale  allied  involvement  in  Vietnam.  Although  the  British
were  not  asked  to  make  substantial  ground  troop  commitments  to  a  united
action,  they  felt  that  their  approval  would  ultimately  condone  a  widening  of
the  war  that  would  risk  bringing  in  the  Chinese  who,  the  British  argued,
could  not  possibly  be  expected  to  cease  assistance  they  had  been  providing  since
1950.  London  therefore  told  Dulles  it  would  not  approve  united  action  and
preferred  to  await  the  outcome  of  the  negotiations  before  deciding  whether  the
Indochina  situation  warranted  resort  to  military  alternatives.  The  British  were
perfectly  willing  to  talk  about  regional  defense  in  the  Far  East,  but  only  after
the  results  were  in  on  the  negotiations.  Until  then,  they  said,  they  would  limit
themselves  to  providing  full  diplomatic  support  to  the  French  in  search  of  a
peaceful  solution.

Differences  among  the  allies  were  therefore  acute  as  the  conference  opened.
The  French  had  cleverly  exploited  the  American  assistance  program  without
having  brought  in  the  Americans  in  full  force,  yet  had  also  been  unable  to
save  Dienbienphu  from  being  overrun  on  May  7.  The  British  were  felt  in  Wash-
ington to  have  been  the  primary  obstacle  to  united  action;  they  were  accused  of
having  been  so  blinded  by  their  own  self-interest  in  other  areas  of  Southeast
Asia  that  they  failed  to  appreciate  the  vast  strategic  importance  to  the  Free
World  of  saving  Indochina.

Contrasting  Communist  unity  on  the  eve  of  the  conference  was  more  a
matter  of  Sino-Soviet  agreement  on  the  desirability  of  negotiations  than  of  com-
plete accord  among  the  three  parties.  In  the  aftermath  of  Stalin's  death,  Soviet
foreign  policy  under  Malenkov  had  altered  considerably.  Domestic  priorities
no  doubt  influenced  the  regime's  proclaimed  hopes  for  a  reduction  in  inter-
national tension.  Peking,  more  intimately  involved  in  the  Viet  Minh  cause,
stepped  up  its  assistance  to  General  Giap's  forces  between  February  and  April
1954,  but  also  agreed  with  Moscow  on  the  desirability  of  convening  an  inter-
national conference,  which  China  would  attend,  to  end  the  fighting.  The  limited
available  evidence  suggests  that  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  (DRV)
alone  among  the  three  Communist  parties  considered  the  call  for  negotiations
premature  and  urged  that  they  be  preceded  by  intensified  military  efforts.  Ho's
much-publicized  offer  in  late  November  1953  to  talk  with  the  French  was  in-
tended more  to  influence  French  domestic  and  official  opinion  and  to  demoralize
Franco-Vietnamese  troops  than  to  evince  sincere  interest  in  arriving  at  an
equitable  settlement.  In  ensuing  months,  DRV  broadcasts  showed  a  far  greater
interest  in  first  achieving  a  clear-cut  military  victory  in  the  Tonkin  Delta  and


110 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

parts  of  Laos  than  in  engaging  in  discussions  while  French  forces  remained
scattered  throughout  Indochina.

These  developments,  in  very  broad  outline,  provided  the  backdrop  to  the
Geneva  Conference.  Strength  and  weakness  seemed  to  be  the  respective  char-
acteristics of  the  Communist  and  Western  positions.  Yet  these  terms  are,  as  we
shall  see,  not  entirely  accurate,  for  the  interaction  between  and  within  the
two  sides  was  to  make  clear  that  the  Geneva  Conference  would  not  be  the
setting  for  a  victor's  peace.

II. THE  CONDUCT  AND  STRUCTURE  OF  DIPLOMACY

One  of  the  first  agreements  reached  at  the  Geneva  Conference  occurred  in
the  course  of  a  conversation  between  V.  M.  Molotov  and  Anthony  Eden  on
May  5,  when  the  Soviet  foreign  minister  endorsed  the  foreign  secretary's  asser-
tion that  this  negotiation  was  the  most  difficult  he  had  ever  encountered.*  In-
deed, it  seems  at  first  glance  somewhat  paradoxical  that  the  Indochina  phase
of  the  Geneva  Conference  (May  8-July  21)  should  have  resulted  in  a  settle-
ment within  less  than  a  dozen  weeks,  given  the  unusual  difficulties  facing  the
negotiators  on  both  sides.  (See  Table  1)  Key  issues  were  postponed  until  the
eleventh  hour  while  debate  wore  endlessly  on  over  relatively  insignificant  mat-
ters; contact  among  the  delegations  was  limited  by  ideological  projudices  and
political  antagonisms,  forcing  some  delegates  to  act  as  mediators  no  less  than
as  representatives  of  national  interests;  and  major  agreements  were  reached
outside  the  special  framework  for  discussions  that  the  conferees  had  taken  a
month  to  build.


TABLE  1


CHIEF  NEGOTIATORS  AT  THE  GENEVA  CONFERENCE
ON  INDOCHINA


United  Kingdom
Anthony  Eden


Vyacheslav  Molotov


USSR


United  States

General  Walter  Bedell  Smith
U.  Alexis  Johnson


France

Georges  Bidault

Jean  Chauvel

Pierre  Mendes-France


Chinese  People's  Republic
Chou  En-lai
Chang  Wen-t'ien
Li  K'e-nung


Vietnam
Dac  Khe
Tran  Van  Do


Cambodia


Laos

Phoui  Sananikone


Tep  Phan
Sam  Sary


Viet  Minh
Pham  Van  Dong


*  A  valuable  source  is  Anthony  Eden,  Memoirs:  Full  Circle,  Houghton-Mifflin,  Boston,
1960.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1 954  111


A.  THE  REPRESENTATION  QUESTION

The  first  major  roadblock  in  the  negotiations  was  the  Communist  claims  con-
cerning the  representation  of  parties  not  present  at  the  conference.  Since  the
conference  had  already  begun  when  these  claims  were  forwarded,  the  chances
of  expanding  the  list  of  invited  parties  were  very  limited.  Nevertheless,  through
fourteen  restricted  and  seven  plenary  sessions,*  bitter  controversy  raged  over
Communist  insistence  that  the  Viet  Minh-led  Free  Cambodian  (Khmer  Issarak)
and  Free  Laotian  (Pathet  Lao)  forces  were  entitled  to  be  seated  beside  repre-
sentatives of  the  Royal  Governments  of  Cambodia  and  Laos.  Not  until  June  16,
when  Premier  Chou  En-lai,  China's  foreign  minister  and  chief  delegate,  indicated
to  Eden  that  Viet  Minh  forces  would  be  withdrawn  from  Cambodia  and  Laos,
was  the  debate  resolved  and  the  way  opened  for  serious  efforts  to  bring  about
cease-fires  throughout  Indochina.

The  time-consuming  exchanges  over  the  authenticity  of  Communist  "resistance
forces"  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  were,  interestingly  enough,  not  duplicated  when
it  came  to  determining  the  status  of  the  DRV.  The  Berlin  Conference  final  com-
munique had  specified  that  the  Indochina  deliberations  would  be  attended  by
the  United  States,  Great  Britain,  Communist  China,  the  Soviet  Union,  France,
"and  other  states  concerned."  Invitations  to  the  participants  would,  it  was  further
agreed,  be  issued  only  by  the  Berlin  conferees,  i.e.,  by  the  Big  Four  but  not  by
Peking.  Yet,  as  Molotov  admitted  at  the  first  plenary  session  (May  8),  Peking
as  well  as  Moscow  invited  the  DRV,  a  move  vigorously  assailed  by  France  and
the  United  States.  [Doc.  45]  No  attempt  was  made,  however,  to  block  the  DRV's
participation.  Despite  the  antagonism  of  the  Vietnamese  government  nominally
headed  by  Bao  Dai,  (Bao  Dai's  consistent  position,  supported  by  Ngo  Dinh
Diem  when  he  took  over  the  premiership  on  June  18,  was  that  his  was  the  only
legitimate  government  in  Vietnam,  while  the  Viet  Minh  were  not  political  com-
petitors but  merely  armed  rebels.)  the  DRV  was  generally  considered  one  of
the  principal  combatants  whose  consent  to  a  cease-fire,  being  indispensable,  re-
quired its  participation.  Moreover,  the  Soviet  Union  indicated  to  the  French
that  it  would  not  accept  the  presence  of  delegates  from  the  Associated  States  of
Indochina  (Vietnam,  Cambodia,  and  Laos)  unless  the  DRV  was  admitted  to
the  conference.  By  the  time  of  Dienbienphu's  fall  (May  7),  all  parties  were
agreed  that  there  would  be  nine  delegations  (though  not  States)  discussing
Indochina;  and  on  May  8  the  first  session  got  underway.

B.  THE  COMMUNICATION  GAPS

Nine  delegations  seated  at  a  roundtable  to  exchange  views,  about  every  second
day,  obscured  the  fact  that  true  bargaining  was  not  taking  place.  Proposals
were,  of  course,  tabled  and  debated;  but  actual  give-and-take  was  reserved  for
private  discussions,  usually  in  the  absence  of  the  pro-Western  Indochinese
parties.  Even  then,  the  Geneva  talks  on  Indochina  were  hardly  dominated  by

*  In  all,  the  Geneva  Conference  comprised  eight  plenary  and  twenty-two  restricted  ses-
sions. These  were  quite  apart  from  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  military  command  confer-
ences held  after  June  2,  as  well  as  from  Viet  Minh  military  staff  talks  with  Laotian
and  Cambodian  representatives  that  begain  in  late  June.  Finally,  during  the  latter  half
of  the  conference,  French  and  Viet  Minh  delegation  heads  met  secretly  in  so-called
"underground"  negotiations,  the  results  of  which  were  closely  held,  at  least  by  the
French.


112 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

Big  Power  cabals;  political  and  ideological  differences  were  so  intense,  particularly
between  the  American  and  Chinese  representatives,  that  diplomacy  had  to  be
conducted  circuitously,  with  Eden  and  Molotov  frequently  acting  as  mediators
and  messengers  for  delegates  unwilling  to  be  found  together.  (As  one  example
of  the  American  attitude,  Dulles  told  reporters  just  prior  to  the  first  session
that  the  only  way  he  could  possibly  meet  with  Chou  En-lai  was  if  their  cars
collided.)

Anthony  Eden,  whose  persistence  in  the  face  of  adverse  developments  through-
out the  conference  was  rewarded  in  the  end,  has  provided  this  description  of  per-
sonal tribulation:

I  was  conscious  that  time  was  not  on  our  side.  Since  neither  the  Americans
nor  the  French  had  established  any  contacts  with  the  Communist  repre-
sentatives [in  mid- June],  I  had  been  compelled  to  adopt  the  role  of  inter-
mediary between  the  Western  powers  and  the  Communists.  My  activities  in
this  respect  were  open  to  every  kind  of  misrepresentation.  I  was  concerned
about  their  effect  on  Anglo-American  relations.  On  the  other  hand,  I  was
encouraged  by  the  close  accord  maintained  throughout  the  conference  be-
tween ourselves  and  the  other  members  of  the  Commonwealth,  including
those,  like  Mr.  Nehru,  who  were  not  represented  at  Geneva.  They  sent  me
messages  of  thanks  and  encouragement.  I  needed  them,  for  I  began  to  feel
that  we  should  never  make  effective  headway.  I  had  never  known  a  con-
ference of  this  kind.  The  parties  would  not  make  direct  contact  and  we
were  in  constant  danger  of  one  or  another  backing  out  of  the  door.

Not  until  the  latter  half  of  June  did  high-ranking  French  and  Viet  Minh  delegates
meet  face-to-face,  did  Viet  Minh  military  officials  confer  with  Cambodian  and
Laotian  representatives,  and  did  French  and  Chinese  heads-of -delegation  privately
exchange  views.  Communist  and  non-Communist  Vietnamese,  meanwhile,  refused
to  talk  to  one  another  until  July,  when  finally  Tran  Van  Do  and  Pham  Van  Dong
were  persuaded  to  have  private  discussions.  Most  importantly,  the  American
delegation  (USDEL),  under  strict  instructions  to  avoid  contact  with  the  Chinese,
had  to  rely  on  second-hand  information  provided  by  the  British,  French,  and
Soviet  representatives,  a  procedure  that  was  repeated  with  respect  to  the  Viet
Minh.

The  problem  of  contact  was  no  more  acutely  felt  than  by  the  delegation  of  the
State  of  Vietnam.  Although  finally  granted  complete  independence  by  France
under  treaties  initialed  in  Paris  April  28  and  approved  by  both  governments
June  4,  Vietnam  did  not  gain  the  concurrent  power  to  negotiate  its  own  fate.
The  French,  clearly  anxious  lest  the  Vietnamese  upset  the  delicate  state  of
private  talks  with  the  Viet  Minh,  avoided  Bao  Dai's  representatives  whenever
possible  and  sought  to  exploit  close  Vietnamese-American  relations  in  informing
the  Vietnamese  only  after  agreements  had  been  reached.  During  June,  for
instance,  Jean  Chauvel,  head  of  the  French  delegation,  on  several  occasions
approached  the  Americans  with  information  on  the  "underground"  negotiations
with  the  Viet  Minh  and  with  the  hope  that,  once  partition  had  been  fixed,  the
United  States  would  "sell"  that  solution  to  Saigon.  [Doc.  60]  In  the  same  month,
Chauvel,  evincing  complete  understanding  of  American  determination  to  avoid
approving  or  acquiescing  in  a  partition  settlement,  nevertheless  asked  if  the
United  States  would  soften  Vietnamese  opposition  to  it  by  indicating  it  was  the
best  solution  obtainable.  Chauvel  described  Diem  and  his  predecessor,  Buu  Loc,
as  difficult,  unrealistic,  and  unreasonable  on  the  subject.  [Doc.  66]


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  113

In  an  aide-memoire  delivered  to  Dulles  and  Eden  on  June  26  by  Henri  Bonnet,
the  French  ambassador  to  Washington,  Paris  urged  Washington  not  to  encourage
an  adverse  Vietnamese  reaction  to  partition.  The  United  States  was  also  asked
"to  intervene  with  the  Vietnamese  to  counsel  upon  them  wisdom  and  self-control
and  to  dissuade  them  from  refusing  an  agreement  which,  if  it  is  reached,  is
dictated  not  by  the  spirit  of  abandoning  them,  but  on  the  contrary  by  the  desire
to  save  in  Indochina  all  that  can  possibly  be  saved,  and  to  give  the  Vietnamese
state,  under  peaceful  conditions,  opportunities  which  have  not  always  been
possible  heretofore  because  of  the  war."  To  these  approaches,  the  United
States  consistently  reacted  negatively  in  the  undoubtedly  correct  belief  that
the  French  were  merely  attempting  to  identify  the  United  States  in  Vietnamese
eyes  with  the  partition  concept.  By  refusing  to  act  as  intermediaries  for  the
French,  the  American  delegation  kept  free  of  association  with  a  "French  solution"
to  the  Vietnam  problem.

French  aloofness  from  the  Vietnamese  continued  into  July.  Despite  American
requests  of  the  French  delegation  that  the  Vietnamese  be  kept  informed  of
developments,  the  French  demurred.  Chauvel  informed  U.  Alexis  Johnson,
chief  deputy  to  the  head  of  the  USDEL,  General  Walter  Bedell  Smith,  that
"he  was  handling  this  [liaison  with  the  Vietnamese]  through  members  of  his  staff
and  was  avoiding  direct  contact  with  Vietnamese  in  order  not  to  have  to  answer
their  questions."  When  Offroy,  another  member  of  the  French  delegation,  sug-
gested that  the  United  States  placate  the  Vietnamese  with  assurance  of  Free
World  political,  economic,  and  military  support  after  the  settlement,  Johnson
replied  that  this  was  a  matter  for  the  French  to  handle.  Not  until  late  in  the
Conference  did  the  Vietnamese  government  become  aware  of  the  strong  possibil-
ity that  partition  would  become  part  of  the  settlement;  on  this  and  other  develop-
ments, as  we  shall  see,  the  Vietnamese  were  kept  in  the  dark,  a  circumstance
that  was  to  solidify  Vietnamese  hostility  to  and  dissociation  from  the  final  terms.

But  the  Vietnamese  loyal  to  Bao  Dai  were  not  alone  in  being  denied  important
information,  although  they  suffered  worst  from  it.  The  United  States  delegation
itself  several  times  suspected  that  it  was  not  receiving  all  the  news  the  French
were  in  a  position  to  provide.  The  fault,  however,  lay  as  much  with  the  ambiguous
status  under  which  the  delegation  operated  as  with  the  French  who  were  to  act
as  messengers.  On  the  one  hand,  the  Americans  wanted  to  use  their  influence  to
ensure  that  the  French  not  sell  out  Western  interests  for  the  sake  of  a  quick
settlement;  on  the  other,  they  were  determined  not  to  become  so  involved  in
the  bargaining  process  as  to  link  the  Administration  to  the  final  terms.  The
resolution  of  these  apparently  conflicting  aims  was  offered  by  Dulles  on  the  eve
of  the  conference  in  a  background  briefing  to  newsmen  at  Geneva.  He  said  that
primary  responsibility  for  decisions  taken  at  the  conference  belonged  to  the
French  and  Vietnamese  on  one  side,  and  to  the  Viet  Minh  on  the  other.  The
United  States  "would  be  inclined  not  to  try  to  interpose  [its]  veto  in  any  sense
as  against  what  they  might  want  to  do."  As  to  whether  this  attitude  applied
equally  to  substantive  provisions  of  any  settlement,  the  Secretary  indicated  that
the  United  States  would,  if  necessary,  refuse  to  acknowledge  results  contrary  to
American  "interests" :

I  would  think  that  [nonapplication  of  a  veto]  would  be  true  up  to  the
point  at  least  where  we  felt  that  the  issues  involved  had  a  pretty  demon-
strable interest  to  the  United  States  itself.  The  United  States  does  have
pretty  considerable  interests  in  the  Western  Pacific,  and  there  are  some  solu-
tions there  which  we  would  regard  as  so  disadvantageous  that  we  would


114 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

seek  to  prevent  them.  And  if  we  failed  in  that  respect,  we  would  probably
want  to  disassociate  ourselves  from  it  [the  final  settlement].

Thus,  the  United  States  would  apply  the  tactic  of  "disassociation"  should  its
influence  not  be  sufficient  to  make  the  final  terms  compatible  with  American
"interests."  Yet  the  French,  against  whom  the  tactic  was  primarily  directed,  were
probably  (and  quite  naturally)  averse  to  keeping  their  American  colleagues  so
well  informed  of  developments  in  the  talks  with  the  Viet  Minh  that  the  United
States  would  have  occasion  to  resort  to  "disassociation."  Throughout  the  con-
ference, in  fact,  the  French  aimed  at  exploiting  the  American  presence  for  the
strength  they  believed  it  provided  their  negotiators,  and  this  policy  meant  pres-
suring Washington  to  retain  a  high-ranking  delegation  at  the  conference  right
up  to  the  moment  of  the  settlement.

Whatever  the  rationale  for  French  behavior,  the  USDEL  complained  to
Washington  that  it  was  not  being  kept  fully  informed  of  developments  in  the
"underground"  Franco-Viet  Minh  talks.  The  change  in  government  in  Paris
during  June  from  Laniel  to  Pierre  Mendes-France  helped  matters  somewhat.
But  though  it  was  conceded  that  Mendes-France's  representatives  had  done  better
than  their  predecessors  in  keeping  the  United  States  apprised,  the  United  States
still  felt,  as  Dulles  put  it,  that  while  Paris  was  not  willfully  concealing  informa-
tion, there  remained  a  "certain  lack  of  any  intimacy.  .  .  ."  [Doc.  65]

The  British  also  felt  locked  out  of  news  that  vitally  affected  them.  Particularly
during  May,  when  Washington  and  Paris  were  frequently  in  touch  about  possible
military  intervention,  the  British  were  highly  disturbed  to  find  newspapers  their
best  source  of  information  on  the  intentions  of  their  foremost  allies.  Since  London
was  no  longer  considered  essential  to  "united  action"  (see  Section  IV),  the
Americans  and  the  French  had  evidently  agreed  that  their  negotiations  should
be  kept  under  wraps  until  such  time  as  a  decision  was  made.  Only  after  Eden
confronted  Under  Secretary  Smith  with  the  newspaper  stories  (which  may  have
been  deliberate  "leaks"  to  influence  the  Geneva  deliberations)  did  Dulles  direct
that  the  British,  Australian,  and  New  Zealand  ambassadors  be  informed  "in
general  terms"  regarding  U.S.-French  talks.  Diplomay  among  the  Western  Big
Three  clearly  reflected  the  rifts  that  had  developed  in  the  alliance  over  inter-
vention before  the  Dienbienphu  disaster;  as  a  result,  secrecy  and  bilateral  dis-
cussions tended  to  be  the  rule,  thereby  complicating  the  already  mammoth  task
of  presenting  a  united  Western  front  against  the  Communist  negotiators.

Thus  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  diplomacy  as  it  was  conducted  by  the
non-Communist  delegations.  What  of  the  Communists?  The  available  docu-
mentation limits  the  comments  we  may  make,  but  still  permits  some  remarks,
both  definite  and  speculative.  First,  the  Chinese,  Soviet,  and  Viet  Minh  delega-
tions were  in  constant  touch,  as  reported  by  their  news  agencies.  Moreover,
Chou  En-lai  was  able  to  make  three  stopovers  in  Moscow  during  the  conference
that  very  likely  heightened  Sino-Soviet  coordination.  Finally,  during  a  recess  for
heads  of  delegation,  Chou  and  Ho  Chi  Minh  held  a  three-day  meeting  in  early
July  that  may  have  provided  the  turning  point  in  the  Viet  Minh's  more  conciliatory
attitude  thereafter.  In  brief,  the  Communists  apparently  were  not  plagued  by  the
kinds  of  communication  problems  that  hampered  the  Americans,  British,  and
Vietnamese.

As  will  be  argued  in  greater  detail  subsequently,  the  frequent  meetings  of  the
Communist  delegations  did  not  result  in  a  uniformity  of  views.  The  Chinese  and
Soviets  evidently  worked  independent  of  the  Viet  Minh  whenever  their  separate


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  115

interests  dictated  the  need  for  advancement  of  progress  in  the  negotiations.  At
times  when  the  Viet  Minh  were  intransigent,  Chou  and  Molotov  frequently  took
the  initiative  to  break  log  jams  that  threatened  to  plunge  the  conference  into
irresolvable  deadlock.  Much  like  Eden,  Chou  and  Molotov  sometimes  found
themselves  playing  the  role  of  mediator,  a  role  which  they,  and  particularly  Chou,
rehshed  for  what  Fred  Ikle  has  called  the  "side-effects"  of  negotiations — benefits
deriving  from,  but  incidental  to,  negotiations,  such  as  enhanced  prestige.  In  the
end,  the  Viet  Minh  advantage  of  close  rapport  with  Moscow  and  Peking  did  not
prevent  the  Viet  Minh  from  sharing  with  their  non-Communist  compatriots  the
ignominious  distinction  of  having  been  undercut  by  allies.

III. THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BARGAINING  POSITIONS

A. THE  UNITED  STATES  AND  THE  NEGOTIATIONS

In  underwriting  the  Navarre  Plan  and  proceeding  with  utmost  caution  in
urging  France  to  improve  its  relationship  with  the  non-Communist  Vietnamese
nationalists,  the  United  States  hoped  to  influence  Paris  to  postpone  a  commitment
to  negotiations  until  French  forces  were  at  least  on  the  threshold  of  military
victory.  While  aware  of  the  strong  pressures  on  the  Laniel  government  from
the  National  Assembly  and  the  French  public  for  a  peaceful  settlement,  the
United  States,  clearly  influenced  by  the  experience  at  Panmunjom,  sought  to
persuade  the  premier  not  to  let  the  clamor  for  peace  drive  him  to  the  bargaining
table.  As  late  as  December  1953  Laniel  agreed  that  Washington's  aversion  to
premature  negotiations  was  well-advised;  but  two  months  later,  at  Berlin,  his
government  joined  with  the  Soviet  Union  in  calling  for  an  international  confer-
ence to  end  the  Indochina  conflict.  The  French  government  found  it  could  no
longer  ignore  anti-war  sentiment  at  home  without  jeopardizing  its  survival,  while
the  Americans,  however  strongly  opposed  to  bringing  the  war  to  the  conference
table  with  victory  nowhere  in  sight  and  with  Communist  China  as  a  negotiating
opponent,  felt  compelled  to  approve  the  Berlin  decision  if  only  to  blunt  the
French  threat  of  scuttling  EDC.

Forced  to  go  along  with  French  preference  for  negotiating  with  the  Commu-
nists, the  United  States  remained  unalterably  pessimistic  about  the  probable
results.  This  attitude  was  first  set  out  fully  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  in  March
1954.  [Doc.  23]  The  Chiefs  examined  the  alternatives  to  military  victory  and
found  them  all  infeasible  or  unacceptable  to  the  United  States.  A  ceasefire  prior
to  a  political  settlement,  the  JCS  paper  states,  "would,  in  all  probability,  lead
to  a  political  stalemate  attended  by  a  concurrent  and  irretrievable  deterioration
of  the  Franco-Vietnamese  military  position."  A  coalition  government  would  lead
to  Communist  control  by  keeping  any  outside  assistance  from  preventing  a
seizure  of  power  from  within.  Partition,  on  the  other  hand,  would  mean  recog-
nizing Communist  success  by  force  of  arms,  ceding  the  key  Tonkin  Delta  to  the
Communists,  and,  even  if  confined  to  only  one  of  the  three  Indochinese  states,
undercutting  our  containment  policy  in  Asia.

The  Chiefs  also  commented  at  some  length  on  the  difficult  question  of  elections
in  Vietnam.  They  took  the  position  that  even  if  elections  could  be  held  along
democratic  lines  (which  they  doubted),  a  Communist  victory  would  almost
certainly  result  because  of  Communist  territorial  control,  popular  support,  and
superior  tactics:


116 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Such  factors  as  the  prevalence  of  illiteracy,  the  lack  of  suitable  educational
media,  and  the  absence  of  adequate  communications  in  the  outlying  areas
would  render  the  holding  of  a  truly  representative  plebiscite  of  doubtful
feasibility.  The  Communists,  by  virtue  of  their  superior  capability  in  the
field  of  propaganda,  could  readily  pervert  the  issue  as  being  a  choice  be-
tween national  independence  and  French  Colonial  rule.  Furthermore,  it
would  be  militarily  infeasible  to  prevent  widespread  intimidation  of  voters
by  Communist  partisans.  While  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  make  a  de-
pendable forecast  as  to  the  outcome  of  a  free  election,  current  intelligence
leads  the  Joint  Chiefs  to  the  belief  that  a  settlement  based  upon  free  elec-
tions would  be  attended  by  almost  certain  loss  of  the  Associated  States  to
Communist  control.

The  JCS  views,  together  with  the  recommendation  that  the  United  States  not
associate  itself  with  any  settlement  that  "would  fail  to  provide  reasonably  adequate
assurance  of  the  future  political  and  territorial  integrity  of  Indochina  .  .  .  ,"
were  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  March  23.

The  JCS  position  reflected  Government  policy,  for  in  the  remaining  months
before  the  Conference  the  United  States  privately  stood  opposed  to  any  course
of  action  other  than  full  prosecution  of  the  war.  Dulles,  speaking  with  French
Ambassador  Henri  Bonnet  on  April  3,  reasoned  that"  a  negotiated  settlement
would  lead  only  to  face-saving  formulae  for  either  a  French  or  a  Viet  Minh
surrender.  The  Secretary  termed  a  division  of  Indochina  "impractical"  and  a
coalition  government  the  "beginning  of  disaster";  neither  arrangement  could
prevent  a  French  surrender.  [Doc.  27]  The  President  himself  echoed  this  either-or
approach.  Writing  to  Churchill  April  4,  Eisenhower  proposed:  "There  is  no
negotiated  solution  of  the  Indochina  problem  which  in  essence  would  not  be
either  a  face-saving  device  to  cover  a  French  surrender  or  a  face-saving  device
to  cover  a  Communist  retirement."  And,  as  already  observed,  it  was  precisely
to  bring  about  the  latter — China's  "discreet  disengagement"  from  support  of
the  Viet  Minh — that  the  President  wanted  British  cooperation  in  united  action.

Concomitantly,  the  United  States  was  concerned  that  a  disaster  at  Dienbienphu
would  propel  the  French  into  acceptance  of  an  immediate,  unsupervised  cease-
fire even  before  the  conference  was  to  begin.  Dulles  obtained  assurances  from
Bidault  that  the  French  would  not  agree  to  such  a  cease-fire.  But  the  Secretary
found  the  British  less  inflexible,  with  Eden  doubting  the  American  view  that  a
sudden  cease-fire  would  lead  either  to  a  massacre  of  the  French  by  the  native
people  or  to  large-scale  infiltration  of  French-held  terrain  by  Viet  Minh  forces.
[Doc.  37]

Thus  assured  by  the  French  but  mindful  of  both  French  and  British  preference
for  trying  to  bargain  with  the  Communists  before  resorting  to  further  military
steps,  Washington,  in  late  April  and  early  May,  sought  to  develop  guidelines  for
the  American  delegation.  The  National  Security  Council,  less  than  a  week  before
the  opening  conference  session,  carefully  examined  American  alternatives.  Dis-
turbed by  what  it  regarded  as  peace-at-any-price  thinking  in  Paris,  the  NSC  urged
the  President  to  decide  not  to  join  the  Geneva  deliberations  without  assurance
from  France  that  it  was  not  preparing  to  negotiate  the  surrender  of  Indochina.
Again,  the  Korean  example  was  foremost:  Communist  tactics  at  Geneva,  the
NSC  forecast,  would  likely  resemble  those  at  Panmunjom;  a  cease-fire  might
be  announced  that  the  Communists  would  not  comply  with  for  lack  of  effective
supervision;  the  French  would  wilt  before  the  Communists'  predictable  dilatory
tactics  and  end  by  accepting  almost  any  terms.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  117

The  NSC  therefore  decided  that  the  French  had  to  be  pressured  into  adopting
a  strong  posture  in  the  face  of  probable  Communist  intransigence.  The  President
was  urged  to  inform  Paris  that  French  acquiescence  in  a  Communist  takeover
of  Indochina  would  bear  not  only  on  France's  future  position  in  the  Far  East,
but  also  on  its  status  as  one  of  the  Big  Three;  that  abandonment  of  Indochina
would  grievously  affect  both  France's  position  in  North  Africa  and  Franco-U.S.
relations  in  that  region;  that  U.S.  aid  to  France  would  automatically  cease  upon
Paris'  conclusion  of  an  unsatisfactory  settlement;  and,  finally,  that  Communist
domination  of  Indochina  would  be  of  such  serious  strategic  harm  to  U.S.  in-
terests as  to  produce  "consequences  in  Europe  as  well  as  elsewhere  [without]  .  .  .
apparent  limitation."  In  addition,  the  NSC  recomended  that  the  United  States
determine  immediately  whether  the  Associated  States  should  be  approached  with
a  view  to  continuing  the  anti-Viet  Minh  struggle  in  some  other  form,  including
unilateral  American  involvement  "if  necessary."  The  NSC  clearly  viewed  the
Indochina  situation  with  extreme  anxiety,  and  its  action  program  amounted  to
unprecedented  proposals  to  threaten  France  with  the  serious  repercussions  of
a  sell-out  in  Southeast  Asia.

Pessimism  over  the  prospects  for  any  meaningful  progress  in  talks  with  the
Communists  was  shared  by  Secretary  Dulles.  In  a  background  briefing  for
newsmen  at  Geneva,  Dulles  gave  the  first  official  indication  for  public  consumption
that  the  United  States  would  dissociate  itself  from  any  settlement  rather  than
be  party  to  unacceptable  terms.  As  to  the  acceptability  of  partition,  the  Secretary,
in  views  that  would  change  later,  said  he  did  not  see  how  partition  could  be
arranged  with  the  fighting  not  confined  to  any  single  area.  He  as  much  as  ruled
out  a  territorial  division  when  he  commented  that  the  United  States  would  only
agree  to  an  arrangement  in  which  all  the  Viet  Minh  troops  would  be  placed  in  a
small  regroupment  area  out  of  harm's  way.  But  that  arrangement  "might  not  be
acceptable  to  them,"  Dulles  said  coyly.

American  opinions  on  the  likely  ramifications  of  a  settlement  were  also  made
known,  and  with  greater  precision,  in  private.  On  May  7,  for  instance,  Livingston
Merchant  of  the  State  Department  presented  the  American  view  to  the  Ministers
of  New  Zealand  and  Australia.  Predicting  that  the  French  would  finally  settle
for  part  of  Vietnam  and  manage  to  salvage  Cambodia  and  Laos,  Merchant  said
the  United  States  could  not  accept  such  a  surrender  of  territory.  While  we  could
not  prevent  the  French  from  making  concessions,  neither  did  we  have  to  associate
ourselves  with  the  results.  Thus,  both  publicly  and  privately,  Administration
leaders  indicated  at  the  outset  of  the  conference  that  the  United  States  would
divorce  itself  from  any  settlement  that  resulted  in  less  than  a  complete  French-
Vietnamese  victory.

The  first  test  of  U.S.  policy  came  May  5  when  the  French  informed  Washington
of  the  proposals  they  intended  to  make  in  the  opening  round  of  the  Geneva  talks
on  May  8.  The  proposals  included  a  separation  of  the  "civil  war"  in  Vietnam
from  the  Communist  aggressions  in  Cambodia  and  Laos;  a  cease-fire,  supervised
by  a  well-staffed  international  authority  (but  not  the  UN)  and  followed  by  polit-
ical discussions  leading  to  free  elections;  the  regrouping  of  regular  forces  of  the
belligerents  into  defined  zones  (as  Laniel  had  proposed  in  a  speech  on  March
5)  upon  signature  of  a  cease-fire  agreement;  the  disarming  of  all  irregular  forces
(i.e.,  the  Viet  Minh  guerrillas);  and  a  guarantee  of  the  agreements  by  "the  States
participating  in  the  Geneva  Conference."

The  ICS  were  first  to  react  to  the  French  plan.  The  Chiefs  strongly  felt  that
even  if  the  Communists  unexpectedly  agreed  to  it,  the  likely  outcomes  would
still  be  either  rapid  French  capitulation  in  the  wake  of  the  cease-fire  or  virtual


118 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

French  surrender  in  the  course  of  protracted  poHtical  discussions.  Once  more,
the  Chiefs  fell  back  on  the  Korean  experience,  which  they  said  demonstrated  the
certainty  that  the  Communists  would  violate  any  armistice  controls,  including
those  supervised  by  an  international  body.  An  agreement  to  refrain  from  new
military  activities  during  armistice  negotiations  would  be  a  strong  obstacle  to
Communist  violations;  but  the  Communists,  the  JCS  concluded,  would  never
agree  to  such  an  arrangement.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  far  more  likely  to
intensify  military  operations  so  as  to  enhance  their  bargaining  position,  precisely
at  the  time  the  French  would  seek  to  reduce  operations  to  avoid  taking  casualties.
The  Chiefs  therefore  urged  that  the  United  States  not  get  trapped  into  backing
a  French  armistice  proposal  that  the  Communists,  by  voicing  approval,  could
use  to  bind  us  to  a  cease-fire  while  they  themselves  ignored  it.  The  only  way  to
get  satisfactory  results  was  through  military  success,  and  since  the  Navarre  Plan
was  no  longer  tenable,  the  next  best  alternative  was  not  to  associate  the  United
States  with  any  cease-fire  in  advance  of  a  satisfactory  political  settlement.  The
first  step,  the  Chiefs  believed,  should  be  the  conclusion  of  a  settlement  that  would
"reasonably  assure  the  political  and  territorial  integrity  of  the  Associated
States  .  .  .  ";  only  thereafter  should  a  cease-fire  be  entertained.

As  previously,  the  Joint  Chiefs'  position  became  U.S.  policy  with  only  minor
emendations.  The  President,  reviewing  the  Chiefs'  paper,  agreed  that  the  Govern-
ment could  not  back  the  French  proposal  with  its  call  for  a  supervised  cease-fire
that  the  Communists  would  never  respect.  Eisenhower  further  concurred  with
the  Chiefs'  insistence  on  priority  to  a  political  settlement,  with  the  stipulation
that  French  forces  continue  fighting  while  negotiations  were  in  progress.  He
added  that  the  United  States  would  continue  aiding  the  French  during  that
period  and  would,  in  addition,  work  toward  a  coalition  "for  the  purpose  of
preventing  further  expansion  of  Communist  power  in  Southeast  Asia."

These  statements  of  position  paved  the  way  for  a  National  Security  Council
meeting  on  May  8,  which  set  forth  the  guidelines  of  U.S.  policy  on  negotiations
for  the  delegation  at  Geneva.  The  decision  taken  at  the  meeting  simply  under-
scored what  the  President  and  the  Chiefs  had  already  stated :

The  United  States  will  not  associate  itself  with  any  proposal  from  any
source  directed  toward  a  cease-fire  in  advance  of  an  acceptable  armistice
agreement,  including  international  controls.  The  United  States  could  concur
in  the  initiation  of  negotiations  for  such  an  armistice  agreement.  During  the
course  of  such  negotiations,  the  French  and  the  Associated  States  should
continue  to  oppose  the  forces  of  the  Viet  Minh  with  all  the  means  at  their
disposal.  In  the  meantime,  as  a  means  of  strengthening  the  hands  of  the
French  and  the  Associated  States  during  the  course  of  such  negotiations,  the
United  States  will  continue  its  program  of  aid  and  its  efforts  to  organize  and
promptly  activate  a  Southeast  Asian  regional  grouping  for  the  purpose  of
preventing  further  expansion  of  Communist  power  in  Southeast  Asia.

B. THE  COMMUNIST  PROPOSALS

Official  American  perspectives  on  the  likely  pattern  of  the  Geneva  negotia-
tions were  confirmed  when  the  Viet  Minh  forwarded  their  first  proposal  "pack-
age" at  the  second  plenary  session  on  May  10.  Pham  Van  Dong,  then  the
DRV's  vice-minister  for  foreign  affairs  and  already  a  seasoned  negotiator  with
the  French,  introduced  his  case  with  the  argument  that  the  Viet  Minh  were  the
"stronger"  force  in  "more  than  three-fourths  of  the  country."  He  went  on  to


f


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  119

describe  the  successful  administration  of  this  territory  by  his  government,  which
he  said  "represents  the  will  of  the  entire  Vietnamese  nation.  .  .  ."  The  op-
position, the  Bao  Dai  regime,  characterized  as  "the  government  of  the  tempo-
rarily occupied  zone,"  did  not  enjoy  popular  support  and  was  merely  the  tool
of  the  French.

Pham  Van  Dong  did  not,  however,  demand  that  France  concede  control
of  all  Vietnam  to  the  DRV.  Instead,  Dong  urged  that  France  recognize  "the
sovereignty  and  independence  of  Vietnam  throughout  the  territory  of  Vietnam,"
a  statement  which  amounted  to  a  rejection  of  the  Franco-Vietnamese  treaties
approved  April  28  in  Paris  by  Laniel  and  Premier  Nguyen  Trung  Vinh.  The
main  points  of  Dong's  proposal  for  a  cease-fire  and  political  settlement  in
Vietnam  were  as  follows:

(1)  Conclusion  of  an  agreement  on  the  withdrawal  of  all  "foreign"  (i.e.,
French)  troops  from  the  Associated  States,  to  be  preceded  by  the  reloca-
tion of  those  troops  to  regroupment  areas

(2)  Convening  of  advisory  conferences,  to  be  composed  of  representatives
of  the  "governments  of  both  sides,"  in  each  country  of  Indochina,  with
the  objective  of  holding  general  elections  leading  to  the  establishment  of
unified  governments

(3)  Supervision  of  elections  by  local  commissions

(4)  Prior  to  the  establishment  of  unified  governments,  the  carrying  out  by
the  opposing  parties  of  "the  administrative  functions  in  the  districts  which
will  be  [temporarily]  under  their  administration  .  .  ."

(5)  Cease-fire  in  all  Indochina  supervised  by  mixed  commissions  composed
of  the  belligerents,  the  cease-fire  to  take  effect  upon  implementation  of
all  other  measures.  No  new  forces  or  military  equipment  to  be  introduced
into  Indochina  during  the  armistice

To  placate  the  French,  Dong  asserted  the  DRV's  readiness  "to  examine  the
question  of  the  entry  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  into  the  French
Union.  .  .  ."

The  meaning  of  Dong's  proposal  was  clear.  A  political  settlement  would  pre-
cede a  military  agreement  to  a  cease-fire  rather  than  the  reverse,  which  the
French  preferred.  Somewhat  ironically,  the  Viet  Minh  position  was  in  line  with
the  American  preference  for  giving  priority  to  a  political  setdement;  but  the  Viet
Minh  in  effect  proposed  to  stop  fighting  only  when  French  troops  had  left
Vietnam  and  a  political  process  favorable  to  the  Communists  had  been  set  up.
By  first  getting  rid  of  the  French,  and  then  substituting  all- Vietnamese  con-
sultations for  strict  control  and  supervision  of  the  cease-fire,  the  regroupment,
and  the  general  elections,  the  Viet  Minh  could  legitimately  expect  a  quick  take-
over of  power  from  the  relatively  weak  Vietnamese  National  Army,  by  then
bereft  of  its  French  command  structure.  As  Dong  well  knew,  the  relocation  of
French  forces  in  the  Tonkin  Delta  to  a  tighter  perimeter  was  having,  and
would  continue  to  have,  major  repercussions  on  VNA  morale.  Once  the  French
could  be  persuaded  to  withdraw,  the  VNA  would  undoubtedly  collapse  under
Viet  Minh  military  pressure.  Moreover,  inasmuch  as  Dong's  plan  made  no
allowance  for  the  disarming,  much  less  the  regrouping,  of  indigenous  forces
on  either  side,  the  Viet  Minh  would  be  militarily  in  a  virtually  unassailable
position  to  control  any  general  election  that  might  be  held.  Dong's  proposal,  then,
amounted  to  a  request  that  the  French  abandon  Vietnam  to  a  certain  fate.

In  the  same  speech,  Dong  made  clear  that  the  DRV's  concern  extended  be-
yond Vietnam  to  Cambodia  and  Laos.  By  1954,  Viet  Minh  coordination  with  the
Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  "resistance  forces"  had  been  going  on  for  at  least


120 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

three  years,  or  since  the  formal  announcement  on  March  11,  1951,  of  formation
of  a  Viet  Minh-Free  Khmer-Pathet  Lao  "National  United  Front."  Viet  Minh
soldiers  and  cadres  were  active  participants  in  the  fighting  there,  where  they
provided  the  hard  core  of  the  "resistance."  In  addition,  forces  under  General
Vo  Nguyen  Giap  had  invaded  Laos  in  April  and  December  1953,  and  Cam-
bodia in  April  1954  (a  move  which  prompted  a  formal  protest  by  the  Royal
Khmer  Government  to  the  Secretary  General  of  the  UN  on  April  23).  Viet
Minh  battalions  were  still  active  in  both  countries  during  May  and  June,  with
greater  priority  given  operations  in  Laos.  Thus,  Dong's  proposals  on  a  settle-
ment in  Laos  and  Cambodia  reflected  not  simply  the  DRV's  assumption  of  the
role  of  spokesman  for  the  unrepresented  Free  Khmer  and  Pathet  Lao  move-
ments, but  also  direct  Viet  Minh  interests  in  those  neighboring  kingdoms.

Dong  argued  that  the  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  forces  enjoyed  wide-
spread popular  support  and  controlled  most  of  the  territory  of  their  respective
countries.  With  considerable  distortion  of  history  (subsequently  corrected  by
the  Laotian  and  Cambodian  delegates),  Dong  sought  to  demonstrate  that  the
Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  were  de  facto  governments  carrying  out  "demo-
cratic reforms"  in  the  areas  their  armies  had  "liberated."  France  was  therefore
advised  to  recognize  the  "sovereignty  and  independence"  of  those  movements
no  less  than  of  the  DRV.  French  forces  alone  were  to  withdraw  from  Cambodia
and  Laos;  the  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  were  not  "foreign"  troops.  The  same
election  procedure  offered  for  Vietnam,  without  neutral  or  international  super-
vision, would,  Dong  proposed,  take  place  in  Cambodia  and  Laos,  thereby  grant-
ing the  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  a  status  equal  to  that  of  the  lawful  govern-
ments. And  during  the  electoral  process,  Dong  insisted  on  "conditions  securing
freedom  of  activity  for  patriotic  parties,  groups,  and  social  organizations  .  .  .  ,"
agreement  to  which  would  have  permitted  various  Communist  fronts  to  function
with  impunity.  The  inclusion  of  the  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  in  the  DRV's
settlement  plan — in  particular,  the  demand  that  they  merited  political  and  ter-
ritorial recognition — very  quickly  brought  the  conference  to  a  standstill  and,
much  later,  compelled  the  Soviets  and  Chinese  to  work  against  Viet  Minh
ambitions.

C. THE  AMERICAN  REACTION

Pham  Van  Dong's  opening  gambit  was  clearly  anathema  to  the  Western
delegations.  Certainly,  from  the  American  standpoint,  his  proposals  met  none
of  the  criteria  for  acceptability  outlined  by  the  National  Security  Council  on
May  8.  Smith  said  as  much  at  Geneva  when  he  spoke  on  May  10  and  again
at  the  third  plenary  session  May  12.  Accordingly,  Smith  did  not  wholeheartedly
embrace  Bidault's  proposals,  for  despite  giving  a  general  endorsement  of  the
French  plan,  he  departed  from  it  at  two  important  junctures.  First,  he  declined
to  commit  the  United  States  in  advance  to  a  guarantee  of  the  settlement  despite
Bidault's  call  for  all  the  participants  to  make  such  a  guarantee;  second,  he
proposed  that  national  elections  in  Vietnam  be  supervised  specifically  by  an
international  commission  "under  United  Nations  auspices."  As  his  speeches
made  clear,  the  United  States  believed  the  UN  should  have  two  separate  func-
tions— overseeing  not  only  the  cease-fire  but  the  elections  as  well.  Both  these
points  in  Smith's  remarks  were  to  remain  cardinal  elements  of  American  policy
throughout  the  negotiations  despite  French  (and  Communist)  efforts  to  induce
their  alteration.

Entirely  in  keeping  with  Smith's  position  at  the  conference,  as  well  as  with


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  121

the  tenor  of  the  Viet  Minh  proposals,  Secretary  Dulles,  on  May  12,  sent  Smith
instructions  intended  to  make  the  United  States  an  influential,  but  unentangled
and  unobligated,  participant.  As  Dulles  phrased  it,  the  United  States  was  to  be
"an  interested  nation  which,  however,  is  neither  a  belligerent  nor  a  principal
in  the  negotiation."  Its  primary  aim  would  be  to:

help  the  nations  of  that  area  [Indochina]  peacefully  to  enjoy  territorial
integrity  and  political  independence  under  stable  and  free  governments
with  the  opportunity  to  expand  their  economies,  to  realize  their  legitimate
national  aspirations,  and  to  develop  security  through  individual  and  col-
lective defense  against  aggression,  from  within  and  without.  This  implies
that  these  people  should  not  be  amalgamated  into  the  Communist  bloc  of
imperialistic  dictatorship.

Accordingly,  Smith  was  told,  the  United  States  should  not  give  its  approval
to  any  settlement  or  cease-fire  "which  would  have  the  effect  of  subverting  the
existing  lawful  governments  of  the  three  aforementioned  states  or  of  perma-
nently impairing  their  territorial  integrity  or  of  placing  in  jeopardy  the  forces  of
the  French  Union  of  Indochina,  or  which  otherwise  contravened  the  principles
j stated  .  .  .  above."  [Doc.  47]

I The  NSC  decision  of  May  8,  Smith's  comments  at  the  second  and  third
I plenary  sessions,  and  Dulles'  instructions  on  May  12  reveal  the  rigidity  of  the
American  position  on  a  Geneva  settlement.  The  United  States  would  not  asso-
ciate itself  with  any  arrangement  that  failed  to  provide  adequately  for  an  inter-
nationally supervised  cease-fire  and  national  elections,  that  resulted  in  the  par-
titioning of  any  of  the  Associated  States,  or  that  compromised  the  independence
and  territorial  integrity  of  those  States  in  any  way.  It  would  not  interfere  with
I French  efforts  to  reach  an  agreement,  but  neither  would  it  guarantee  or  other-
wise be  placed  in  the  position  of  seeming  to  support  it  if  contrary  to  policy.
\ Bedell  Smith  was  left  free,  in  fact,  to  withdraw  from  the  conference  or  to  re-
I strict  the  American  role  to  that  of  observer.  [Doc.  47]  The  rationale  for  this  ap-
proach was  clear  enough:  the  United  States,  foreseeing  inevitable  protraction  of
negotiations  by  the  Communists  in  the  manner  of  Korea,  would  not  be  party  to  a
I French  cession  of  territory  that  would  be  the  end  result  of  the  Communists'
\ waiting  game  already  begun  by  Pham  Van  Dong.  Rather  than  passively  accept
that  result,  the  United  States  would  withdraw  from  active  involvement  in  the
j proceedings,  thereby  leaving  it  with  at  least  the  freedom  to  take  steps  to  re-
! capture  the  initiative  (as  by  rolling  back  the  Viet  Minh  at  some  future  date)
and  the  moral  purity  of  having  refused  to  condone  the  enslavement  of  more
I people  behind  the  Iron  Curtain.  American  policy  toward  negotiations  at  Geneva
: was  therefore  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  Eisenhower-Dulles  global  approach
to  dealing  with  the  Communist  bloc.

Gloomy  American  conclusions  about  the  conference,  and  no  doubt  the
extravagant  opening  Communist  demands,  were  intimately  connected  with  events
on  the  battlefield.  After  the  debacle  at  Dienbienphu  on  May  7,  the  French
gradually  shifted  their  forces  from  Laos  and  Cambodia  into  the  Tonkin  Delta,
I leaving  behind  weak  Laotian  and  Cambodian  national  armies  to  cope  with
veteran  Viet  Minh  battalions.  As  the  French  sought  to  consolidate  in  northern
Vietnam,  the  Viet  Minh  pressed  the  attack,  moving  several  battalions  eastward
from  Dienbienphu.  U.S.  Army  intelligence  reported  in  late  May,  on  the  basis
f| of  French  evaluations,  that  the  Viet  Minh  were  redeploying  much  faster  than
I anticipated,  to  the  point  where  of  35,000  troops  originally  in  northwestern


122 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

Tonkin  only  2,000  remained.  At  the  same  time,  two  Viet  Minh  battalions  stayed
behind  in  Cambodia  and  another  ten  in  Laos;  and  in  both  those  countries,
American  intelligence  concluded  that  the  Viet  Minh  position  was  so  strong
as  to  jeopardize  the  political  no  less  than  the  military  stability  of  the  royal
governments.

To  thwart  the  Communist  military  threat  in  Vietnam,  the  French  chief  of  staff,
General  Paul  Ely,  told  General  J.  H.  Trapnell,  the  MAAG  chief  (on  May  30),
that  French  forces  were  forming  a  new  defensive  perimeter  along  the  Hanoi-
Haiphong  axis;  but  Ely  made  no  effort  to  hide  the  touch-and-go  nature  of  French
defensive  capabilities  during  the  rainy  season  already  underway.  This  precarious
situation  was  confirmed  by  General  Valluy  of  the  French  command  staff.  In  a
report  in  early  June  to  U.S.,  British,  Australian,  and  New  Zealand  chiefs  of  staff
assembled  in  Washington,  Valluy  held  that  the  Delta  was  in  danger  of  falling  to
the  Communists,  that  neither  Frenchmen  nor  Vietnamese  would  fight  on  in  the
south  in  that  eventuality,  and  that  only  prompt  allied  intervention  could  save  the
situation.  [Doc.  53]  American  assessments  merely  echoed  those  provided  by  the
French.  A  National  Intelligence  Estimate  published  June  15  determined  that
French  Union  forces,  despite  a  numerical  advantage,  faced  defections  on  a
mounting  scale  that  could  become  very  large  if  the  Viet  Minh  scored  major  vic-
tories or  if  the  French  were  believed  (and  Vietnamese  suspicions  were  rife  on
this  score  in  Hanoi  and  Saigon)  about  to  abandon  Hanoi  and  portions  of  the
Delta.  In  sum,  the  tenor  of  intelligence  reports  by  French  and  American  sources
during  this  period  (from  early  May  through  mid-June)  was  that  the  Viet  Minh
armies  were  solidly  entrenched  in  portions  of  Cambodia  and  Laos,  were  prepar-
ing for  further  advances  in  the  Tonkin  Delta,  and,  if  the  war  were  to  continue
beyond  the  rainy  season,  had  the  capability  to  destroy  positions  then  being  forti-
fied by  French  Union  forces  throughout  northern  Vietnam.

The  upshot  of  this  military  deterioration  throughout  much  of  Indochina  was
to  reinforce  the  American  conviction  that  the  Communists,  while  making  pro-
posals at  Geneva  they  knew  would  be  unacceptable  to  the  West,  would  drive
hard  for  important  battlefield  gains  that  would  thoroughly  demoralize  French
Union  troops  and  set  the  stage  for  their  withdrawal  southward,  perhaps  precipi-
tating a  general  crisis  of  confidence  in  Indochina  and  a  Viet  Minh  takeover  by
default.  More  clearly  than  earlier  in  the  year,  American  officials  now  saw  just
how  desperate  the  French  really  were,  in  part  because  French  field  commanders
were  being  far  more  sincere  about  and  open  with  information  on  the  actual
military  situation.  But  the  thickening  gloom  in  Indochina  no  less  than  at  Geneva
did  not  give  way  to  counsels  of  despair  in  Washington.  The  Government  con-
cluded not  that  the  goals  it  had  set  for  a  settlement  were  unrealistic,  but  rather
that  the  only  way  to  attain  them,  as  the  President  and  the  ICS  had  been  saying,
was  through  decisive  military  victory  in  conformity  with  the  original  united  ac-
tion proposal  of  March  29.  While  therefore  maintaining  its  delegation  at  Geneva
throughout  the  indecisive  sessions  of  May  and  June,  the  United  States  once  again
alerted  France  to  the  possibility  of  a  military  alternative  to  defeat  under  the
pressure  of  Communist  talk-fight  tactics.

IV.  THE  UNITED  STATES  AT  GENEVA:  THE  STAGE
OF  FORCE  AND  DIPLOMACY,  MAY  TO  MID-JUNE

In  keeping  open  the  option  of  united  action,  the  Administration,  no  less  dur-
ing May  and  the  first  half  of  June  than  in  April,  carefully  made  direct  involve-
ment conditional  on  a  range  of  French  concessions  and  promises.  This  second


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  123


Indochina,  July  1954


124 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

go- 'round  on  united  action  was  not  designed  to  make  further  negotiations  at
Geneva  impossible;  rather,  it  was  intended  to  provide  an  alternative  to  which
the  French  might  turn  once  they,  and  hopefully  the  British  as  well,  conceded  that
negotiations  were  a  wasteful  exercise.

The  issue  of  united  action  arose  again  in  early  May  when  Premier  Laniel,  in
a  talk  with  Ambassador  Dillon,  expressed  the  view  that  the  Chinese  were  the
real  masters  of  the  negotiations  at  Geneva.  This  being  the  case,  Laniel  reasoned,
the  Chinese  would  probably  seek  to  drag  out  the  talks  over  any  number  of  pe-
ripheral issues  while  the  Viet  Minh  pushed  on  for  a  military  decision.  The  French
position  in  the  field,  with  a  major  redeployment  on  the  order  of  15  battalions
to  the  Tonkin  Delta  probably  very  soon,  would  be  desperate,  Laniel  said,  unless
the  United  States  decided  to  give  its  active  military  cooperation.  In  the  interim,
the  premier  requested  that  an  American  general  be  dispatched  to  Paris  to  assist
in  military  planning.

Laniel's  views  failed  to  make  an  impression  in  Washington.  Although  the  Ad-
ministration agreed  to  dispatch  a  general  (Trapnell),  Dulles  proposed,  and  Eisen-
hower accepted,  a  series  of  "indispensable"  conditions  to  American  involvement
that  would  have  to  be  met  by  Paris.  Even  after  those  conditions  were  met,
American  intervention  would  not  follow  automatically;  Laniel  would  have  to
request  further  U.S. -French  consultations.  The  conditions  were:  (In  forwarding
these  conditions  to  the  Embassy  for  transmittal  to  the  French,  Dulles  noted  that
a  prompt,  favorable  decision  would  be  premature  inasmuch  as  it  might  inter-
nationalize the  war  in  a  way  offensive  to  the  British,  leaving  the  French  with  the
difficult  choice  of  internationalization  or  capitulation.)

(1)  Formal  requests  for  U.S.  involvement  from  France  and  the  Associated
States

(2)  An  immediate,  favorable  response  to  those  invitations  from  Thailand,  the
Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  as  well  as  the  assurance  that
Britain  "would  either  participate  or  be  acquiescent"

(3)  Presentation  of  "some  aspect  of  matter"  to  the  UN  by  one  of  the  in-
volved Asian  states

(4)  A  French  guarantee  of  complete  independence  to  the  Associated  States,
"including  unqualified  option  to  withdraw  from  French  Union  at  any
time.  .  .  ."

(5)  A  French  undertaking  not  to  withdraw  the  Expeditionary  Corps  from
Indochina  during  the  period  of  united  action  in  order  to  ensure  that  the
United  States  would  be  providing  air  and  sea,  but  not  combat-troop,  sup-
port

(6)  Franco- American  agreement  on  the  training  of  native  forces  and  a  new
command  structure  during  united  action  (Admiral  Radford  was  reported
to  be  thinking  in  terms  of  a  French  supreme  command  with  a  U.S.  air
command)

(7)  Full  endorsement  by  the  French  cabinet  and  Assembly  of  these  conditions
to  ensure  a  firm  French  commitment  even  in  the  event  of  a  change  in
government  in  Paris

It  was  further  agreed  that  in  the  course  of  united  action,  the  United  States  would
pursue  efforts  to  broaden  the  coalition  and  to  formalize  it  as  a  regional  defense
pact.

During  the  same  conference  in  which  the  conditions  were  drawn  up,  top
American  officials  went  deeper  into  them.  Eisenhower  was  insistent  on  collective
action,  but  recognized  that  the  British  might  not  commit  themselves  initially
and  that  the  Australians,  facing  a  general  election  later  in  May,  could  only  give


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  125

"evidence"  of  their  willingness  to  participate.  A  second  major  problem  was  In-
dochinese  independence.  Dulles  posed  the  American  dilemma  on  this  score:  on
the  one  hand,  the  United  States  had  to  avoid  giving  Asians  reason  to  believe  we
were  intervening  on  behalf  of  colonialism;  on  the  other,  the  Associated  States
lacked  the  administrative  personnel  and  leadership  necessary  to  carrying  on
alone.  "In  a  sense,"  said  Dulles,  "if  the  Associated  States  were  turned  loose,  it
would  be  like  putting  a  baby  in  a  cage  of  hungry  lions.  The  baby  would  rapidly
be  devoured."  His  solution  was  that  the  Associated  States  be  granted  (evidently,
orally)  the  right  to  withdraw  from  the  French  Union  after  passage  of  a  suitable
time  period,  perhaps  five  or  ten  years.

A  final  point  concerned  Executive-Congressional  relations  once  a  French  re-
quest, backed  by  Parliamentary  assent,  reached  Washington.  The  President  felt
he  should  appear  before  a  joint  session  of  Congress  and  seek  a  Congressional
resolution  to  use  the  armed  forces  in  Indo-China  [words  missing]  act  on  the  for-
mal invitation  of  France  and  the  Associated  States,  and  with  the  cooperation  of
friends  and  allies  in  the  region.  At  Eisenhower's  request,  Dulles  directed  that  the
State  Department  begin  working  up  a  first  draft  of  a  Presidential  message.

The  American  response  to  Laniel's  requests  set  the  stage  for  an  extended  series
of  discussions  over  the  ensuing  five  weeks.  In  Paris,  Dillon  communicated  the
American  conditions  to  Laniel  and  Maurice  Schumann,  the  Deputy  Minister  for
Foreign  Affairs;  in  a  talk  with  the  Ambassador  May  14,  they  accepted  the  con-
ditions, but  with  important  reservations.  First,  Laniel  indicated  his  dismay  at  the
American  insistence  on  the  right  of  the  Associated  States  to  withdraw  from  the
French  Union.  The  premier  predicted  that  the  French  public  would  never  accept
this  condition  inasmuch  as  the  Associated  States  had  themselves  never  made  it
and  since  even  the  Viet  Minh  envisioned  joining  the  Union.  The  obvious  Ameri-
can reluctance  to  go  beyond  air  and  naval  forces  also  disturbed  the  premier.  He
requested  that  the  United  States  additionally  provide  artillery  forces  and  a  token
contingent  of  ground  troops.  But  he  indicated  pleasure  that  UK  participation  was
no  longer  a  prerequisite  to  American  involvement.

Laniel's  qualified  approval  of  the  preconditions  was  accompanied  by  a  re-
quest for  a  response  to  two  other  questions:  could  the  United  States  in  some
way  guarantee  the  borders  and  independence  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  following
a  French  withdrawal  from  those  countries?  Could  the  United  States  provide
written  assurance  of  prompt  air  intervention  to  meet  a  possible  Chinese  Com-
munist air  attack  on  French  forces  in  the  Tonkin  Delta?

The  American  response  to  Laniel's  demurrers  and  requests  was  for  the  most
part  negative.  On  the  French-Associated  States  relationship,  which  Ambassador
Dillon  had  said  was  the  chief  barrier  to  a  French  request  for  intervention,*

*  Dillon  commented :  "I  am  certain  that  unless  we  can  find  some  way  to  get  around  this
requirement  [that  the  Vietnamese  have  the  option  of  leaving  the  French  Union],  French
will  never  ask  for  outside  assistance."

Dillon  proposed  that  the  real  objection  among  Asians  to  the  position  of  the  Associ-
ated States  rested  not  on  the  "purely  juridical"  problem  of  the  right  to  leave  the  Un-
ion, but  on  Indochina's  lack  of  powerful  national  armies.  The  Ambassador  recom-
mended that  American  training  and  equipping  of  the  VNA,  coupled  with  a  French
statement  of  intention  to  withdraw  the  Expeditionary  Corps  after  the  establishment  of
peace  and  a  national  army,  would  significantly  dampen  Asian  antagonism  to  the  Bao
Dai  regime.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  Dillon  assumed  Asians  would  significantly
change  their  attitude  toward  French  Indochina  when,  even  with  an  American  takeover
of  the  training  and  equipping  of  the  VNA,  French  forces  would  still  be  on  Vietnamese
territory  for  a  lengthy  period.


126 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Dulles  replied  (through  Dillon)  that  the  United  States  might  have  some  flexi-
bility on  the  matter,  but  had  to  remain  adamant  on  complete  independence  if  it
ever  hoped  to  gain  Thai  and  Filipino  support.  Next,  on  the  question  of  the  ex-
tent of  American  involvement,  the  Government  was  more  flexible:  It  would  not
exclude  antiaircraft  "and  limited  U.S.  ground  forces  for  protection  of  bases  which
might  be  used  by  U.S.  naval  and  air  forces."  As  to  Laniel's  questions,  Washing-
ton answered  that  it  saw  no  way,  in  view  of  the  military  and  legal  impracticali-
ties,  to  guarantee  the  security  of  Laos  and  Cambodia;  the  alternative  was  that
Laos  and  Cambodia  join  with  Thailand  in  requesting  the  stationing  of  a  UN
Peace  Observation  Commission  (POC)  on  their  territories.  The  possibility  of
Chinese  MIG  intervention,  considered  extremely  remote  by  the  Defense  Depart-
ment, ruled  out  the  need  for  a  written  commitment.  The  French  were  to  be  as-
sured, however,  that  a  collective  defense  arrangement  would  include  protection
against  that  contingency,  and  that  prior  to  the  formation  of  the  organization,
Chinese  air  involvement  would  prompt  a  Presidential  request  for  Congressional
authorization  to  respond  with  U.S.  aircraft.

Although  the  setting  up  of  several  preconditions  to  involvement  and  the  quali-
fications of  the  French  reply  by  no  means  made  intervention  an  immediate  pos-
sibility, the  Administration  moved  ahead  on  contingency  planning.  The  State
Department's  Bureau  of  Far  Eastern  Affairs  took  the  lead  by  producing  a  hypo-
thetical timetable  based  on  the  assumption  of  U.S.-French  agreement  in  princi-
ple to  the  proposed  conditions  by  May  21.  FEA  also  outlined  a  full  slate  of  urgent
priority  studies,  including  U.S.  strategy  under  differing  circumstances  of  Chinese
involvement  in  the  war.  By  May  24,  FEA  had  forwarded  a  contingency  study
from  the  Operations  Planning  Board  that  proposed,  among  other  things,  public
and  private  communications  to  Peking  to  prevent,  or  at  least  reduce  the  effec-
tiveness of,  direct  Chinese  intervention.

The  initiation  of  planning  for  intervention  extended  to  more  far-ranging  dis-
cussions of  the  purposes,  requirements,  and  make-up  of  a  Southeast  Asia  collec-
tive defense  organization.  The  framework  of  the  discussions  evidenced  the  Gov-
ernment's intention  that  united  action  be  undertaken  only  after  the  Geneva  Con-
ference had  reached  a  stalemate  or,  far  less  likely,  a  settlement.  Three  regional
formulations  were  envisaged:  the  first  would  be  designed  for  direct  action,  prob-
ably (it  was  felt)  without  British  participation,  either  to  defeat  the  Viet  Minh
or  to  prevent  them  from  gaining  control  of  Indochina;  the  second,  formed  after
a  settlement,  would  comprise  the  present  SEATO  members  and  functions,  in
particular  active  assistance  to  the  participating  Asian  states  resisting  external  at-
tack or  "Communist  insurrection";  the  third  would  have  have  a  broad  Asian  mem-
bership, but  would  be  functionally  limited  to  social  and  economic  cooperation.

An  important  input  to  contingency  planning  on  intervention  came  from  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  On  May  20,  the  ICS  sent  a  memorandum  to  the  Secretary
of  Defense  entitled  "U.S.  Military  Participation  in  Indochina."  In  the  paper,  the
Chiefs  requested  formulation  of  a  Defense  Department  position  on  the  size  of
any  American  contributions  and  the  nature  of  the  command  structure  once
united  action  began.  They  noted  the  "limited  availability  of  U.S.  forces  for  mili-
tary action  in  Indochina"  and  the  "current  numerical  advantage  of  the  French
Union  forces  over  the  enemy,  i.e.,  approximately  5  to  3."  Pointing  out  the  dis-
advantages of  either  stationing  large  numbers  of  U.S.  troops  in  Indochina  or  of
basing  U.S.  aircraft  on  Indochina's  limited  facilities,  the  Chiefs  considered  "the
current  greatest  need"  to  be  an  expanded,  intensified  training  program  for  in-
digenous troops.  They  observed,  moreover,  that  they  were  guided  in  their  com-
ments by  the  likely  reaction  of  the  CPR  to  U.S.  involvement,  as  well  as  by  the


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  127

prescription:  "Atomic  weapons  will  be  used  whenever  it  is  to  our  military  ad-
vantage."

In  view  of  these  problems  and  prospects,  the  JCS  urged  the  limitation  of
United  States  involvement  to  strategic  planning  and  the  training  of  indigenous
forces  through  an  increase  in  MA  AG  from  less  than  150  to  2250  men.  Its  force
commitment  should  be  restricted,  they  advised,  primarily  to  air-naval  support
directed  from  outside  Indochina;  even  here,  the  Chiefs  cautioned  against  making
a  "substantial"  air  force  commitment.  The  Chiefs  were  also  mindful  of  the
Chinese.  Since  Viet  Minh  supplies  came  mainly  from  China,  "the  destruction  or
neutralization  of  those  outside  sources  supporting  the  Viet  Minh  would  mate-
rially reduce  the  French  military  problems  in  Indochina."

The  Chiefs  were  simply  taking  their  traditional  position  that  any  major  U.S.
force  commitment  in  the  Far  East  should  be  reserved  for  a  war  against  China
in  the  event  the  President  decided  that  such  a  conflict  was  necessary  for  the
preservation  of  vital  American  interests.  Recognizing  the  limitations  of  the  "New
Look"  defense  establishment  for  large-scale  involvement  in  "brushfire"  wars,  the
Chiefs  were  extremely  hesitant,  as  had  consistently  been  the  case  during  the
Indochina  crisis,  to  favor  action  along  the  periphery  of  China  when  the  strategic
advantages  of  American  power  lay  in  decisive  direct  blows  against  the  major
enemy.  Thus,  the  JCS  closed  their  memorandum  with  the  admonition  that  air-
naval  commitments  beyond  those  specified:

will  involve  maldeployment  of  forces  and  reduce  readiness  to  meet  prob-
able Chinese  Communist  reaction  elsewhere  in  the  Far  East.  From  the
point  of  view  of  the  United  States,  with  reference  to  the  Far  East  as  a
whole,  Indochina  is  devoid  of  decisive  military  objectives  and  the  allocation
of  more  than  token  U.S.  armed  forces  to  that  area  would  be  a  serious  di-
version of  limited  U.S.  capabilities.*

The  JCS  evidently  also  decided  to  call  a  meeting  of  military  representatives
from  the  United  States,  France,  the  UK,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand.  At  first,
the  Chiefs  suggested  the  downgrading  of  the  representatives  to  below  chief-of-
staff  level;  but  apparently  on  the  strong  protest  of  Under  Secretary  Smith  at  Ge-
neva, and  of  the  British  too,  the  Chiefs  acquiesced  in  a  meeting  at  chief-of-staff

*  These  conclusions  were  subsequently  confirmed  when,  at  the  direction  of  General
Matthew  B.  Ridgway,  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  a  technical  team  of  seven  officers  repre-
senting the  Engineer,  Transportation,  and  Signal  Corps  went  to  Indochina  on  a  covert
mission  to  determine  military  and  military-related  resources  available  there  in  the  event
U.S.  intervention  were  implemented.  The  team  spent  the  period  May  31 -June  22  in
the  field.  Their  conclusions  were,  in  brief,  that  Indochina  was  devoid  of  the  logistical,
geographic,  and  related  resources  necessary  to  a  substantial  American  ground  effort.
The  group's  findings  are  in  a  report  from  Col.  David  W.  Heiman,  its  leader,  to  Ridg-
way, July  12,  1954.

The  Chiefs'  conclusions  were  disputed,  however,  by  Everett  Drumright  of  State
(FEA)  (in  a  memorandum  to  MacArthur,  May  24,  1954).  He  argued  that  if,  as
everyone  agreed,  Indochina  was  vital  to  American  security,  the  United  States  should
not  consider  more  than  a  token  group  troop  commitment  to  be  a  serious  diversion  of
our  capabilities.  While  not  arguing  for  a  substantial  troop  commitment,  Drumright
suggested  that  the  United  States  plan  for  that  eventuality  rather  than  count  on  defense
with  atomic  weapons  or  non-nuclear  strikes  on  Chinese  territory.  Somehow,  however,
Drumright's  concern  about  the  Chinese  did  not  extend  to  the  consideration  that  a  mas-
sive troop  commitment,  which  he  stated  elsewhere  in  the  memorandum  might  prove
necessary  should  token  forces  fail  to  do  the  job,  also  risked  bringing  in  the  Chinese.


128 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

level.  But  prior  to  the  meeting,  which  began  the  first  week  of  June,  important
developments  occurred  in  the  U.S.-France  discussions  of  intervention.

The  ticklish  problem  of  bringing  France  to  concede  the  critical  importance  of
granting  full  independence  to  the  Associated  States  occupied  center  stage  once
more.  On  May  27,  the  State  Department,  acknowledging  France's  hesitancy  to
go  too  far  on  this  score,  still  insisted  on  certain  "minimum  measures,"  the  most
important  of  which  was  that  France,  during  or  immediately  after  formal  ap-
proval of  the  April  28  draft  treaties,  announce  its  willingness  to  withdraw  all  its
forces  from  Indochina  unless  invited  by  the  governments  of  the  Associated  States
to  maintain  them  or  to  establish  bases.  (The  United  States,  the  Department
added,  would  be  prepared  to  make  a  similar  declaration  if  it  committed  forces.)
Beyond  that  step,  the  French  were  also  asked  to  permit  Indochinese  participa-
tion in  the  programming  of  economic  aid  and  their  direct  receipt  of  all  military
aid,  to  find  ways  to  broaden  participation  of  the  Vietnamese  defense  ministry
and  armed  forces  in  national  defense,  and  to  push  for  the  establishment  of  "rep-
resentative and  authentic  nationalist  governments"  at  the  earliest  possible  date.

Transmitting  these  new  proposals  to  the  French,  Dillon  (incorrectly  as  it
turned  out)  found  them  so  well  received  that  he  reported  on  May  29,  following
a  conversation  with  Laniel,  that  the  two  partners  "had  now  reached  accord  in
principle  on  political  side."  Laniel,  he  cabled  Dulles,  urged  immediate  military
talks  to  complete  arrangements  on  training  of  the  Vietnamese,  a  new  command
structure,  and  war  plans.  Inasmuch  as  Ely  and  General  John  W.  O'Daniel  in
Indochina  had  reached  general  agreement  on  American  assumption  of  responsi-
bility for  training  the  VNA,  [Doc.  52]  the  way  was  apparently  cleared  for  bi-
lateral military  talks  in  Washington  to  take  place  simultaneously  with,  and  there-
fore disguised  by,  the  five-power  staff  negotiations.

Dillon's  optimistic  assessment  proved  premature,  however,  on  several  grounds.
When  he  reported  May  28  on  talks  with  Schumann,  he  had  added  Schumann's
and  Defense  Minister  Rene  Pleven's  concern  about  Chinese  air  intervention,
which  they  felt  would  be  so  damaging  as  to  warrant  a  deterrent  action  in  the
form  of  a  Presidential  request  to  the  Congress  for  discretionary  authority  to
defend  the  Delta  in  case  of  CCAF  attack.  The  French  wanted  a  virtually  instan-
taneous U.S.  response,  one  that  would  be  assured  by  a  Presidential  request  before
rather  than  after  overt  Chinese  aerial  intervention.  The  State  Department's  re-
tort was  that  the  French  first  had  to  satisfy  the  previously  reported  conditions
before  any  such  move  by  the  President  could  be  considered.

Dillon  was  no  less  disappointed  by  Washington's  reply  than  the  French.  He
cabled  back  that  there  apparantly  was  an  "extremely  serious  misunderstanding
between  U.S.  and  French":

French  draw  sharp  distinction  between  (1)  U.S.  intervention  in  present
circumstances  with  Viet  Minh  bolstered  by  Chinese  Communist  materiel,
technicians  and  possibly  scattered  troops  and  (2)  U.S.  reaction  against  full-
scale  air  attack  mounted  from  Communist  Chinese  bases.

Dillon  said  that,  for  the  French,  Washington's  preconditions  applied  in  the  first
case  but  not  the  second,  wherein  only  Congressional  authorization  was  under-
stood to  stand  in  the  way  of  direct  American  action.  Ely,  the  Ambassador  re-
ported, had  all  along  believed  he  had  Radford's  personal  assurance  of  an  Ameri-
can countermove  against  Chinese  air  attack  in  the  Delta.  Now,  the  French  wanted
to  know  if  they  could  count  on  instant  U.S.  interdiction  of  a  CCAF  strike.  The
Ambassador  closed  by  reminding  the  Department  of  the  incalculable  harm  to


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  129

NATO,  to  the  whole  U.S.  role  in  Western  Europe,  and  to  the  U.S.  position  against
the  Communists'  world  strategy  if  a  Chinese  attack  was  not  met.

Despite  Dillon's  protestations,  the  Department  stuck  by  its  initial  position  of
May  15,  namely,  that  Chinese  air  attack  was  unlikely  and  that  the  United  States
would  meet  that  problem  when  it  arose.  Clearly,  the  Administration  was  un-
willing to  make  any  advance  commitments  which  the  French  could  seize  upon
for  political  advantage  at  Geneva  without  having  to  give  a  quid  pro  quo  in  their
Indochina  policy.  Eisenhower  affirmed  this  view  and  went  beyond  it:  The  con-
ditions for  united  action,  he  said,  applied  equally  to  Chinese  direct  and  indirect
involvement  in  Indochina.  The  United  States  would  make  no  unilateral  commit-
ment against  any  contingency,  including  overt,  unprovoked  Chinese  aggression,
without  firm,  broad  allied  support.'^

There  were  other  obstacles  to  U.S.-French  agreement,  as  brought  into  the
open  with  a  memorandum  to  the  President  from  Foreign  Minister  Georges
Bidault  on  June  1.  One  was  the  question  of  timing  involved  in  American  in-
sistence on  French  Assembly  approval  of  a  government  request  for  U.S.  inter-
vention. The  French  cabinet  considered  that  to  present  a  program  of  allied  in-
volvement to  the  Assembly  except  under  the  circumstance  of  "a  complete  failure
of  the  Geneva  Conference"  attributable  to  the  Communists  "would  be  literally
to  wish  to  overthrow  the  [French]  Government."  A  second  area  of  continuing
disagreement  concerned  the  maintenance  of  French  forces  in  the  field  and  the
nature  of  a  U.S.  commitment.  The  French  held  that  the  United  States  could
bypass  Congress  by  committing  perhaps  one  division  of  Marines  without  a
declaration  of  war.  Although  assured  by  Washington  that  the  Marines  would
not  be  excluded  from  a  U.S.  air-naval  commitment,  the  French  were  not  satis-
fied. In  his  memorandum,  Bidault  asked  that  the  United  States  take  account  of

*  Eisenhower's  unwavering  attitude  toward  action  in  Asia  only  in  concert  with  allies
put  him  at  odds  with  Dulles,  who  was  prepared  to  act  unilaterally  in  cases  of  overt
aggression.  When  the  issue  of  possible  CPR  air  intervention  came  before  the  President,
he  is  reported  to  have  reacted  sharply.  Evidently  supposing  that  conflict  in  the  air
would  mean  a  Sino-American  war,  the  President".

said  the  United  States  would  not  intervene  in  China  on  any  basis  except  united
action.  He  would  not  be  responsible  for  going  into  China  alone  unless  a  joint
Congressional  resolution  ordered  him  to  do  so.  The  United  States  should  in  no
event  undertake  alone  to  support  French  colonialism.  Unilateral  action  by  the
United  States  in  cases  of  this  kind  would  destroy  us.  If  we  intervened  alone  in
this  case  we  would  be  expected  to  intervene  alone  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  He
made  very  plain  that  the  need  for  united  action  as  a  condition  of  U.S.  intervention
was  not  related  merely  to  the  regional  grouping  for  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia
but  was  also  a  necessity  for  U.S.  intervention  in  response  to  Chinese  communist
overt  aggression.

See  memorandum  of  conversation  between  Eisenhower  and  Robert  Cutler,  the  Presi-
dent's special  assistant,  June  1,  1954.

The  rationale  for  the  President's  difference  of  view  with  his  Secretary  was  laid  out
more  fully  the  next  day.  Eisenhower  said  that  since  direct  Chinese  aggression  would
force  him  to  go  all  the  way  with  naval  and  air  power  (including  "new  weapons")  in
reply,  he  would  need  to  have  much  more  than  Congressional  authorization.  Thai,
Filipino,  French,  and  Indochinese  support  would  be  important  but  not  sufficient;  other
nations,  such  as  Australia,  would  have  to  give  their  approval,  for  otherwise  he  could
not  be  certain  the  public  would  back  a  war  against  China.  (Memorandum  of  con-
versation in  the  President's  office,  June  2,  1954,  involving  also  Dulles,  Anderson,  Rad-
ford, MacArthur,  and  Cutler.)  At  its  200th  meeting  on  June  3,  the  NSC  received,
considered,  and  agreed  upon  the  President's  views.


130 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

France's  defense  obligations  elsewhere,  an  indirect  way  of  asking  that  Washing-
ton go  beyond  a  token  ground-troop  commitment.  Confronted  by  a  war-weary
Parliament  on  one  side  and  opponents  of  EDC  on  the  other,  Bidault  doubtless
believed  that  the  retention  of  French  soldiers  in  Indochina  without  relief  from
American  GIs  was  neither  militarily  nor  politically  acceptable.

A  final  but  by  no  means  negligible  French  objection  to  the  American  proposals
concerned  the  independence  issue.  Far  from  having  been  settled,  as  Dillon  sup-
posed, the  French  were  still  unhappy  about  American  pressure  for  concessions
even  after  the  State  Department's  May  27  revisions.  The  French  were  particularly
disturbed  (as  Bidault  implied)  at  the  notion  that  the  Associated  States  could
leave  the  Union  at  any  time,  even  while  French  fighting  men  were  in  the  field
on  Indochina's  behalf.  "Such  a  formula,"  Bidault  wrote,  "is  unacceptable  to  the
French  Government,  first  because  it  is  incompatible  with  the  French  Constitu-
tion, and  also  because  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  explain  to  French  opin-
ion that  the  forces  of  the  French  Union  were  continuing  the  war  in  Indochina
for  the  benefit  of  States  that  might  at  any  moment  leave  the  Union."  France
was  perfectly  willing,  Bidault  remarked,  to  sign  new  treaties  of  association  with
the  three  Indochinese  States,  to  allow  them  a  larger  voice  in  defense  matters,
and  to  work  with  them  toward  formation  of  truly  national  governments;  but,  to
judge  from  his  commentary,  Paris  would  not  go  the  whole  route  by  committing
itself  in  advance  to  Indochina's  full  freedom  of  action  in  the  French  Union.  And
while  this  and  other  issues  remained  unresolved,  as  Dulles  observed  June  4,
Laniel's  reported  belief  that  the  United  States  and  France  were  politically  agreed
was  a  "serious  overstatement."

By  early  June  the  unsettled  issues  separating  the  United  States  from  France
began  to  lose  their  relevance  to  the  war.  Even  if  they  could  be  resolved,  it  was
questionable  whether  American  involvement  could  any  longer  be  useful,  much
less  decisive.  On  the  matter  of  training  the  VNA,  for  instance,  the  United  States
was  no  longer  certain  that  time  would  permit  its  training  methods  to  take  effect
even  if  the  French  promptly  removed  themselves  from  responsibility  in  that  area.
The  State  Department  now  held  that  the  Vietnam  situation  had  deteriorated  "to
point  where  any  commitment  at  this  time  to  send  over  U.S.  instructors  in  near
future  might  expose  us  to  being  faced  with  situation  in  which  it  would  be  con-
trary to  our  interests  to  have  to  fulfill  such  commitment.  Our  position  accordingly
is  that  we  do  not  wish  to  consider  U.S.  training  mission  or  program  separately
from  over-all  operational  plan  on  assumption  conditions  fulfilled  for  U.S.  par-
ticipation war  Indochina."  Morale  of  the  Franco-Vietnamese  forces,  moreover,
had  dropped  sharply,  the  whole  Tonkin  Delta  was  endangered,  and  the  political
situation  in  Saigon  was  reported  to  be  dangerously  unstable.  Faced  with  this
uniformly  black  picture,  the  Administration  determined  that  the  grave  but  still
retrievable  military  situation  prevailing  at  the  time  united  action  was  proposed
and  pursued  had,  in  June,  altered  radically,  to  the  point  where  united  action
might  have  to  be  withdrawn  from  consideration  by  the  French.

By  mid-June  American  diplomacy  was  therefore  in  an  unenviable  position.
At  Geneva,  very  little  progress  had  been  made  of  a  kind  that  could  lead  any  of
the  Allies  to  expect  a  satisfactory  outcome.  Yet  the  alternative  which  the  United
States  had  reopened  no  longer  seemed  viable  either.  As  Dulles  told  Smith,  any
"final  agreement"  with  the  French  would  be  "quite  impossible,"  for  Paris  was
moving  farther  than  ever  from  a  determination  that  united  action  was  necessary.
"They  want,  and  in  effect  have,  an  option  on  our  intervention,"  Dulles  wrote,
"but  they  do  not  want  to  exercise  it  and  the  date  of  expiry  of  our  option  is  fast
running  out."  [Doc.  57]  From  Paris,  in  fact.  Ambassador  Dillon  urged  the


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  131

Secretary  that  "the  time  limit  be  now"  on  U.S.  intervention.  [Doc.  56]  And
Dulles  was  fast  concluding  that  Dillon  was  correct.

In  view  of  France's  feeHng  that,  because  of  strong  Assembly  pressure  for  a
settlement,  no  request  could  be  made  of  the  United  States  until  every  effort  to
reach  agreement  at  Geneva  had  been  exhausted,  Dulles  in  effect  decided,  on
June  15,  that  united  action  was  no  longer  tenable.  In  a  conversation  with  Bonnet,
in  which  the  French  Ambassador  read  a  message  from  Bidault  which  indicated
that  the  French  no  longer  considered  the  United  States  bound  to  intervene  on
satisfaction  of  the  seven  conditions,  the  Secretary  put  forth  the  difficulty  of  the
American  position.  He  stated  that  the  United  States  stood  willing  to  respond  to
a  French  request  under  the  conditions  of  May  11,  but  that  time  and  circum-
stance might  make  future  intervention  "impracticable  or  so  burdensome  as  to
be  out  of  proportion  to  the  results  obtainable."  While  this  offer  would  be  un-
satisfactory to  Bidault,  especially  in  his  dealings  with  the  Communists  at  Geneva,
Dulles  "could  not  conceive  that  it  would  be  expected  that  the  United  States  would
give  a  third  power  the  option  to  put  it  into  war  at  times  and  under  conditions
wholly  of  the  other's  choosing."  With  this,  united  action  was  shelved,  and  it
never  appeared  again  in  the  form  and  with  the  purpose  originally  proposed.

As  a  break  with  France  on  united  action  became  likely,  American  interest
focused  on  a  collective  defense  arrangement  after  a  Geneva  settlement  with
British  participation.  The  French  and  British  roles  in  U.S.  planning  were  in
effect  reversed;  Paris,  it  was  felt,  could  no  longer  be  counted  on  as  an  active
participant  in  regional  security.  As  their  delegate  to  Geneva,  Jean  Chauvel,  told
Smith,  Bidault  was  still  hopeful  of  getting  "something"  from  the  conference.
[Doc.  54]  On  the  other  hand,  Eden  told  Smith  on  June  9  of  his  extreme  pessimism
over  the  course  of  the  negotiations.  Eden  believed  a  recess  in  the  talks  was  likely
within  a  few  days  (it  came,  in  fact,  ten  days  later),  and  proposed  that  the
Cambodian  and  Laotian  cases  be  brought  before  the  United  Nations  immediately
after  the  end  of  the  conference,  even  if  France  opposed  the  move.  Smith  drew
from  the  conversation  the  strong  impression  that  Eden  believed  negotiations  to
have  failed  and  would  now  follow  the  American  lead  on  a  coalition  to  guarantee
Cambodia  and  Laos  "under  umbrella  of  some  UN  action"  (Smith's  words).
[Doc.  54]  Days  later,  Dulles  likewise  anticipated  a  British  shift  when  he  ob-
served sardonically  that  events  at  Geneva  had  probably  "been  such  as  to  satisfy
the  British  insistence  that  they  did  not  want  to  discuss  collective  action  until
either  Geneva  was  over  or  at  least  the  results  of  Geneva  were  known.  I  would
assume,"  Dulles  went  on,  "that  the  departure  of  Eden  [from  Geneva]  would  be
evidence  that  there  was  no  adequate  reason  for  further  delaying  collective  talks
on  Southeast  Asia  defense."  But  whether  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain
would  see  eye-to-eye  on  their  post-settlement  security  obligations  in  the  region,
and  whether  joint  diplomatic  initiatives  to  influence  the  nature  of  the  settlement
could  be  decided  upon,  remained  outstanding  questions.

The  rebirth  and  demise  of  united  action  was  a  rare  case  of  history  repeated
almost  immediately  after  it  had  been  made.  The  United  States,  having  failed  to
interest  Britain  and  France  in  united  action  prior  to  the  start  of  the  Geneva
Conference,  refused  to  be  relegated  to  an  uninfluential  role  and  determined  in-
stead to  plunge  ahead  without  British  participation.  But  the  conditions  for  inter-
vention which  had  been  given  the  French  before  the  fall  of  Dienbienphu  were
now  stiffened,  most  importantly  by  a  greater  detailing  of  the  process  the  French
government  would  have  to  go  through  before  the  United  States  would  consider
direct  involvement.

Even  while  the  French  pondered  the  conditions,  urged  their  refinement  and


132 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

redefinition  to  suit  French  policies,  and  insisted  in  the  end  that  they  saw  no
political  obstacles  separating  the  United  States  and  France,  Washington  an-
ticipated that  the  French  were  very  unlikely  to  forward  a  request  for  U.S.  in-
volvement. Having  learned  something  of  French  government  priorities  from  the
futile  diplomatic  bargaining  in  April,  Department  of  State  representatives  in
Paris  and  Washington  saw  that  what  the  French  wanted  above  all  was  not  the
military  advantages  of  active  U.S.  intervention  but  the  political  benefits  that
might  be  derived  from  bringing  into  the  open  the  fact  that  the  two  allies  were
negotiating  American  participation  in  the  fighting.  Thus,  Dillon  correctly  as-
sessed in  mid-May  that  French  inquiries  about  American  conditions  for  inter-
vention represented  a  "wish  to  use  possibility  of  our  intervention  primarily  to
strengthen  their  hand  at  Geneva."  The  French  hoped  they  would  not  have  to
call  on  the  United  States  for  direct  support;  they  did  hope  the  Communists
would  sense  the  dangers  of  proposing  unacceptable  terms  for  a  settlement.
Dillon's  sensitivity  to  the  French  position  was  proven  accurate  by  Bidault's
memorandum  to  the  President:  France  would,  in  reality,  only  call  on  the  United
States  if  an  "honorable"  settlement  could  clearly  not  be  obtained  at  Geneva,  for
only  under  that  circumstance  could  the  National  Assembly  be  persuaded  that
the  Laniel  government  had  done  everything  possible  to  achieve  peace.

Recognition  of  the  game  the  French  were  playing  did  not  keep  the  United
States  from  posing  intervention  as  an  alternative  for  them;  but  by  adhering
tenaciously  to  the  seven  conditions,  it  ruled  out  either  precipitous  American  ac-
tion or  an  open-ended  commitment  to  be  accepted  or  rejected  by  Paris.  The
State  Department,  guided  on  the  military  side  by  strong  JCS  objections  to  prom-
ising the  French  American  combat  troops  in  advance  of  a  new  and  satisfactory
command  structure  and  strategic  plan,  became  increasingly  distraught  with  and
suspicious  of  French  motivations.  "We  cannot  grant  French  an  indefinite  option
on  us  without  regard  to  intervening  deterioration"  of  the  military  situation,  Dulles
wrote  on  June  8.  As  much  as  the  Administration  wanted  to  avoid  a  sell-out  at
Geneva,  it  was  aware  that  events  in  Indochina  might  preclude  effective  U.S.
action  even  if  the  French  suddenly  decided  they  wanted  American  support.  Put
another  way,  one  of  the  primary  differences  between  American  diplomacy  before
and  after  the  fall  of  Dienbienphu  was  its  ability  to  project  ahead — to  weigh  the
factors  of  time  and  circumstance  against  the  distasteful  possibility  that  Vietnam,
by  French  default  at  the  negotiating  table  or  defeat  on  the  battlefield,  might  be
lost.  As  the  scales  tipped  against  united  action,  American  security  planning  began
to  focus  on  the  future  possibilities  of  collective  defense  in  Southeast  Asia,  while
the  pattern  of  diplomacy  shifted  from  disenchantment  with  the  Geneva  Con-
ference to  attempts  to  bring  about  the  best  possible  settlement  terms.

V. THE  MAJOR  ISSUES  AT  THE  CONFERENCE,  MAY-JUNE

Washington's  sense  that  the  conference  had  essentially  gotten  nowhere — a  view
which  Smith  and  Dulles  believed  was  shared  by  Eden,  as  already  noted — was  not
entirely  accurate;  nor  was  it  precisely  the  thinking  of  other  delegations.  Following
the  initial  French  and  Viet  Minh  proposals  of  May  8  and  10,  respectively,  some
progress  had  in  fact  been  made,  although  certainly  not  of  an  order  that  could
have  led  any  of  the  chief  negotiators  to  expect  a  quick  settlement.  As  the  con-
ference moved  ahead,  three  major  areas  of  contention  emerged:  the  separation
of  belligerent  forces,  the  establishment  of  a  framework  for  political  settlements  in
the  three  Indochinese  states,  and  provision  for  effective  control  and  supervision
of  the  cease-fire.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May— July,  1954  133

A. SEPARATION  OF  THE  BELLIGERENTS

The  question  how  best  to  disentangle  the  opposing  armies  was  most  acute  in
Vietnam,  but  was  also  hotly  debated  as  it  applied  to  Cambodia  and  Laos.  In
Vietnam,  Viet  Minh  forces  were  concentrated  in  the  Tonkin  Delta,  though  large
I numbers  had  long  been  active  in  Annam  (central  Vietnam)  and  Cochinchina
j (the  south).  The  original  French  and  Viet  Minh  proposals  sought  to  take  account
of  this  situation  by  dismissing  (although  for  separate  reasons)  the  concept  of
single  regroupment  areas  and  forwarding  instead  the  idea  of  perhaps  several
I concentration  points  to  facilitate  a  cease-fire.  To  this  point,  the  Vietnamese  dele-
gation was  in  agreement:  regroupment  of  the  belligerents  should  in  no  way
have  the  effect  of  dividing  the  country  into  makeshift  military  zones  that  could
have  lasting  political  implications.
I It  was  an  entirely  different  matter  where  the  regroupment  areas  should  be
located;  whether  "foreign"  (i.e.,  French)  troops  should  be  withdrawn,  and  if  so,
from  what  areas  and  during  what  period;  whether  irregular  troops  (i.e.,  Viet
Minh  guerrillas)  should  be  disarmed  and  disbanded,  and  if  so,  whether  they  and
their  comrades  in  the  regular  forces  should  be  integrated  (as  the  Bao  Dai  dele-
gation proposed)  into  the  VNA;  and,  of  crucial  importance,  whether  a  cease-
fire should  be  dependent  upon  success  in  the  regroupment  process  or,  as  Pham
I Van  Dong  proposed,  upon  an  overall  political  settlement.

This  last  question  was  tackled  first  by  the  negotiators.  On  Eden's  initiative,  the
conference  had  moved  in  mid-May  from  plenary  to  restricted  sessions,  where
fewer  delegates  were  present,  no  verbatim  record  was  systematically  kept,  and
the  press  was  barred.  Eden's  expectation  that  the  opportunities  for  greater  in-
I timacy  among  the  delegates  would  enhance  the  possibility  of  making  some  head-
way was  partially  fulfilled.  At  the  first  restricted  session  on  May  17,  Molotov
, responded  to  Bidault's  implication  that  one  cause  of  continuing  irresolution  in
I the  negotiations  was  the  Viet  Minh's  insistence  on  coupling  a  military  with  a
! political  settlement,  whereas  the  French  proposal  had  been  geared  to  dealing
only  with  the  military  portion  before  going  on  to  discuss  the  political  side.  The
Soviet  delegate  argued  that  while  military  and  political  matters  were  obviously
I closely  linked,  the  conference  might  do  best  to  address  the  military  settlement
I first,  since  it  was  a  point  common  to  the  French  and  Viet  Minh  proposals.  Dong
! objected  that  military  and  political  matters  were  so  closely  knit  that  they  could
not  be  separated;  however,  he  agreed  (although,  we  may  surmise,  with  some
I reluctance)  that  the  two  problems  could  be  dealt  with  in  that  order.
I With  a  basic  procedural  obstacle  removed,  it  was  finally  agreed  that  a  cease-
I fire  should  have  priority  in  the  conference's  order  of  business.*  Toward  that
i goal,  the  problem  of  regroupment  and  disarmament  of  certain  forces  was  taken
up.  At  the  fifth  restricted  session  on  May  24,  Foreign  Minister  Bidault  proposed,
i among  other  things,  that  a  distinction  be  admitted  between  "regular"  and  "ir-
regular" forces.  Regular  troops,  he  said,  included  all  permanently  organized

*  On  May  20,  Chou  En-lai  told  Eden  that  military  and  political  matters  should  indeed
be  dealt  with  separately,  and  that  priority  should  be  given  to  the  attainment  of  a
cease-fire.  (Smith  tel.  SECTO  267  from  Geneva,  May  20,  1954.)  The  Communists
were  quick  to  point  out  thereafter,  though,  that  a  poHtical  settlement  should  not  be
dropped  from  consideration.  In  fact,  at  the  fifth  restricted  session,  Molotov  returned
to  the  issue  of  military  versus  political  settlements  by  proposing  that  they  be  con-
'  sidered  at  alternate  meetings.  The  Western  side  held  fast  to  concentrating  on  the
cease-fire  and  turning  to  political  matters  only  when  agreement  had  been  reached  on
the  military  side;  this  position  was  tacitly  adopted.


134 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

forces,  which  for  the  Viet  Minh  meant  regional  as  well  as  regular  units.  These,
he  suggested,  should  be  regrouped  into  demilitarized  zones,  whereas  loosely  or-
ganized irregulars  should  be  disarmed  under  some  form  of  control.  Pham  Van
Dong,  in  his  reply,  agreed  on  the  urgency  of  a  cease-fire  and  on  the  importance
of  disarming  irregulars;  but,  in  contrast  to  Bidault's  proposal,  Dong  asserted  that
inasmuch  as  each  side  would  have  responsibility  for  all  forces  in  areas  under  its
control  after  the  cease-fire,  disarmament  would  take  place  naturally.  Dong  im-
plicitly rejected  the  idea  of  controlled  disarmament,  therefore,  by  placing  the
problem  in  the  post-  rather  than  pre-cease-fire  period.

The  issues  of  regroupment  and  disarmament  might  have  brought  the  confer-
ence to  a  standstill  had  not  Pham  Van  Dong,  at  the  sixth  restricted  session  (May
25),  suddenly  reversed  his  position  on  regroupment  and  proposed  what  amounted
to  the  partitioning  of  Indochina.  Following  only  moments  after  the  Vietnamese
delegate,  Nguyen  Quoc  Dinh,  had  offered  a  plan  based  on  the  maintenance  of
his  country's  territorial  integrity,*  Dong  suggested  that  in  the  course  of  the  re-
groupment, specific  territorial  jurisdictions  be  established  such  that  each  side
would  have  complete  economic  and  administrative,  no  less  than  military,  con-
trol. So  as  not  to  be  misunderstood,  Dong  further  urged  that  a  temporary  line
of  demarcation  be  drawn  that  would  be  topographically  suitable  and  appropriate
for  transportation  and  communication  within  each  zone  thus  created.  The  Ameri-
can delegate.  General  Smith,  immediately  dismissed  Dong's  proposal  and  ad-
vised that  the  conferees  return  to  discussion  of  the  original  cease-fire  issues.  But,
as  was  to  become  clear  very  soon,  Dong's  new  move  struck  a  responsive  chord
among  the  French  even  as  it  confirmed  to  the  Bao  Dai  delegation  its  worst  fears.

What  had  prompted  Dong  to  introduce  a  partition  arrangement  when,  at  pre-
vious sessions,  the  Viet  Minh  had  pushed  repeatedly  for  a  settlement  procedure
that  would  facilitate  their  consolidation  of  control  over  the  entire  country?  What
evidence  we  have  is  circumstantial,  but  it  suggests  that  the  Viet  Minh  delegation
may  have  come  under  Sino-Soviet  pressure  to  produce  an  alternative  to  cease-
fire proposals  that  were  consistently  being  rejected  by  the  West.  The  partition
alternative,  specifically  at  the  16th  parallel,  had  been  intimated  to  American  offi-
cials as  early  as  March  4  by  a  member  of  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  London,  ap-
parently out  of  awareness  of  Franco-American  objections  to  a  coalition  arrange-
ment for  Vietnam.  On  the  opening  day  of  the  conference,  moreover,  Soviet  offi-
cials had  again  approached  American  officials  on  the  subject,  this  time  at  Geneva,
averring  that  the  establishment  of  a  buffer  state  to  China's  south  would  be  suffi-
cient satisfaction  of  China's  security  needs.  While  these  events  do  not  demon-
strate that  Dong's  partition  proposal!  was  the  direct  outgrowth  of  Sino-Soviet
disposition  toward  a  territorial  division,  they  do  reveal  that  partition  was  a  solu-
tion, albeit  temporary,  which  Moscow,  at  least,  early  found  agreeable.

*  The  GVN's  position  called  for  the  disbandment  and  disarming  of  Viet  Minh  forces
and  their  later  integration  into  a  national  army  under  international  control;  interna-
tional supervision  of  elections  to  be  conducted  by  the  Bao  Dai  government  at  an  un-
specified future  date;  and  recognition  of  the  integrity  of  the  Vietnamese  state.  The
GVN  also  insisted  that  the  withdrawal  of  foreign  forces  come  after  all  other  issues
had  been  resolved.

t  The  DRV,  it  should  be  added,  refused  to  call  its  proposal  one  for  partition.  As
the  official  newspaper,  Nhan  Dan  (The  People)  put  it,  the  proposal  amounted  merely
to  "zonal  readjustment"  necessary  to  achieving  a  cease-fire.  The  readjustment  "is  only
a  stage  in  preparation  for  free  general  elections  with  a  view  toward  the  realization  of
national  unity."  Vietnam  News  Agency  (VNA)  broadcast  in  English  to  Southeast
Asia,  June  7,  1954.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  135

Whatever  lay  behind  Dong's  gambit,  the  French  were  put  in  the  position  of
being  challenged  on  their  prior  commitments  to  the  Vietnamese.  At  the  time  the
conference  began,  Bao  Dai's  government,  perhaps  mindful  of  past  instances  of
partition-type  solutions  in  Korea  and  Germany,  and  almost  certainly  suspicious
of  ultimate  French  intentions  in  the  face  of  Viet  Minh  territorial  demands,
urged  Paris  to  provide  written  assurance  it  would  neither  seek  nor  accept  a  di-
vision of  Vietnam  at  Geneva.  To  make  his  own  position  perfectly  clear,  Bao
Dai,  through  his  representatives  in  the  French  capital,  issued  a  communique  (in
the  name  of  the  GVN  cabinet)  which  took  note  of  various  plans  in  the  air  for
partition.  The  communique  stated  that  partition  "would  be  in  defiance  of  Viet-
namese national  sentiment  which  has  asserted  itself  with  so  much  strength  for
the  unity  as  well  as  for  the  independence  of  the  country.  Neither  the  Chief  of
State  nor  the  national  government  of  Vietnam  admits  that  the  unity  of  the  coun-
try can  be  severed  legally.  .  .  ."  The  cabinet  warned  that  an  agreement  compro-
mising that  unity  would  never  receive  Vietnam's  approval:

.  .  .  neither  the  Chief  of  State,  nor  the  Vietnamese  Government  will  con-
sider themselves  [sic]  as  bound  by  decisions  running  counter  to  the  inter-
ests, i.e.,  independence  and  unity,  of  their  country  that  would,  at  the  same
time,  violate  the  rights  of  the  peoples  and  offer  a  reward  to  aggression  in
opposition  to  the  principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  and  demo-
cratic ideals.

In  response  to  this  clear-cut  statement,  the  French  came  forward  with  both
oral  and  written  promises.  On  May  3,  Maurice  Dejean,  the  Commissioner  Gen-
eral for  Indochina,  said  in  Saigon:

The  French  Government  does  not  intend  to  seek  a  settlement  of  the  Indo-
china problem  on  the  basis  of  a  partition  of  Vietnamese  territory.  .  .  .
Formal  assurances  were  given  on  this  subject  last  April  25  by  the  French
minister  for  foreign  affairs  to  the  minister  for  foreign  affairs  of  Vietnam,
and  they  were  confirmed  to  him  on  May  1.

Written  assurance  came  from  Bidault  on  May  6  when  he  wrote  Bao  Dai  that
the  task  of  the  French  government  was  to  establish  peace  in  Indochina,  not  "to
seek  here  [at  Geneva]  a  definitive  political  solution."  Therefore,  the  French
goal  would  be,  said  Bidault,  to  obtain  a  cease-fire  with  guarantees  for  the  Asso-
ciated States,  hopefully  with  general  elections  in  the  future.  Bidault  continued:

As  of  now,  I  am  however  in  a  position  to  confirm  to  Your  Majesty  that
nothing  would  be  more  contrary  to  the  intentions  of  the  French  govern-
ment than  to  prepare  for  the  establishment,  at  the  expense  of  the  unity
of  Vietnam,  two  States  having  each  an  international  calling  {vocation).

Bidault's  support  of  Vietnam's  opposition  to  partition,  which  he  repeated
privately  before  Eden  and  Smith  at  Geneva,  collapsed  once  the  new  government
of  Pierre  Mendes-France  took  over  in  mid-June.  Mendes-France,  keenly  aware  of
the  tenor  of  French  public  opinion,  was  far  more  disposed  than  the  Laniel-
Bidault  administration  to  making  every  effort  toward  achieving  a  reasonable
settlement.  While  by  no  means  prepared  for  a  sell-out,  Mendes-France  quickly
foresaw  that  agreement  with  the  Viet  Minh  was  unlikely  unless  he  accepted
the  concept  of  partition.  His  delegate  at  Geneva,  who  remained  Chauvel,


136 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  the  new  Commissioner  General  for  Indochina,  General  Ely,  reached  the
same  conclusion.  At  a  high-level  meeting  in  Paris  on  June  24,  the  new  govern-
ment thoroughly  revised  the  French  negotiating  position.  The  objectives  for
subsequent  talks,  it  was  decided,  would  be:  (1)  the  regroupment  of  forces
of  both  sides,  and  their  separation  by  a  line  about  at  the  18th  parallel;*  (2)  the
establishment  of  enclaves  under  neutral  control  in  the  two  zones,  one  for  the
French  in  the  area  of  the  Catholic  bishoprics  at  Phat  Diem  and  Bui  Chu,  one
for  the  Viet  Minh  at  an  area  to  be  determined;  (3)  the  maintenance  of  Hai-
phong in  French  hands  in  order  to  assist  in  the  regroupment.  The  meeting
also  decided  that,  for  the  purpose  of  psychological  pressure  on  the  Viet  Minh
if  not  military  preparedness  for  future  contingencies,  France  should  break
with  past  practice  and  announce  plans  to  send  a  contingent  of  conscripts  (later
determined  as  two  divisions)  to  Indochina.  Thus,  by  late  June,  the  French  had
come  around  to  acceptance  of  the  need  to  explore  a  territorial  settlement  without,
as  we  have  already  observed,  informing  the  Vietnamese  that  Bidault's  and  De-
jean's  assurances  had  been  superseded.  On  June  26,  Paris  formally  notified
Washington  and  London  that  Chauvel  would  soon  begin  direct  talks  with  Pham
Van  Dong  on  a  partition  arrangement  that  would  provide  the  GVN  with  the
firmest  possible  territorial  base.  [Doc.  66]

While  ground  had  been  broken  on  the  cease-fire  for  Vietnam,  debate  con-
tinued on  Laos  and  Cambodia.  Prior  to  and  after  Dong's  proposal  of  May  25,
the  delegates  argued  back  and  forth  without  progress  over  the  relationship  be-
tween the  conflict  in  Vietnam  and  that  in  Cambodia  and  Laos.  The  Khmer
and  Laotian  delegates  insisted  they  represented  free  and  independent  governments
which  were  being  challenged  by  a  handful  of  indigenous  renegades  assisted  by
the  invading  Viet  Minh.  Thus,  the  delegates  reasoned,  their  situations  were
quite  different  from  the  "civil  war"  in  Vietnam,  and  therefore  cease-fires  could
readily  be  established  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  by  the  simple  expedient  of  re-
moving the  aggressors.  These  delegates  saw  no  reason — and  they  received  solid
support  from  the  American,  French  and  British  representatives — for  acceding
to  the  Viet  Minh  demand  that  cease-fires  in  their  two  countries  be  contingent
upon,  and  hence  forced  to  occur  simultaneously  with,  one  in  Vietnam.

The  Communists'  retorts  left  little  room  for  compromise.  Pham  Van  Dong
held,  as  before,  that  he  spoke  for  "governments"  which  were  being  refused  ad-
mission to  the  conference.  The  Pathet  Lao  and  the  Free  Khmer  were  separate,
genuine  "national  liberation  movements"  whose  stake  in  their  respective  coun-
tries, Dong  implied,  would  have  to  be  acknowledged  before  a  cease-fire  could
be  arranged  anywhere  in  Indochina.  Molotov  buttressed  this  argument  with
the  claim  that  Laos  and  Cambodia  were  no  more  "independent"  than  Vietnam.
Using  a  common  negotiating  tactic,  he  excerpted  from  a  public  statement  by
Dulles  to  point  out  how  France  was  still  being  urged  by  the  United  States  in
May  to  grant  real  independence  to  all  three  Indochinese  states,  not  just  Vietnam.

*  French  insistence  on  the  1 8th  parallel  originated  in  the  recommendation  of  General
Navarre,  who  was  asked  several  questions  by  the  French  delegation  at  Geneva  regard-
ing the  likely  impact  of  the  then-existing  military  situation  on  the  French  negotiatory
position.  Navarre's  responses  were  sent  April  21.  On  the  demarcation  line,  Navarre
said  that  the  18th  parallel  would  leave  "us"  the  ancient  political  capital  of  Hue  as
well  as  Tourane  (Da  Nang),  and  permit  the  retention  of  militarily  valuable  terrain.
(See  General  Ely's  Memoires:  Vlndochine  dans  la  Tourmente  [Paris:  Plon,  1964],
p.  112,  and  Lacouture  and  Devillers,  La  fin  d'une  guerre,  p.  126.)  Thus,  the  choice  of
the  18th  parallel  was  based  on  military  considerations,  and  apparently  assumed  a  con-
tinuing French  role  in  southern  Vietnam  after  partition.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  137

Molotov's  only  retreat  was  on  the  extent  of  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  terri-
torial control.  He  admitted  that  while  the  Viet  Minh  were  dominant  in  Viet-
nam, the  Khmer-Laotian  resistance  movements  controlled  some  lesser  amount
of  territory.

For  a  while  it  seemed  that  the  conference  would  become  inextricably  bogged
down  on  the  question  whether  the  Pathet  Lao  and  Free  Khmer  were  creatures  of
the  Viet  Minh  or  genuine  nationalist  forces.  Certainly  the  Viet  Minh  delegation
remained  steadfast.  At  the  fourth  restricted  session  (May  21),  Pham  Van  Dong
made  his  implication  of  the  previous  sessions  clearer  when  he  said  he  had
always  understood  the  French  cease-fire  proposal  to  have  applied  to  all  Indo-
china (an  outright  fabrication)  inasmuch  as  the  problems  in  the  three  states
were  different  only  in  degree,  not  in  nature.  If  Cambodia  and  Laos  were  de-
tached from  Vietnam  in  the  discussions,  Dong  said,  the  cease-fire  issue  would
be  attacked  in  the  wrong  way  and  a  satisfactory  solution  would  not  be  reached.
The  warning  of  no  cease-fire  settlement  for  Cambodia  and  Laos  without  one  for
Vietnam  was  clear.

These  last  remarks  by  Dong,  however,  were  no  longer  wholly  in  accord  with
what  the  Chinese  were  privately  indicating.  Chou  En-lai,  in  the  same  conversa-
tion with  Eden  on  May  20  in  which  Chou  had  agreed  to  separate  military
from  political  matters,  also  admitted  that  political  settlements  might  be  differ-
ent for  the  three  Indochinese  states.  Chou  thus  moved  one  step  closer  to  the
Western  position,  which  held  that  the  Laotian  and  Cambodian  cases  were  sub-
stantially different  from  that  in  Vietnam  and  hence  should  be  decided  separately.
The  concession,  however  small,  paved  the  way  for  agreement  to  Eden's  pro-
posal on  May  25  that  the  problem  of  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam  be  dealt  with
separately  and  directly  by  having  the  Viet  Minh  and  French  military  commands
meet  in  Geneva  and  on  the  spot  in  Vietnam  (later  determined  as  Trung  Gia)
to  discuss  technical  aspects  of  the  regroupment.  The  military  staffs  would  report
their  findings  to  the  conferees.  On  June  2  formal  agreement  was  reached  between
the  commands  to  begin  work;  but  it  was  not  until  June  10,  apparently,  that  the
Viet  Minh  actually  consented  that  their  secret  talks  with  the  French,  like  the
discussions  of  the  military  commands,  should  be  concerned  only  with  Vietnam
to  the  exclusion  of  Laotian  and  Cambodian  problems.  Thus,  it  would  seem
that  the  Viet  Minh  position  on  the  indivisibility  of  the  three  Indochinese  states
for  purposes  of  a  settlement  was  undercut  by  the  Chinese  (doubtless  with  Soviet
support) ;  yet  for  about  three  weeks  following  Chou's  talk  with  Eden,  the  Viet
Minh  had  privately  refused  to  deal  with  the  French  on  Vietnam  alone.

B. POLITICAL  SETTLEMENTS

Communist  agreement  to  treat  Laos  and  Cambodia  separately  as  well  as  to
consider  a  territorial  division  did  not,  however,  signal  imminent  progress  on
the  substance  of  military  or  political  settlements  for  those  countries  any  more
than  for  Vietnam.  Several  additional  plenary  and  restricted  sessions  made  no
headway  at  all  during  late  May  and  the  first  weeks  of  June.  Eden's  disappoint-
ment led  him  to  state  to  his  fellow  delegates :

In  respect  ...  to  the  arrangements  for  supervision  and  to  the  future  of
Laos  and  Cambodia,  the  divergencies  are  at  present  wide  and  deep.  Un-
less we  can  narrow  them  now  without  further  delay,  we  shall  have  failed
in  our  task.  We  have  exhausted  every  expedient  procedure  which  we  could
devise  to  assist  us  in  our  work.  We  all  know  now  what  the  differences  are.


138 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

We  have  no  choice  but  to  resolve  them  or  to  admit  our  failure.  For  our
part,  the  United  Kingdom  Delegation  is  still  willing  to  attempt  to  resolve
them  here  or  in  restricted  session  or  by  any  other  method  which  our
colleagues  may  prefer.

But,  gentlemen,  if  the  positions  remain  as  they  are  today,  I  think  it
is  our  clear-cut  duty  to  say  so  to  the  world  and  to  admit  that  we  have
failed.

Days  later,  his  pessimism  ran  even  deeper  as  the  conference  indeed  seemed
close  to  a  breakdown.  The  Americans  did  not  help  matters,  either:  "Bedell
Smith,"  Eden  has  since  divulged,  "showed  me  a  telegram  from  President  Eisen-
hower advising  him  to  do  everything  in  his  power  to  bring  the  conference  to
an  end  as  rapidly  as  possible,  on  the  grounds  that  the  Communists  were  only
spinning  things  out  to  suit  their  own  military  purposes."

For  reasons  which  will  be  speculated  on  subsequently,  the  Soviets  and  Chi-
nese were  not  prepared  to  admit  that  the  conference  had  failed  and  were  willing
to  forestall  that  prospect  by  making  concessions  sufficient  to  justify  its  con-
tinuation. While  the  Americans  may  have  wished  to  see  a  breakdown,  Eden  was
not  yet  convinced  that  was  inevitable.  Again,  his  patience  was  rewarded.  On
June  16,  Chou  told  the  foreign  secretary  that  the  Cambodian  resistance  forces
were  small,  making  a  political  settlement  with  the  Royal  Government  "easily"
obtainable.  In  Laos,  where  those  forces  were  larger,  regroupment  areas  along
the  border  with  Vietnam  (in  Sam  Neua  and  Phong  Saly  provinces)  would  be
required,  Chou  thought.  Asked  by  Eden  whether  there  might  not  be  difficulty
in  gaining  Viet  Minh  agreement  to  the  withdrawal  of  their  troops  from  the  two
countries,  Chou  replied  it  would  "not  be  difficult"  in  the  context  of  a  with-
drawal of  all  foreign  forces.  The  CPR  would  even  be  willing  to  consider  the
royal  governments  as  heading  independent  states  that  could  maintain  their  ties
to  the  French  Union,  provided  no  American  bases  were  established  in  their
territories.  China's  preeminent  concern,  Eden  deduced,  was  that  the  United
States  might  use  Laos  and  Cambodia  as  jump-off  points  for  an  attack  on  the
mainland.

From  the  conversation,  Eden  "received  a  strong  impression  that  he  [Chou]
wanted  a  settlement  and  I  accordingly  urged  Georges  Bidault  to  have  a  talk
with  him  and  to  discuss  this  new  offer.""  On  the  next  day  (June  17),  Bidault  met
with  Chou  for  the  first  time,  as  well  as  with  Molotov,  and  reported  the  Com-
munists' great  concern  over  a  break-up  of  the  conference.  Two  days  later  a
French  redraft  of  a  Chinese  proposal  to  broaden  the  military  staff  conferences
to  include  separate  talks  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  was  accepted.

This  first  major  breakthrough  in  the  negotiations,  with  the  Chinese  making
an  overture  that  evidently  had  full  Soviet  backing,*  seems  not  to  have  had  Viet
Minh  approval.  At  the  same  time  as  the  Chinese  were  saying,  for  example  in
a  New  China  News  Agency  (NCNA)  broadcast  of  June  17,  that  all  three
Communist  delegations  had  "all  along  maintained  that  the  conditions  in  each

*  When  Molotov  met  with  Smith  on  June  19,  the  Soviet  representative  said  he  saw
the  possibility  of  agreement  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  so  long  as  neither  side  (i.e.,  the
French  and  Viet  Minh)  "adopted  one-sided  views  or  put  forward  extreme  pretensions."
Molotov  said  about  50  percent  of  Laotian  territory  was  not  controlled  by  the  royal
government  (putting  the  Pathet  Lao  case  in  the  negative),  with  a  much  smaller  move-
ment in  Cambodia.  The  tone  of  Smith's  report  on  this  conversation  suggests  that  Molo-
tov saw  no  obstacles  to  Viet  Minh  withdrawal  of  its  "volunteers."  Smith  tel.  DULTE
202  from  Geneva,  June  19,  1954.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  139

of  the  three  Indochinese  countries  are  not  exactly  alike,"  and  hence  that  "con-
ditions peculiar  to  each  of  these  countries  should  be  taken  into  consideration,"
the  Viet  Minh  were  claiming  that  "the  indivisibility  of  the  three  questions  of
Vietnam,  Khmer,  and  Pathet  Lao"  was  one  of  several  "fundamental  questions"
which  the  conference  had  failed  to  resolve.  In  fact,  of  course,  that  question  had
been  resolved;  yet  the  Viet  Minh  continued  to  proclaim  the  close  unity  of  the
Viet  Minh,  Pathet  Lao,  and  Free  Khmer  under  the  banner  of  their  tri-national
united  front  alliance  formed  in  1951.  No  doubt  the  Viet  Minh  were  seeking  to
assure  their  cadres  and  soldiers  in  Cambodia  and  Laos  that  Pham  Van  Dong
would  not  bargain  away  their  fate  at  the  conference  table,  but  it  may  also  be
that  the  broadcasts  were  meant  to  imply  Viet  Minh  exceptions  to  objectionable
Sino-Soviet  concessions.

Those  concessions,  first  on  the  separability  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  from  Viet-
nam and  subsequently  on  Viet  Minh  involvement  there,  compelled  the  DRV  dele-
gation to  take  a  new  tack.  On  the  former  question,  Viet  Minh  representatives
indicated  on  June  16  during  "underground"  discussions  with  the  French  that
insofar  as  Vietnam  was  concerned,  their  minimum  terms  were  absolute  control
of  the  Tonkin  Delta,  including  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.  While  the  French  were  re-
luctant to  yield  both  cities,  which  they  still  controlled,  a  bargaining  point  had
been  established  inasmuch  as  the  Viet  Minh  were  now  willing  to  discuss  specific
geographic  objectives.  On  the  second  question,  the  Viet  Minh,  apparently  re-
sponding to  Chou  En-lai's  "offer"  of  their  withdrawal  from  Cambodia  and
Laos,  indicated  flexibility  at  least  toward  the  latter  country.  A  Laotian  delegate
reported  June  23,  following  a  meeting  with  Pham  Van  Dong  in  the  garden  of
the  Chinese  delegation's  villa,  that  the  Viet  Minh  were  in  apparent  accord  on
the  withdrawal  of  their  "volunteers"  and  even  on  Laos'  retention  of  French
treaty  bases.  The  Viet  Minh's  principal  demand  was  that  French  military  per-
sonel  in  Laos  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Less  clearly,  Dong  alluded  to  the  crea-
tion in  Laos  of  a  government  of  "national  union,"  Pathet  Lao  participation  in
1955  elections  for  the  national  assembly,  and  a  "temporary  arrangement"  gov-
erning areas  dominated  by  Pathet  Lao  military  forces.  But  these  latter  points
were  interpreted  as  being  suggestive;  Dong  had  come  around  to  the  Western
view  shared  (now  by  the  Soviets  and  Chinese)  that  the  Pathet  Lao  not  be  ac-
corded either  military  or  political  weight  equal  to  that  of  the  royal  government.
Later  in  the  conference,  Dong  would  make  a  similar  retreat  on  Cambodia.

C. CONTROL  AND  SUPERVISION

Painstakingly  slow  progress  toward  cease-fires  and  political  settlements  for  the
Indochinese  states  also  characterized  the  work  of  devising  supervisory  organs
to  oversee  the  implementation  and  preservation  of  the  cease-fire.  Yet  here  again,
the  Communist  side  was  not  so  intransigent  as  to  make  agreement  impossible.

Three  separate  but  interrelated  issues  dominated  the  discussions  of  control
and  supervision  at  this  stage  of  the  conference  and  afterward.  First,  there  was
sharp  disagreement  over  the  structure  of  the  supervisory  organ:  Should  it  con-
sist solely  of  joint  commissions  composed  of  the  belligerents,  or  should  it  have
superimposed  above  an  international  authority  possessing  decisionmaking  power?
Second,  the  composition  of  any  supervisory  organ  other  than  the  joint  com-
missions was  also  hotly  disputed:  Given  agreement  to  have  "neutral"  nations
observe  the  truce,  which  nations  might  be  considered  "neutral"?  Finally,  if  it
were  agreed  that  there  should  be  a  neutral  control  body,  how  would  it  dis-
charge its  duties?


140 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

In  the  original  Viet  Minh  proposals,  implementation  of  the  cease-fire  was  left
to  joint  indigenous  commissions,  with  no  provision  for  higher,  international
supervision.  Vehement  French  objections  led  to  a  second  line  of  defense  from
the  Communist  side.  At  the  fourth  plenary  session  (May  14),  Molotov  suggested
the  setting  up  of  a  Neutral  Nations  Supervisory  Commission  (NNSC)  such  as
existed  in  Korea,  and  said  he  did  not  foresee  any  insurmountable  problem  in
reaching  agreement  on  its  membership.  But  Molotov's  revision  left  much  to  be
determined  and,  from  the  Western  standpoint,  much  to  be  desired  too.  Serious
debate  on  the  control  and  supervision  problem  did  not  get  underway  until
early  June.  At  that  time,  Molotov  expressly  rejected  the  American  plan,  sup-
ported by  the  Indochinese  delegations  and  Great  Britain,  to  have  the  United
Nations  supervise  a  cease-fire.  He  argued  that  the  UN  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  Geneva  Conference,  especially  as  most  of  the  conferees  were  not  UN
members.  Returning  to  his  plan  for  an  NNSC,  Molotov  reiterated  his  view
that  Communist  countries  could  be  as  neutral  as  capitalist  countries;  hence,  he
said,  the  problem  was  simply  one  of  choosing  which  countries  should  comprise
the  supervisory  organ,  and  suggested  that  the  yardstick  be  those  having  diplo-
matic and  political  relations  with  both  France  and  the  Viet  Minh.  As  to  that
body's  relationship  to  the  joint  commissions,  Molotov  shied  away  from  the
Western  proposal  to  make  them  subordinate  to  the  neutral  commission.  "It
would  be  in  the  interest  of  our  work  to  recognize,"  Molotov  said,  "that  these
commissions  should  act  in  coordination  and  in  agreement  between  each  other,
but  should  not  be  subordinate  to  each  other."  No  such  hierarchical  relationship
had  existed  in  Korea,  so  why  one  in  Indochina?  Finally,  the  foreign  minister
saw  no  reason  why  an  NNSC  could  not  reach  decisions  by  unanimous  vote  on
"important"  questions.  Disputes  among  or  within  the  commissions,  Molotov
concluded,  would  be  referred  to  the  states  guaranteeing  the  settlement,  which
would,  if  necessary,  take  "collective  measures"  to  resolve  them.

The  Western  position  was  stated  succinctly  by  Bidault.  Again  insisting  on
having  "an  authority  remote  from  the  heat  of  the  fighting  and  which  would
have  a  final  word  to  say  in  disputes,"  Bidault  said  the  neutral  control  commis-
sion should  have  absolute  responsibility  for  the  armistice.  It  would  have  such
functions  as  regrouping  the  regular  forces,  supervising  any  demilitarized  zones,
conducting  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  and  implementing  measures  for  the  non-
introduction  of  war  materiel  into  Indochina.  While  the  joint  commission  would
have  an  important  role  to  play  in  these  control  processes,  such  as  in  working  out
agreement  for  the  safe  passage  of  opposing  armies  from  one  zone  to  another
or  for  POW  exchange,  its  functions  would  have  to  be  subordinate  to  the  undis-
puted authority  of  a  neutral  mechanism.  Bidault  did  not  specify  which  nations
fitted  his  definition  of  "neutrality"  and  whether  they  would  decide  by  majority
or  unanimous  vote.  These  omissions  were  corrected  by  Eden  a  few  days  later
when  he  suggested  the  Colombo  Powers  (India,  Pakistan,  Ceylon,  Burma,  and
Indonesia),  which  he  argued  were  all  Asian,  had  all  been  actively  discussing
Indochina  outside  the  conference,  were  five  in  number  and  hence  impervious  to
obstruction  by  a  two-to-two  vote  (as  on  the  NNSC)  or  requirement  for  una-
nimity, and  were  truly  impartial.

The  basis  for  agreement  on  the  vital  question  of  supervising  a  cease-fire
seemed  at  this  stage  nonexistent.  The  Communists  had  revised  their  position  by
admitting  the  feasibility  of  a  neutral  nations'  control  organ  in  addition  to  joint
commissions  of  the  belligerents.  But  they  clearly  hoped  to  duplicate  in  Indo-
china the  ineffective  machinery  they  had  foisted  on  the  United  Nations  com-
mand at  Panmunjom,  one  in  which  effective  peacekeeping  action  was  basically


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  141

proscribed  by  the  built-in  veto  of  a  four-power  authority  evenly  divided  among
Communist  and  non-Communist  representatives.  The  West,  on  the  other  hand,
absolutely  refused  to  experiment  again  with  an  NNSC;  a  neutral  organ  was
vital,  but  it  could  not  include  Communist  representatives,  who  did  not  know
the  meaning  of  neutrality.  If  the  United  Nations  was  not  acceptable  to  the
Communists,  the  Colombo  Powers  should  be.

However  remote  these  positions,  various  kinds  of  trade-offs  must  have  been
apparent  to  the  negotiators.  Despite  diflFering  standards  of  "neutrality"  and  "im-
partiality," for  instance,  compromise  on  the  membership  problem  seemed  pos-
sible. The  real  dilemma  was  the  authority  of  a  neutral  body.  Unless  superior  to
the  joint  commissions,  it  would  never  be  able  to  resolve  disputes,  and  unless  it
had  the  power  to  enforce  its  own  decisions,  it  would  never  be  more  than  an
advisory  organ.  Whether  some  new  formula  could  be  found  somewhere  between
the  Communists'  insistence  on  parallel  authority  and  the  West's  preference  for
a  hierarchical  arrangement  remained  to  be  seen.

On  June  19  the  Korea  phase  of  the  conference  ended  without  reaching  a
political  settlement.  The  conferees  at  that  point  agreed  to  a  prolonged  recess  by
the  delegation  leaders  on  the  understanding  that  the  military  committees  would
continue  to  meet  at  Geneva  and  in  the  field.  Eden  wrote  to  the  Asian  Com-
monwealth prime  ministers  that  "if  the  work  of  the  committees  is  sufficiently
advanced,  the  Heads  of  Delegations  will  come  back."  Until  that  time,  the  work
of  the  conference  would  go  on  in  restricted  session.  Chauvel  and  Pham  Van
Dong  remained  at  their  posts;  Molotov  returned  to  Moscow;  Chou  En-lai,  en
route  to  Peking,  made  important  stopovers  in  New  Delhi,  Rangoon,  and  Nan-
ning  that  were  to  have  important  bearing  on  the  conference.  Smith  remained
in  Geneva,  but  turned  the  delegation  over  to  Johnson.  It  was  questionable
whether  the  Under  Secretary  would  take  over  again;  gloom  was  so  thick  in
Washington  over  the  perceived  lack  of  progress  in  the  talks  and  the  conviction
that  the  new  Mendes-France  government  would  reach  a  settlement  as  soon  as
the  conference  reconvened,  that  Dulles  cabled  Smith:  "Our  thinking  at  present
is  that  our  role  at  Geneva  should  soon  be  restricted  to  that  of  observer.  .  .  ."
[Doc.  65]  As  for  Eden,  he  prepared  to  accompany  Churchill  on  a  trip  to  Wash-
ington for  talks  relating  to  the  conference  and  prospects  for  a  Southeast  Asia
defense  pact.


VI. THE  ANGLO-AMERICAN  RAPPROCHEMENT

With  its  preconceptions  of  Communist  negotiating  strategy  confirmed  by  the
harshness  of  the  first  Viet  Minh  proposals,  which  Washington  did  not  regard  as
significantly  watered  down  by  subsequent  Sino-Soviet  alterations,  and  with  its
military  alternatives  no  longer  considered  relevant  to  the  war,  the  United  States
began  to  move  in  the  direction  of  becoming  an  influential  actor  at  the  negotia-
tions. This  move  was  not  dictated  by  a  sudden  conviction  that  Western  capacity
for  inducing  concessions  from  the  Communist  side  had  increased;  nor  was  the
shift  premised  on  the  hope  that  we  might  be  able  to  drive  a  wedge  between  the
Viet  Minh  and  their  Soviet  and  Chinese  friends.  Rather,  Washington  believed
that  inasmuch  as  a  settlement  was  certain  to  come  about,  and  even  though  there
was  near-equal  certainty  it  could  not  support  the  final  terms,  basic  American
and  Western  interests  in  Southeast  Asia  might  still  be  preserved  if  France  could
be  persuaded  to  toughen  its  stand.  Were  concessions  still  not  forthcoming —
were  the  Communists,  in  other  words,  to  stiffen  in  response  to  French  firmness


142 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

— the  Allies  would  be  able  to  consult  on  their  next  moves  with  the  confidence
every  reasonable  effort  to  reestablish  peace  had  been  attempted.

As  already  observed,  the  American  decision  to  play  a  more  decisive  role  at
the  conference  depended  on  gaining  British  support.  The  changing  war  situation
now  made  alignment  with  the  British  necessary  for  future  regional  defense,  es-
pecially as  Washington  was  informed  of  the  probability  that  a  partition  settle-
ment (which  London  had  foreseen  months  before)  would  place  all  Indochina
in  or  within  reach  of  Communist  hands.  The  questions  remained  how  much
territory  the  Communists  could  be  granted  without  compromising  non-Com-
munist Indochina's  security,  what  measures  were  needed  to  guarantee  that  se-
curity, and  what  other  military  and  political  principles  were  vital  to  any  settle-
ment which  the  French  would  also  be  willing  to  adopt  in  the  negotiations.  When
the  chief  ministers  of  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  met  in  Washington  in
late  June,  these  were  the  issues  they  had  to  confront.

The  British  and  American  representatives — Eden,  Churchill,  Dulles,  and
Eisenhower — brought  to  the  talks  positions  on  partition  and  regional  security
that,  for  all  the  differences,  left  considerable  room  for  a  harmonization  of  view-
points. The  UK,  as  the  Americans  well  knew,  was  never  convinced  either  that
Indochina's  security  was  inextricably  linked  to  the  security  of  all  Asia,  or  that
the  Franco-Viet  Minh  war  would  ever  bring  into  question  the  surrender  of  all
Indochina  to  the  Communists.  London  considered  partition  a  feasible  solution,
but  was  already  looking  beyond  that  to  some  more  basic  East-West  understand-
ing that  would  have  the  effect  of  producing  a  laissez-faire  coexistence  between
the  Communist  and  Western  powers  in  the  region.  As  Eden  recalled  his  thinking
at  the  time,  the  best  way  of  keeping  Communism  out  of  Southeast  Asia  while
still  providing  the  necessary  security  within  which  free  societies  might  evolve  was
to  build  a  belt  of  neutral  states  assisted  by  the  West.  The  Communists  might  not
see  any  advantage  to  this  arrangement,  he  admitted.  But:

If  we  could  bring  about  a  situation  where  the  Communists  believed  that
there  was  a  balance  of  advantage  to  them  in  arranging  a  girdle  of  neutral
states,  we  might  have  the  ingredients  of  a  settlement.

Once  the  settlement  was  achieved,  a  system  for  guaranteeing  the  security  of  the
neutral  states  thus  formed  would  be  required,  Eden  held.  Collective  defense,  of
the  kind  that  would  ensure  action  without  unanimity  among  the  contracting
parties — a  system  "of  the  Locarno  type" — seemed  most  reasonable  to  him.  These
points,  in  broad  outline,  were  those  presented  by  him  and  Churchill.

The  United  States  had  from  the  beginning  dismissed  the  viability  of  a  parti-
tion solution.  Dulles'  public  position  in  his  major  speech  of  March  29  that
Communist  control  even  of  part  of  Indochina  would  merely  be  the  prelude  to
total  domination  was  fully  supported  in  private  by  both  State  and  Defense.
Nevertheless,  the  Government  early  recognized  the  possibility  that  partition,
however  distasteful,  might  be  agreed  to  among  the  French  and  Communist
negotiators.  As  a  result,  on  May  5,  the  Defense  Department  drew  up  a  settle-
ment plan  that  included  provision  for  a  territorial  division.  As  little  of  Vietnam
as  possible  should  be  yielded.  Defense  argued,  with  the  demarcation  line  fixed
in  the  north  and  "defined  by  some  defensible  geographic  boundary  (i.e.,  the  Red
or  Black  Rivers,  or  the  Annamite  Mountains) .  .  .  ."  In  accord  with  the  French
position  that  evolved  from  the  meeting  of  Mendes-France's  cabinet  on  June  24,
Defense  urged  provision  for  a  Vietnamese  enclave  in  the  Hanoi-Haiphong  area


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  143

or,  alternatively,  internationalization  of  the  port  facilities  there.  Fairly  well  con-
vinced, however,  that  partition  would  be  fragile,  Defense  also  called  for  "sanc-
tions" against  any  form  of  Communist  aggression  in  Laos,  Cambodia,  or  Thai-
land, and  for  allied  agreement  to  united  action  in  the  event  the  Communists
violated  a  cease-fire  by  conducting  subversive  activities  in  the  non-Communist
area  of  Vietnam.

The  Defense  proposal  amounted  to  containing  the  Communist  forces  above
the  20th  parallel  while  denying  them  sovereign  access  to  the  sea.  This  position
went  much  further  than  that  of  the  French,  who  also  favored  a  demarcation  line
geared  to  military  requirements  but  were  willing  to  settle  on  roughly  the  18th
parallel.  Moreover,  when  the  five-power  military  staff  conference  met  in  Wash-
ington in  early  June,  it  reported  (on  the  9th)  that  a  line  midway  between  the
17th  and  18th  parallels  (from  Thakhek  in  Laos  westward  to  Dong  Hoi  on  the
north  Vietnam  seacoast)  would  be  defensible  in  the  event  partition  came  about.
[Doc.  61]  Undercutting  the  Defense  plan  still  further  was  the  French  disposi-
tion to  yield  on  an  enclave  in  the  Hanoi— Haiphong  area  were  the  Viet  Minh
to  press  for  their  own  enclave  in  southern  Vietnam.  As  Chauvel  told  U.  Alexis
Johnson,  should  the  choice  come  to  a  trade-off  of  enclaves  or  a  straight  terri-
torial division,  the  French  preferred  the  latter.  [Doc.  62]  Thus,  by  mid-June,  a
combination  of  circumstances  made  it  evident  to  the  Administration  that  some
more  flexible  position  on  the  location  of  the  partition  line  would  have  to  be,  and
could  be,  adopted.

American  acceptance  of  partition  as  a  workable  arrangement  put  Washington
and  London  on  even  terms.  Similarly,  on  the  matter  of  an  overall  security  "um-
brella" for  Southeast  Asia,  the  two  allies  also  found  common  ground.  While  the
United  States  found  "Locarno"  an  unfortunate  term,  the  Government  did  not
dispute  the  need  to  establish  a  vigorous  defense  mechanism  capable  of  acting
despite  objections  by  one  or  more  members.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  NSC
Planning  Board,  on  May  19,  had  outlined  three  possible  regional  groupings  de-
pendent upon  the  nature  and  timing  of  a  settlement  at  Geneva.  Now,  in  late
June,  circumstances  dictated  the  advisability  of  concentrating  on  the  "Group
2"  formula,  in  which  the  UK,  the  United  States,  Pakistan,  Thailand,  the  Philip-
pines, Australia,  and  New  Zealand  would  participate  but  not  France  (unless  it
was  decided  that  the  pact  would  apply  to  Indochina).  The  concerned  states
would  exchange  information,  act  as  a  united  front  against  Communism,  provide
actual  assistance  to  Asian  members  against  external  attack  or  "Communist  in-
surrection," and  make  use  of  Asian  facilities  and/or  forces  in  their  defense
assistance  program.

American  planning  for  what  was  to  become  SEATO  evinced  concern,  how-
ever, about  the  commitment  of  American  forces  in  cases  of  Communist  in-
filtration and  subversion.  As  the  Planning  Board's  paper  notes,  the  role  of  the
United  States  and  other  countries  should  be  limited  to  support  of  the  country
requesting  assistance;  Asian  member  nations  would  be  expected  to  "contribute
facilities  and,  if  possible,  at  least  token  military  contingents."  The  Board's  paper
did  not  represent  a  final  policy  statement;  but  it  did  reflect  American  reluctance,
particularly  on  the  part  of  the  President  and  the  Joint  Chiefs,  to  have  American
forces  drawn  into  the  kind  of  local  conflict  the  Administration  had  steered  clear
of  in  Vietnam.  On  this  question  of  limiting  the  Western  commitment,  the  British,
to  judge  from  their  hostility  toward  involvement  against  the  Viet  Minh,  were
also  in  general  agreement.

Aside  from  partition  and  regional  security,  a  basis  also  existed  for  agreement
to  assisting  the  French  in  their  diplomatic  work  by  the  device  of  some  carefully


144 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

worded  warning  to  the  Communists.  The  British,  before  as  well  as  after  Dien-
bienphu,  were  firmly  against  issuing  threats  to  the  Communists  that  involved
military  consequences.  When  united  action  had  first  been  broached,  London  re-
jected raising  the  threat  of  a  naval  blockade  and  carrying  it  out  if  the  Chinese
continued  to  assist  the  Viet  Minh.  Again,  when  united  action  came  up  in  private
U.S.-French  discussions  during  May,  the  British  saw  no  useful  purpose  in  seek-
ing to  influence  discussions  at  Geneva  by  making  it  known  to  the  Communists
that  united  action  would  follow  a  breakdown  in  negotiations.  The  situation  was
different  now.  Instead  of  threatening  direct  military  action,  London  and  Wash-
ington apparently  agreed,  the  West  could  profit  from  an  open-ended  warning
tied  to  a  lack  of  progress  at  Geneva.  When  Eden  addressed  the  House  of  Com-
mons on  June  23  prior  to  emplaning  for  Washington,  he  said:  "It  should  be
clear  to  all  that  the  hopes  of  agreement  [at  Geneva]  would  be  jeopardized  if
active  military  operations  in  Indochina  were  to  be  intensified  while  negotiations
for  an  armistice  are  proceeding  at  Geneva.  If  this  reminder  is  needed,  I  hope
that  it  may  be  heeded."  Eden  was  specifically  thinking  of  a  renewed  Viet  Minh
offensive  in  the  Delta,  but  was  not  saying  what  might  happen  once  negotiations
were  placed  in  jeopardy.

This  type  of  warning  was  sounded  again  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Anglo-
American  talks,  and  encouragement  for  it  came  from  Paris.  In  the  same  aide-
memoire  of  June  26  in  which  the  French  Government  had  requested  that  the
United  States  counsel  Saigon  against  a  violent  reaction  to  partition,  Washington
was  also  urged  to  join  with  London  in  a  declaration.  The  declaration  would
"state  in  some  fashion  or  other  that,  if  it  is  not  possible  to  reach  a  reasonable
settlement  at  the  Geneva  Conference,  a  serious  aggravation  of  international  re-
lations would  result.  .  .  ."  [Doc.  66]  The  French  suggestion  was  acted  upon.
Eisenhower  and  Churchill  issued  a  statement  on  June  29  that  "if  at  Geneva
the  French  Government  is  confronted  with  demands  which  prevent  an  accept-
able agreement  regarding  Indochina,  the  international  situation  will  be  seriously
aggravated."  In  retrospect,  the  statement  may  have  had  an  important  bearing  on
the  Communists'  negotiating  position — a  point  to  which  we  shall  return  sub-
sequently.

The  joint  statement  referred  to  "an  acceptable  agreement,"  and  indeed  the
ramifications  of  that  phrase  constituted  the  main  subject  of  the  U.S.-UK  talks.
In  an  unpublicized  agreement,  the  two  governments  concurred  on  a  common
set  of  principles  which,  if  worked  into  the  settlement  terms,  would  enable  both
to  "respect"  the  armistice.  These  principles,  known  subsequently  as  the  Seven
Points,  were  communicated  to  the  French.  As  reported  by  Eden,  they  were:

(1)  Preservation  of  the  integrity  and  independence  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,
and  assurance  of  Viet  Minh  withdrawal  from  those  countries

(2)  Preservation  of  at  least  the  southern  half  of  Vietnam,  and  if  possible  an
enclave  in  the  Delta,  with  the  line  of  demarcation  no  further  south  than
one  running  generally  west  from  Dong  Hoi

(3)  No  restrictions  on  Laos,  Cambodia,  or  retained  Vietnam  "materially  im-
pairing their  capacity  to  maintain  stable  non-Communist  regimes;  and
especially  restrictions  impairing  their  right  to  maintain  adequate  forces
for  internal  security,  to  import  arms  and  to  employ  foreign  advisers"

(4)  No  "political  provisions  which  would  risk  loss  of  the  retained  area  to
Communist  control"

(5)  No  provision  that  would  "exclude  the  possibility  of  the  ultimate  reunifica-
tion of  Vietnam  by  peaceful  means"


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  145

(6)  Provision  for  "the  peaceful  and  humane  transfer,  under  international
supervision,  of  those  people  desiring  to  be  moved  from  one  zone  to
another  of  Vietnam"

(7)  Provision  for  "effective  machinery  for  international  supervision  of  the
agreement."

The  Seven  Points  represented  something  of  an  American  diplomatic  victory
when  viewed  in  the  context  of  the  changed  Administration  position  on  partition.
While  any  loss  of  territory  to  the  Communists  predetermined  the  official  Amer-
ican attitude  toward  the  settlement — Eden  was  told  the  United  States  would
almost  certainly  be  unable  to  guarantee  it — the  terms  agreed  upon  with  the
British  were  sufficiently  hard  that,  if  pushed  through  by  the  French,  they  would
bring  about  a  tolerable  arrangement  for  Indochina.  The  sticking  point  for  Wash-
ington lay  not  in  the  terms  but  in  the  unlikelihood  that  the  British,  any  more
than  the  French,  would  actually  stand  by  them  against  the  Communists.  Thus,
Dulles  wrote:  ".  .  .  we  have  the  distinct  impression  that  the  British  look  upon
this  [memorandum  of  the  Seven  Points]  merely  as  an  optimum  solution  and
that  they  would  not  encourage  the  French  to  hold  out  for  a  solution  as  good  as
this."  The  Secretary  observed  that  the  British,  during  the  talks,  were  unhappy
about  finding  Washington  ready  only  to  "respect"  the  final  terms  reached  at
Geneva,  They  had  preferred  a  stronger  word,  yet  they  "wanted  to  express  these
7  points  merely  as  a  'hope'  without  any  indication  of  firmness  on  our  part."
The  United  States,  quite  aside  from  what  was  said  in  the  Seven  Points,  "would
not  want  to  be  associated  in  any  way  with  a  settlement  which  fell  materially
short  of  the  7  point  memorandum."  [Doc.  70]  Thus,  the  seven  points,  while
having  finally  bound  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  to  a  common  position
on  the  conference,  did  not  allay  Washington's  anxiety  over  British  and  French
readiness  to  conclude  a  less-than-satisfactory  settlement.  The  possibility  of  a
unilateral  American  withdrawal  from  the  conference  was  still  being  "given  con-
sideration," Dulles  reported,  even  as  the  Seven  Points  were  agreed  upon.

Despite  reservations  about  our  Allies'  adherence  to  the  Seven  Points,  the
United  States  still  hoped  to  get  French  approval  of  them.  On  July  6,  Dillon  tele-
graphed the  French  reaction  as  given  him  by  Parodi,  the  secretary-general  of  the
cabinet.  With  the  exception  of  Point  5,  denoting  national  elections,  the  French
were  in  agreement.  They  were  confused  about  an  apparent  conflict  between  the
elections  provision  and  Point  4,  under  which  political  provisions,  which  would
include  elections,  were  not  to  risk  loss  of  retained  Vietnam.  In  addition,  they,
too,  felt  American  agreement  merely  to  "respect"  any  agreement  was  too  weak
a  term,  and  requested  clarification  of  its  meaning.

Dulles  responded  the  next  day  (July  7)  to  both  matters.  Points  4  and  5  were
not  in  conflict,  he  said.  It  was  quite  possible  that  an  agreement  in  line  with  the
Seven  Points  might  still  not  prevent  Indochina  from  going  Communist.  The  im-
portant thing,  therefore,  was  to  arrange  for  national  elections  in  a  way  that
would  give  tlie  South  Vietnamese  a  liberal  breathing  spell:

.  .  .  since  undoubtedly  true  that  elections  might  eventually  mean  unifica-
tion Vietnam  under  Ho  Chi  Minh  this  makes  it  all  more  important  they
should  be  only  held  as  long  after  cease-fire  agreement  as  possible  and  in
conditions  free  from  intimidation  to  give  democratic  elements  [in  South
Vietnam]  best  chance.  We  believe  important  that  no  date  should  be  set  now
and  especially  that  no  conditions  should  be  accepted  by  French  which  would
have  direct  or  indirect  effect  of  preventing  effective  international  super-
vision of  agreement  ensuring  political  as  well  as  military  guarantees.


146 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

And  so  far  as  "respect"  of  that  agreement  was  concerned,  the  United  States  and
Britain  meant  they  "would  not  oppose  a  settlement  which  conformed  to  Seven
Points.  ...  It  does  not  of  course  mean  we  would  guarantee  such  settlement  or
that  we  would  necessarily  support  it  publicly.  We  consider  'respect'  as  strong  a
word  as  we  can  possibly  employ  in  the  circumstances.  .  .  .  'Respect'  would  also
mean  that  we  would  not  seek  directly  or  indirectly  to  upset  settlement  by  force."  *
Dulles'  clarification  of  the  American  position  on  elections  in  Vietnam,  to-
gether with  his  delimitation  of  the  nation's  obligation  towards  a  settlement,  did
not  satisfy  the  French  completely  but  served  the  important  purpose  of  en-
lightening them  as  to  American  intentions.  Placed  beside  the  discussions  with
Eden  and  Churchill,  the  thrust  of  American  diplomacy  at  this  time  clearly  was
to  leave  no  question  in  the  minds  of  our  allies  as  to  what  we  considered  the
elements  in  a  reasonable  Indochina  settlement  and  what  we  would  likely  do
once  a  settlement  were  achieved.

VII. TOWARD  A  SETTLEMENT:  THE  LAST  THIRTY  DAYS

A. THE  BARGAINING  CONTINUES

While  the  French  and  British  pondered  the  implications  of  the  Seven  Points,
bargaining  continued  behind  the  scenes  against  a  background  of  further  military
advance  by  the  Viet  Minh.  At  about  the  same  time  the  Viet  Minh  made  their
first  specific  partition  proposal,  their  forces  in  the  field  completed  their  deploy-
ment from  the  Dienbienphu  area.  By  mid-June,  according  to  American  intelli-
gence, the  Viet  Minh  were  believed  prepared  for  a  massive  attack  in  the  Delta.
Another  report  spoke  of  their  renewed  attention  to  southern  Annam  and  of  an
apparent  buildup  of  military  strength  there.  Not  surprisingly  in  light  of  these
developments,  the  Viet  Minh,  in  late  June,  responded  to  the  French  proposal
of  a  division  at  the  18th  parallel  with  a  plan  for  a  line  in  southern  Annam  run-
ning northwest  from  the  13th  to  the  14th  parallel,  i.e.,  from  Tuy  Hoa  on  the
coast  through  Pleiku  to  the  Cambodian  border.  Moreover,  in  secret  talks  with
the  French,  the  Viet  Minh's  vice-minister  for  national  defense,  Ta  Quang  Buu,
also  insisted  on  French  withdrawal  from  the  Delta  within  two  months  of  a
cease-fire,  in  contrast  to  French  demands  for  a  four-month  interval.  [Doc.  69]
As  suggested  by  Lacouture  and  Devillers,  the  Viet  Minh  may  have  been  seeking
to  capitalize  not  only  on  their  improved  military  position  in  the  Delta,  where
French  Union  forces  were  still  in  retreat,  but  also  on  Mendes-France's  reputation
as  a  man  of  peace  obviously  desirous  of  a  settlement.

This  resurgence  of  Viet  Minh  toughness  on  terms  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities
applied  also  to  Laos  and  Cambodia.  In  the  military  staff  conferences  that  had
begun  separately  on  those  two  countries  in  late  June,  no  progress  was  made.  The
Viet  Minh  indicated,  in  the  Laotian  case,  that  they  had  already  withdrawn;  if
forces  opposing  the  royal  government  remained  (as  in  fact  some  15,000  did),
negotiations  with  the  resistance  groups  would  have  to  be  undertaken.  Thus,  de-

*  Dulles  to  American  Embassy,  Paris,  tel.  No.  77,  July  7.  1954  (Secret).  [Doc.  64]
Regarding  the  U.S.  view  of  a  Ho  Chi  Minh  electoral  victory,  we  not  only  have  the
well-known  comment  of  Eisenhower  that  Ho,  at  least  in  early  1954,  would  have
garnered  80  percent  of  the  vote.  (See  Mandate  for  Change  [Garden  City,  New  York:
Doubleday],  pp.  337-38.)  In  addition,  there  is  a  Department  of  State  memorandum
of  conversation  of  May  31,  1954,  in  which  Livingston  Merchant  reportedly  "recog-
nized the  possibility  that  in  Viet  Nam  Ho  might  win  a  plebiscite,  if  held  today."


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  147

spite  Chou  En-lai's  claim  that  Viet  Minh  withdrawal  from  Laos  and  Cambodia
could  easily  be  accomplished,  the  Viet  Minh  were  hardly  ready  to  move  out
unless  they  received  substantial  guarantees  (such  as  a  permanent  regroupment
area),  which  the  royal  governments  refused  to  give.

Whether  because  of  or  in  spite  of  Viet  Minh  intransigence,  the  Chinese  force-
fully made  known  their  earnest  desire  to  keep  the  conference  moving.  In  an  im-
portant encounter  at  Bern  on  June  23,  Chou  En-lai  several  times  emphasized  to
Mendes-France  that  the  main  thing  was  a  cease-fire,  on  which  he  hoped  progress
could  be  made  before  all  the  heads  of  delegation  returned  to  Geneva.  Regarding
Laos  and  Cambodia,  Chou  thought  regroupment  areas  for  the  insurgents  would
be  necessary,  but  reiterated  that  national  unity  was  the  affair  of  the  royal  gov-
ernments; he  hoped  the  resistance  elements  might  find  a  place  in  the  national
life  of  their  respective  countries.  Chou  told  the  French  premier,  as  he  had  told
Eden  previously,  that  no  American  bases  could  be  permitted  in  those  countries;
yet  Chou  spoke  sympathetically  of  the  French  Union.  Turning  finally  to  the
Viet  Minh,  Chou  urged  that  direct  contact  be  established  between  them  and  the
Vietnamese.  He  promised  that  for  his  part,  he  would  see  that  the  Viet  Minh
were  thoroughly  prepared  for  serious  discussions  on  a  military  settlement.  Clearly,
the  Chinese  were  far  more  interested  in  moving  forward  toward  a  cease-fire
than  were  their  Viet  Minh  counterparts.

Even  though  the  Viet  Minh  were  making  demands  that  the  French,  Cam-
bodians, and  Laotians  could  not  accept,  the  debate  was  narrowing  to  specifics.
The  question  when  national  elections  in  Vietnam  should  be  held  is  illustrative.
The  Viet  Minh  did  not  budge  from  their  insistence  that  elections  occur  six
months  after  the  cease-fire.  But  the  French,  attempting  to  make  some  headway
in  the  talks,  retreated  from  insistence  on  setting  no  date  (a  position  the  Vietnam-
ese had  supported)  and  offered  to  hold  elections  18  months  after  completion
of  the  regroupment  process,  or  between  22  and  23  months  after  the  cessation  of
hostilities.  [Doc.  69]  The  French  now  admitted  that  while  they  still  looked  for-
ward to  retaining  Haiphong  and  the  Catholic  bishoprics  as  long  as  possible,  per-
haps in  some  neutral  environment,  total  withdrawal  from  the  north  would  prob-
ably be  necessary  to  avoid  cutting  up  Vietnam  into  enclaves.  [Doc.  66]  But  par-
tition in  any  manner  faced  the  French  with  hostile  Vietnamese,  and  it  was  for
this  reason  that  Chauvel  not  only  suggested  American  intervention  to  induce
Vietnamese  self-control,  but  also  received  Pham  Van  Dong's  approval,  in  a
conversation  July  6,  to  having  the  military  commands  rather  than  governments
sign  the  final  armistice  so  as  to  avoid  having  to  win  Vietnamese  consent.  As
Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  who  became  prime  minister  June  18,  suspected,  the  French
were  prepared  to  pull  out  of  Tonkin  as  part  of  the  cease-fire  arrangements.

On  the  matter  of  control  and  supervision,  the  debate  also  became  more  focused
even  as  the  gulf  between  opposing  views  remained  wide.  The  chief  points  of
contention  were,  as  before,  the  composition  and  authority  of  the  neutral  super-
visory body;  but  the  outlines  of  an  acceptable  arrangement  were  beginning  to
form.  Thus,  on  composition,  the  Communist  delegations,  in  early  July,  began
speaking  in  terms  of  an  odd-numbered  (three  or  five)  neutral  commission  chaired
by  India,  with  pro-Communist  and  pro-Western  governments  equally  sharing  the
remaining  two  or  four  places.  Second,  on  the  powers  of  that  body,  dispute  per-
sisted as  to  whether  it  would  have  separate  but  parallel  authority  with  the  joint
commissions  or  supreme  authority;  whether  and  on  what  questions  it  would
make  judgments  by  unanimous  vote;  and  whether  it  would  (as  the  French  pro-
posed) be  empowered  to  issue  majority  and  minority  reports  in  case  of  disagree-
ment. These  were  all  fundamental  issues,  but  the  important  point  is  that  the


148 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

Communist  side  refused  to  consider  them  irremovable  obstacles  to  agreement.
As  Molotov's  understudy,  Kuznetsov  (the  deputy  foreign  minister),  put  it,  the
Soviet  and  French  proposals  on  control  and  supervision  revealed  "rapprochement
in  the  points  of  view  on  certain  questions.  It  is  true  v^ith  respect  to  the  relation-
ships between  the  mixed  commission  and  the  international  supervisory  commis-
sion. This  rapprochement  exists  also  in  regard  to  the  question  of  the  examination
of  the  functions  and  duties  of  the  commission.  .  .  ."  In  fact,  a  "rapprochement"
did  not  exist;  but  the  Soviets,  interestingly,  persisted  in  their  optimism  that  a
solution  could  be  found.

B. CHINESE  DIPLOMACY

While  the  negotiations  went  on  among  the  second-string  diplomats,  a  different
kind  of  diplomacy  was  being  carried  on  elsewhere.  Chou  En-lai,  en  route  to  Pe-
king, advanced  Communist  China's  effort,  actually  begun  in  late  1952,  to  woo  its
Asian  neighbors  with  talk  of  peaceful  coexistence.  This  diplomatic  offensive,
which  was  to  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  outcome  at  Geneva,  had  borne
its  first  fruit  in  April  1954,  when  Chou  reached  agreement  with  Nehru  over
Tibet.  At  that  time,  the  Chinese  first  introduced  the  "five  principles"  they  vowed
to  follow  in  their  relations  with  other  nations.  The  five  principles  are:  mutual
respect  for  territorial  integrity  and  sovereignty,  nonaggression,  noninterference  in
internal  affairs,  equality  and  mutual  benefit,  and  peaceful  coexistence.

Chou's  first  stopover  was  in  New  Delhi,  the  scene  of  his  initial  success.  On
June  28  he  and  Nehru  reaffirmed  the  five  principles  and  expressed  the  hope  that
a  peaceful  settlement  in  Indochina  would  be  concluded  in  conformity  with  them.
Similar  sentiments  appeared  in  a  joint  statement  from  Rangoon,  scene  of  talks
with  Prime  Minister  U  Nu.  Promises  were  exchanged,  moreover,  for  the  main-
tenance of  close  contact  between  China  and  Burma,  and  support  was  voiced  for
the  right  of  countries  having  different  social  systems  to  coexist  without  inter-
ference from  outside.  "Revolution  cannot  be  exported,"  the  joint  statement  pro-
claimed; "at  the  same  time  outside  interference  with  the  common  will  expressed
by  the  people  of  any  nation  should  not  be  permitted."

Peking  made  full  use  of  these  diplomatic  achievements  by  contrasting  them
with  the  American  policy  of  ruthless  expansionism,  which  Peking  said  was  carried
out  by  Washington  under  the  label  of  opposing  Communism.  Peking  proclaimed
that  the  era  of  colonialism  which  the  United  States  was  seeking  to  perpetuate  in
Indochina  had  come  to  en  end.  "A  new  era  has  dawned  in  which  Asian  countries
can  coexist  peacefully  and  establish  friendly  relations  on  the  basis  of  respect  for
each  other's  territorial  integrity  and  sovereignty  and  mutual  nonaggression,"  said
Jen-min  jih-pao.  Another  newspaper,  Kuang-ming  jih-pao,  offered  similar  testi-
mony to  the  inspirational  effect  of  the  Sino-Indian  and  Sino-Burmese  agree-
ments, considering  them  to  conform  to  the  interests  of  all  Asian  peoples.  The
daily  castigated  the  American  "policy  of  strength"  as  being  totally  incompatible
with  the  five  principles.  Clearly,  China  was  exploiting  its  gains  through  diplomacy
not  simply  to  acquire  Asian  support  (and  thus  detract  from  pro-Westernism  in
the  region),  but  more  broadly  to  muster  recognition  for  China  as  the  leading
Asian  power  in  the  fight  against  "imperialism"  and  "colonialism."

Chou's  diplomatic  efforts  took  a  different  turn,  it  seems,  when  he  met  with
Ho  Chi  Minh  at  Nanning,  on  the  Sino-Vietnamese  frontier,  from  July  3-5.  Al-
though the  final  communique  merely  stated  that  the  two  leaders  "had  a  full  ex-
change of  views  on  the  Geneva  Conference  with  respect  to  the  question  of  the
restoration  of  peace  in  Indochina  and  related  questions,"  it  subsequently  ap-


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  149

peared  that  much  more  may  have  taken  place.  According  to  observers  in  Hong
Kong,  Chou  pressed  for  the  meeting  out  of  fear  that  the  Viet  Minh  might  engage
in  intensified  mihtary  action  that  would  destroy  chances  for  an  armistice  and
upset  China's  budding  role  as  an  Asian  peacemaker.  Conceivably,  Chou  sought
to  persuade  Ho  that  his  territorial  gains  were  about  as  much  as  he  could  expect
at  that  juncture  without  risking  an  end  to  negotiations  and  renewed  American
attempts  to  forge  a  military  alliance  for  intervention.  To  judge  from  the  Viet
Minh  reaction  to  the  talks,  Ho  was  not  completely  satisfied  with  Chou's  pro-
posed tactics.

Momentarily  leaving  aside  Chou's  motivations,  it  is  vital  to  note  the  impact
of  the  talks  on  the  Geneva  negotiations.  On  July  9,  Chauvel  dined  with  Li  K'e-
nung  and  Chang  Wen-t'ien,  a  vice-minister  for  foreign  affairs  and  CPR  am-
bassador to  the  Soviet  Union.  Chauvel  opened  the  conversation — as  he  later  re-
counted to  Johnson — by  complaining  that  discussions  with  the  Viet  Minh  were
not  going  well,  that  Viet  Minh  demands  were  exorbitant  and  well  beyond  Chou
En-lai's  stated  position.  The  Chinese  delegates  evinced  surprise  but  said  nothing
in  direct  reply.  However,  Chang  did  report  that  Chou  had  had  a  "very  good
meeting"  with  Ho  Chi  Minh,  the  results  of  which  "would  be  helpful  to  French."
Chauvel  received  the  impression — one  which  seems,  in  retrospect,  to  have  been
accurate — that  the  Viet  Minh  had  been  given  a  free  hand  by  the  Soviets  and
Chinese  up  to  the  point  where  their  demands  were  unacceptable  to  the  French,
at  which  time  the  Soviets  and/or  Chinese  felt  compelled  to  intervene.  [Doc.  66]
If  such  was  the  case,  Chou's  talk  with  Ho,  coming  after  Mendes-France  and  his
negotiators  showed  no  sign  of  being  more  compromising  than  their  predecessors,
Laniel  and  Bidault,  may  have  been  intended  to  inform  the  Viet  Minh  that  the
"point"  had  been  reached  and  that  they  had  to  soften  their  demands  if  a  settle-
ment were  ever  to  be  attained.

C. THE  FRANCO- AMERICAN  UNDERSTANDING

Precisely  how  Chou's  stopover  in  Nanning  would  be  "helpful"  to  the  French
did  not  become  apparent  until  four  days  after  Chauvel's  conversation  with  Li
and  Chang.  By  that  time,  the  French  had  been  engaged  in  intensive  conversations
with  the  Americans,  the  aim  of  which  was  to  convince  Washington  that  the
United  States,  to  be  truly  influential  at  the  conference — to  realize,  in  other  words,
a  settlement  in  line  with  the  Seven  Points — had  to  back  the  French  with  a  high-
level  representative  in  Geneva.  Unless  the  United  States  did  more  than  offer  its
views  from  afar  on  an  acceptable  settlement,  Mendes-France  argued,  France
could  not  be  expected  to  present  a  strong  front  when  Molotov  and  Chou  re-
sumed their  places.  As  though  to  prove  his  determination  to  stand  fast  against
Communist  demands,  Mendes-France  told  Ambassador  Dillon  in  Paris  that  if  a
cease-fire  was  not  agreed  to  by  July  20,  the  premier  would  approve  the  dispatch
of  conscripts  to  Indochina  and  would  introduce  a  law  into  Parliament  to  that
effect  on  July  21.  His  government  would  not  resign  until  that  law  passed;  the
ships  would  be  prepared  to  transport  the  conscripts  to  Indochina  beginning  July
25.  [Doc.  62]

Despite  Mendes-France's  willingness  to  establish  a  deadline  and,  for  the  first
time  in  the  history  of  French  involvement  in  Indochina,  to  conscript  soldiers  for
service  there,  Washington  remained  opposed  to  upgrading  its  Geneva  delegation.
Sensitive  as  much  to  any  proposal  that  might  implicate  the  United  States  in  the
final  settlement  terms  as  to  Mendes-France's  difficulties  at  the  conference  table,
Dulles  believed  the  French  would  end  by  accepting  a  settlement  unsatisfactory


150 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

to  the  United  States  whether  or  not  the  USDEL  were  upgraded.  As  he  explained
to  Dillon,  were  he  (the  Secretary)  or  Smith  to  return  to  Geneva  only  to  find
the  French  compelled  to  negotiate  an  unacceptable  agreement  anyway,  the  United
States  would  be  required  to  dissociate  itself  in  a  manner  "which  would  be  deeply
resented  by  the  French  as  an  effort  on  our  part  to  block  at  the  last  minute  a
peace  which  they  ardently  desire,"  with  possible  "irreparable  injury  to  Franco-
American  relations.  .  .  ."  The  least  embarrassing  alternative,  Dulles  felt,  was  to
avoid  the  probability  of  having  to  make  a  "spectacular  disassociation"  by  staying
away  from  the  conference  altogether.  [Doc.  65]

When  Dulles'  position  was  reported  to  Mendes-France,  the  premier  said  he
understood  the  Americans'  reluctance  but  considered  it  misplaced.  The  Ameri-
can fear  of  in  some  way  becoming  committed  to  the  settlement,  he  said,  was
precisely  his  dilemma,  for  he  had  no  idea  what  the  Communists  would  propose
in  the  crucial  days  ahead.  The  French  negotiating  position  was  the  Seven  Points,
he  went  on,  and  would  not  deviate  substantially  from  them.  With  great  feeling,
Mendes-France  told  a  member  of  the  American  Embassy  that  the  presence  of
Dulles  or  Smith  was  "absolutely  essential  and  necessary";  without  either  of  them,
the  Communists  would  sense  and  seek  to  capitalize  on  a  lack  of  unity  in  the
allied  camp.  "Mendes  indicated  that  our  high-level  presence  at  Geneva  had  di-
rect bearing  on  where  Communists  would  insist  on  placing  line  of  demarcation  or
partition  in  Vietnam."

These  arguments  did  not  prove  convincing  to  Washington.  On  July  10,  Dulles
wrote  Mendes-France  a  personal  message  reiterating  that  his  or  General  Smith's
presence  would  serve  no  useful  purpose.  And  Dulles  again  raised  doubts  that
France,  Britain,  and  the  United  States  were  really  agreed  on  a  single  negotiating
position :

What  now  concerns  us  is  that  we  are  very  doubtful  as  to  whether  there  is  a
united  front  in  relation  to  Indochina,  and  we  do  not  believe  that  the  mere
fact  that  the  high  representatives  of  the  three  nations  physically  reappear
together  at  Geneva  will  serve  as  a  substitute  for  a  clear  agreement  on  a
joint  position  which  includes  agreement  as  to  what  will  happen  if  that  posi-
tion is  not  accepted  by  the  Communists.  We  fear  that  unless  there  is  the
reality  of  such  a  united  front,  the  events  at  Geneva  will  expose  differences
under  conditions  which  will  only  serve  to  accentuate  them  with  consequent
strain  upon  the  relations  between  our  two  countries  greater  than  if  the  US
does  not  reappear  at  Geneva,  in  the  person  of  General  Smith  or  myself.
[Doc.  67]

The  Secretary  questioned  whether  the  Seven  Points  truly  represented  a  common
"minimum  acceptable  solution"  which  the  three  Allies  were  willing  to  fight  for  in
the  event  the  Communists  rejected  them.  Charging  that  the  Seven  Points  were  ac-
tually "merely  an  optimum  solution"  for  Paris  no  less  than  for  London,  Dulles
sought  to  demonstrate  that  the  French  were  already  moving  away  from  the  Seven
Points.  He  cited  apparent  French  willingness  to  permit  Communist  forces  to  re-
main in  northern  Laos,  to  accept  a  demarcation  line  "considerably  south  of
Donghoi,"  to  neutralize  and  demilitarize  Laos  and  Cambodia,  and  to  permit
"elections  so  early  and  so  ill-prepared  and  ill-supervised  as  to  risk  the  loss  of  the
entire  area  to  Communism"  as  evidences  of  a  "whittling-away  process"  which,
cumulatively,  could  destroy  the  intent  of  the  Seven  Points.  [Doc.  67]  Unques-
tionably, the  Secretary's  firm  opposition  to  restoring  to  the  American  delegation
its  high  rank  was  grounded  in  intense  suspicion  of  an  ultimate  French  sell-out.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  151

yet  suspicion  based  on  apparent  misinformation  concerning  both  the  actual
French  position  and  the  degree  of  French  willingness  to  stand  firm.

Thus  believing  that  the  French  had  already  gone  far  toward  deflating  some
of  the  major  provisions  of  the  U.S.-UK  memorandum,  Dulles  reiterated  the  Ad-
ministration's position  that  it  had  the  right  "not  to  endorse  a  solution  which
would  seem  to  us  to  impair  seriously  certain  principles  which  the  US  believes
must,  as  far  as  it  is  concerned,  be  kept  unimpaired,  if  our  own  struggle  against
Communism  is  to  be  successfully  pursued."  Perhaps  seeking  to  rationalize  the
impact  of  his  rejection,  Dulles  wrote  in  closing  that  the  American  decision  might
actually  assist  the  French:  "If  our  conduct  creates  a  certain  uncertainty  in  the
minds  of  the  Communists,  this  might  strengthen  your  hand  more  than  our  pres-
ence at  Geneva.  .  .  ."  [Doc.  67]  Mendes-France  had  been  rebuffed,  however,
and  while  Dulles  left  the  door  slightly  ajar  for  his  or  Smith's  return  if  "circum-
stances" should  change,  it  seemed  more  probable  that  France  would  have  to
work  for  a  settlement  with  only  the  British  along  side.

The  Dulles-Mendes-France  exchanges  were  essentially  an  exercise  in  credibil-
ity, with  the  French  premier  desperately  seeking  to  persuade  the  Secretary  that
Paris  really  did  support  and  really  would  abide  by  the  Seven  Points.  When  Men-
des-France read  Dulles'  letter,  he  protested  that  France  would  accept  nothing  un-
acceptable to  the  United  States,  and  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  Dulles'  presence  at
the  conference  would  give  him  a  veto  power,  in  effect,  on  the  decisions  taken.
Beyond  that,  Mendes-France  warned  of  the  catastrophic  impact  of  an  American
withdrawal  on  the  American  position  in  Europe  no  less  than  in  the  Far  East;
withdrawal,  he  said,  was  sure  to  be  interpreted  as  a  step  toward  isolationism.
Asked  what  alternative  his  government  had  in  mind  if  the  conference  failed  even
with  an  American  high-level  presence,  Mendes-France  replied  there  would  have
to  be  full  internationalization  of  the  war.*

Mendes-France's  persistence  was  sufficiently  persuasive  to  move  Dulles,  on
July  13,  to  fly  to  Paris  to  document  the  premier's  support  of  the  Seven  Points.
On  the  14th,  the  Secretary  and  the  premier  signed  a  memorandum  which  dupli-
cated that  agreed  to  by  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.  In  addition,  a  posi-
tion paper  was  drawn  up  the  same  day  reiterating  that  the  United  States  was  at
the  conference  as  "a  friendly  nation"  whose  role  was  subordinate  to  that  of  the
primary  non-Communist  parties,  the  Associated  States  and  France.  The  Seven
Points  were  described,  as  they  had  been  some  two  weeks  earlier,  as  those  ac-
ceptable to  the  "primarily  interested  nations"  and  which  the  United  States  could
"respect."  However,  should  terms  ultimately  be  concluded  which  differed  mark-
edly from  the  Seven  Points,  France  agreed  that  the  United  States  would  neither
be  asked  nor  expected  to  accept  them,  and  "may  publicly  disassociate  itself  from
such  differing  terms"  by  a  unilateral  or  multilateral  statement.

One  of  Dulles'  objections  had  been  that  a  true  united  front  did  not  exist  so
long  as  agreement  was  lacking  on  allied  action  in  the  event  of  no  settlement.  On
this  point,  too,  the  French  were  persuaded  to  adopt  the  American  position.  In
the  event  of  a  settlement,  it  was  agreed  in  the  position  paper  that  the  United
States  would  "seek,  with  other  interested  nations,  a  collective  defense  association

*  Dillon  from  Paris  priority  tel.  No.  134,  July  1  1,  1954.  [Doc.  68]  The  same  day,
Mendes-France  had  told  Dillon  again  of  France's  intention  to  send  conscripts,  with
parliamentary  approval,  by  July  25,  with  two  divisions  ready  for  action  by  about
September  15.  The  premier  said  that  while  he  could  not  predict  how  the  Assembly
would  react,  he  personally  saw  the  need  for  direct  American  involvement  in  the  war
once  negotiations  broke  down  and  the  conscripts  were  sent.  Dillon  from  Paris  priority
tel.  No.  133,  July  11,  1954.


152 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

designed  to  preserve,  against  direct  and  indirect  aggression,  the  integrity  of  the
non-Communist  areas  of  Southeast  Asia.  .  .  ."  Should  no  settlement  be  forth-
coming, U.S.-France  consultations  would  take  place;  but  these  would  not  pre-
clude the  United  States  from  bringing  "the  matter"  before  the  UN  as  a  threat
to  the  peace.  Previous  obstacles  to  French  objections  to  UN  involvement  were
nonexistent,  for  France  reaffirmed  in  the  position  paper  its  commitment  under
the  June  4  treaty  of  independence  with  Vietnam  that  Saigon,  as  well  as  Vientiane
and  Phnom  Penh,  was  an  "equal  and  voluntary"  partner  in  the  French  Union,
and  hence  no  longer  subject  in  its  foreign  policy  to  French  diktat.

On  all  but  one  matter,  now,  the  United  States  and  France  were  in  complete
accord  on  a  negotiating  strategy.  That  matter  was,  of  course,  the  American
delegation.  Mendes-France  had  formally  subscribed  to  the  Seven  Points  and  had
agreed  to  American  plans  for  dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  the  conference;  yet
he  had  gained  nothing  for  the  French  delegation.  Writing  to  the  Secretary,  the
premier  pointed  out  again:

In  effect,  I  have  every  reason  to  think  that  your  absence  would  be  precisely
interpreted  as  demonstrating,  before  the  fact,  that  you  disapproved  of  the
conference  and  of  everything  which  might  be  accomplished.  Not  only
would  those  who  are  against  us  find  therein  the  confirmation  of  the  ill  will
which  they  attribute  to  your  government  concerning  the  reestablishment  of
peace  in  Indochina;  but  many  others  would  read  in  it  a  sure  sign  of  a  divi-
sion of  the  western  powers.  [Doc.  70]

Once  more,  Mendes-France  was  putting  forth  the  view  that  a  high-level  Ameri-
can representation  at  the  conference  would  do  more  to  ensure  a  settlement  in
conformity  with  the  Seven  Points  than  private  U.S.-French  agreement  to  them.

For  reasons  not  entirely  clear,  but  perhaps  the  consequence  of  Eisenhower's
personal  intervention,  Mendes-France's  appeal  was  now  favorably  received  in
Washington.  Dulles  was  able  to  inform  the  premier  on  July  14:  "In  the  light  of
what  you  say  and  after  consultation  with  President  Eisenhower,  I  am  glad  to
be  able  to  inform  you  that  the  President  and  I  are  asking  the  Under  Secretary
of  State,  General  Walter  Bedell  Smith,  to  prepare  to  return  at  his  earliest  con-
venience to  Geneva  to  share  in  the  work  of  the  conference  on  the  basis  of  the
understanding  which  we  have  arrived  at."  [Doc.  70]  For  the  first  time  since  late
1953,  the  United  States  and  France  were  solidly  joined  in  a  common  front  on
Indochina  policy.

In  accordance  with  the  understandings  reached  with  France,  Smith  was  sent
new  instructions  on  July  16  based  upon  the  Seven  Points.  After  reiterating  the
passive  formal  role  the  United  States  was  to  play  at  the  conference,  Dulles  in-
formed his  Under  Secretary  he  was  to  issue  a  unilateral  (or,  if  possible,  multi-
lateral) statement  should  a  settlement  be  reached  that  "conforms  substantially"
to  the  Seven  Points.  "The  United  States  will  not,  however,  become  cosignatory
with  the  Communists  in  any  Declaration,"  Dulles  wrote  with  reference  to  the
procedure  then  being  discussed  at  Geneva  of  drafting  military  accords  and  a  final
declaration  on  a  political  settlement.  Nor  should  the  United  States,  Smith's  in-
structions went  on,  be  put  in  a  position  where  it  could  be  held  responsible  for
guaranteeing  the  results  of  the  conference.  Smith's  efforts  should  be  directed,
Dulles  summed  up,  toward  forwarding  ideas  to  the  "active  negotiators,"  France,
Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Vietnam.

This  last  point  of  guidance  referred  to  the  possibility  of  a  breakdown  in  the
negotiations.  Should  no  settlement  be  reached,  the  United  States  delegation  was


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  153

to  avoid  permitting  the  French  to  believe  that  outcome  was  the  result  of  Amer-
ican advice  or  pressure,  and  that  in  some  way  the  United  States  was  morally
obligated  to  intervene  militarily  in  Indochina.  The  United  States,  Dulles  wrote,
was  "not  prepared  at  the  present  time  to  give  any  commitment  that  it  will  inter-
vene in  the  war  if  the  Geneva  Conference  fails.  .  .  ."  While  this  stricture  al-
most certainly  reflected  the  President's  and  the  Joint  Chiefs'  extreme  reluctance
to  become  committed,  in  advance,  to  a  war  already  past  the  point  of  return,  it
was  also  doubtless  a  reaction  to  Mendes-France's  intimations  to  Dillon  of  French
willingness  to  reconsider  active  American  involvement  if  the  conference
failed.

With  French  and  British  adherence  to  the  Seven  Points  promised  by  written
agreement,  the  United  States  had  gone  about  as  far  as  it  could  toward  ensuring
an  acceptable  settlement  without  becoming  tied  to  it.  The  Administration  still
apparently  believed  that  the  final  terms  would  violate  the  Seven  Points  in  several
significant  respects;*  but  by  making  clear  in  advance  that  any  settlement  would
be  met  with  a  unilateral  American  declaration  rather  than  Bedell  Smith's  signa-
ture, the  United  States  had  at  least  guaranteed  its  retention  of  a  moral  advantage,
useful  particularly  in  placating  domestic  public  opinion.  In  the  event  of  an  un-
satisfactory settlement,  Washington  would  be  in  a  position  to  say  that  it  had
stood  steadfastly  by  principle  only  to  be  undercut  by  "soft"  Allies  and  Com-
munist territorial  ambitions.

D. THE  FINAL  WEEK  OF  BARGAINING

Prior  to  Smith's  return,  positions  had  tended  to  harden  rather  than  change  at
Geneva,  although  the  Viet  Minh  had  yielded  a  trifle  on  partition.  Chang
Wen-t'ien's  encouraging  remark  to  Chauvel  of  July  9  had  been  fulfifled  four  days
later,  as  already  indicated.  The  final  signal  was  Chou's  comment  to  Mendes-
France  on  the  13th  that  both  sides,  French  and  Viet  Minh,  had  to  make  con-
cessions on  the  demarcation  problem,  but  that  this  "does  not  signify  that  each
must  take  the  same  number  of  steps."  That  same  day,  Pham  Van  Dong  told  the
French  premier  the  Viet  Minh  were  willing  to  settle  on  the  16th  parallel.

Dong's  territorial  concession  meant  little  to  the  French,  however,  and,  as  the
negotiations  continued,  it  became  plain  that  the  Viet  Minh  were  not  concerned
about  Mendes-France's  July  20  deadline.  Yet  the  Chinese  remained  optimistic,  at
least  publicly.  Jen-min  jih-pao's  Geneva  reporter,  for  instance,  wrote  July  12
that  while  no  solution  had  yet  been  worked  out  on  the  control  and  supervision
problem,  "there  seems  no  reason  why  agreement  cannot  be  reached."  As  for
defining  the  regroupment  areas,  the  correspondent  asserted  that  "speedy  agree-
ment would  seem  probable  after  the  return  of  the  Foreign  Ministers  of  the  Big
Powers.  .  .  ."  So  long  as  all  parties  were  "sincere,"  he  wrote,  agreement  would
indeed  come  about.

The  minuscule  progress  made  on  settling  the  Vietnam  problem  loomed  large  in

*  Thus,  on  July  15  (one  day  after  the  Franco- American  agreements),  the  National
Security  Council,  after  being  briefed  on  the  Geneva  situation,  decided  that  the  likely
settlement  would  go  against  the  Seven  Points.  The  NSC  was  told  the  Communists
would:  (1)  seek  partition  of  Vietnam  somewhere  between  the  14th  and  18th  parallels;
(2)  demand  control  of  some  part  of  Laos,  neutralization  of  the  remainder,  and  agree-
ment on  the  formation  of  a  coalition  government;  (3)  ask  neutralization  of  Cambodia
and  some  form  of  recognition  for  the  Free  Khmer  movement.  Were  the  Communists
to  accept  the  Dong  Hoi  line  for  Vietnam,  they  would  then  demand  an  enclave  in
southern  Vietnam  plus  part  of  Laos,  or  simply  extend  the  Dong  Hoi  line  through  Laos.


154 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

comparison  with  the  seemingly  unbreakable  log  jam  that  had  developed  over
Laos  and  Cambodia.  Since  the  major  Communist  concessions  of  mid-June,  which
had  at  least  paved  the  way  for  separating  Laos  and  Cambodia  from  Vietnam  for
discussion  purposes,  virtually  nothing  had  been  accomplished  toward  cease-fires.
Debate  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  occupied  the  spotlight  again  on  July  9  when,
from  the  remarks  of  the  Chinese  delegate  (Li  K'e-nung),  it  quickly  became  ap-
parent that  for  all  their  willingness  to  discuss  the  withdrawal  of  Viet  Minh
troops,  the  Chinese  remained  greatly  concerned  about  possible  Laotian  and
Cambodian  rearmament  and  alignment.  Simply  put,  the  Chinese  were  negotiating
for  their  own  security,  not  for  Viet  Minh  territorial  advantage.

As  Chou  had  pointed  out  to  Eden  in  June,  the  CPR's  major  concern  was  that
Cambodia  and  Laos  might,  after  a  settlement,  be  left  free  to  negotiate  for  a
permanent  American  military  presence.  In  his  presentation,  therefore,  Li  K'e-
nung  insisted  that  the  two  countries  not  be  permitted  to  acquire  fresh  troops,
military  personnel,  arms,  and  ammunition  except  as  might  be  strictly  required  for
self-defense;  nor  should  they,  he  held,  allow  foreign  military  bases  to  be  estab-
lished. Li  formalized  Chou's  passing  remark  to  Eden  that  China  was  not  much
disturbed  by  French  Union  (as  opposed  to  American)  technicians.  Li  allowed
that  French  military  personnel  to  assist  the  training  of  the  Laotian  and  Cam-
bodian armies  was  a  matter  that  "can  be  studied."

The  Cambodian  case,  presented  by  Foreign  Minister  Sam  Sary,  revealed  a
stubborn  independence  that  was  to  assist  the  country  greatly  in  the  closing  days
of  the  conference.  Sam  Sary  said  that  foreign  bases  would  indeed  not  be
authorized  on  Khmer  soil  "only  as  far  as  there  is  no  menace  against  Cam-
bodia. ...  If  our  security  is  imperiled,  Cambodia  will  keep  its  legitimate  right
to  defend  itself  by  all  means."  As  for  foreign  instructors  and  technicians,  his
government  wished  to  retain  those  Frenchmen  then  in  Cambodia;  he  was  pleased
to  note  Li  K'e-nung's  apparent  acceptance  of  this  arrangement.  Finally,  with
regard  to  the  importation  of  arms,  Sam  Sary  differentiated  between  a  limitation
on  quantity  (which  his  government  accepted)  and  on  quality  (which  his  govern-
ment wished  to  have  a  free  hand  in  determining).

While  the  Chinese  publicly  castigated  the  Cambodians  for  working  with  the
Americans  to  threaten  "the  security  of  Cambodia's  neighboring  countries  under
the  pretext  of  self-defense,"  the  Americans  gave  the  Cambodians  encouragement.
In  Washington,  Phnom  Penh's  ambassador,  Nong  Kimny,  met  with  Dulles  on
July  10.  Nong  Kimny  said  his  Government  would  oppose  the  neutralization  and
demilitarization  of  the  country;  Dulles  replied  that  hopefully  Cambodia  would
become  a  member  of  the  collective  security  arrangement  envisaged  in  Amer-
ican-British plans.  Cambodia,  the  Secretary  said,  possessed  a  kind  of  inde-
pendence superior  to  that  in  Vietnam  and  Laos,  and  as  such  should  indeed
oppose  Communist  plans  to  neutralize  and  demilitarize  her.  As  an  independent
state,  Cambodia  was  entitled  to  seek  outside  military  and  economic  assistance.

The  Laotian  delegation  was  also  experiencing  difficulties,  though  with  the  Viet
Minh  rather  than  the  Chinese.  The  Viet  Minh  negotiators,  in  the  military  com-
mand conferences,  insisted  on  making  extraneous  demands  concerning  the  Pathet
Lao.  The  Laotians  were  concerned  not  so  much  with  the  demands  as  with  the
possibility  of  a  private  French  deal  with  the  Viet  Minh  that  would  subvert  the
Laotian  position.  A  member  of  the  royal  government's  delegation  went  to  John-
son to  be  assured  that  a  behind-the-scenes  deal  would  not  occur.  The  delegate
said  Laos  hoped  to  be  covered  by  and  to  participate  in  a  Southeast  Asia  col-
lective security  pact.  Johnson  did  not  guarantee  that  this  arrangement  could  be
worked  out;  but  as  the  conference  drew  to  a  close,  as  we  shall  see,  the  United


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  155

States  made  it  clear  to  the  Cambodians  and  Laotians  that  their  security  would  in
some  fashion  be  taken  care  of  under  the  SEATO  treaty.

Irresolution  over  Cambodia  and  Laos,  a  continuing  wide  gap  between  French
and  Viet  Minh  positions  on  the  partition  line,  and  no  progress  on  the  control
and  supervision  dilemma  were  the  highlights  of  the  generally  dismal  scene  that
greeted  General  Smith  on  his  return  July  16  to  the  negotiating  wars.  Smith
apparently  took  heart,  however,  in  the  steadfastness  of  Mendes-France,  although
the  Under  Secretary  also  observed  that  the  Communists  had  reacted  to  this  by
themselves  becoming  unmoving.  Smith  attributed  Communist  intransigence  to
the  probability  that  "Mendes-France  has  been  a  great  disappointment  to  the
Communists  both  as  regards  the  relatively  firm  position  he  has  taken  on  Indo-
china and  his  attitude  toward  EDC.  They  may  therefore  wish  to  force  him  out
of  the  government  by  making  settlement  here  impossible."

Actually,  what  had  disturbed  the  Communists  most  was  not  so  much  Mendes-
France's  firmness  as  Smith's  return.  That  became  clear  following  a  private
meeting  requested  by  a  member  of  the  CPR  delegation,  Huang  Hua,  with
Seymour  Topping,  the  New  York  Times  correspondent  at  Geneva.  Topping,  as
the  Chinese  must  have  expected,  reported  the  conversation  to  the  American
delegation.  He  said  Huang  Hua,  speaking  in  deadly  earnest  and  without  propa-
gandistic  overtones,  had  interpreted  Smith's  return  as  an  American  attempt  to
prevent  a  settlement.  Indeed,  according  to  Huang  Hua,  the  Paris  talks  between
Dulles  and  Mendes-France  on  July  13  and  14  had  been  primarily  responsible  for
Mendes-France's  stubbornness;  the  French  premier  had  obviously  concluded  a
deal  with  the  United  States  in  which  he  agreed  to  raise  the  price  for  a  settle-
ment. [Doc.  78]

Overt  Chinese  statements  in  this  period  lent  credence  to  Topping's  report.
First,  Peking  was  far  from  convinced  that  continued  discussions  on  the  restora-
tion of  peace  in  Indochina  removed  the  possibility  of  dramatic  new  military
moves  by  the  United  States.  Washington  was  accused,  as  before  the  conference,
of  desiring  to  intervene  in  Indochina  so  as  to  extend  the  war  there  into  "a  new
military  venture  on  China's  southern  borders.  In  support  of  this  contention,
Peking  cited  such  provocative  moves  as  trips  during  April  and  June  by  General
James  A.  Van  Fleet  ("the  notorious  butcher  of  the  Korean  War")  to  Korea,
Japan,  and  Taiwan,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  North  Pacific  military
alliance;  American  intentions  of  concluding  a  mutual  defense  treaty  with  Taiwan
as  the  first  step  in  Chiang  Kai-shek's  invasion  plans;  American  efforts,  through
the  five-power  and  later  Eisenhower-Churchill  talks,  to  create  a  Southeast  Asia
alliance  for  a  military  thrust  into  Indochina;  and  stepped-up  U.S.  military
assistance,  including  training,  for  the  Thai  armed  forces.

Second,  Peking  was  clearly  disturbed  that  the  French  were  still  heeding  Amer-
ican advice  when  the  path  to  a  settlement  lay  before  them.  In  a  People's  Daily
editorial  of  July  14,  for  instance,  the  French  people  and  National  Assembly  were
said  to  be  strongly  desirous  of  peace.  Thus:  "A  policy  running  counter  to  French
interests  cannot  work.  France  is  a  major  world  power.  She  should  have  her  own
independent  and  honorable  path.  This  means  following  an  independent  foreign
policy  consistent  with  French  national  interests  and  the  interests  of  world  peace."
The  American  alternative — a  Southeast  Asia  coalition  with  French  participation
— should  be  rejected,  the  editorial  intoned,  and  a  settlement  conforming  to  the
five  principles  achieved  instead.  In  keeping  with  its  line  of  previous  months,
Peking  was  attempting  to  demonstrate — for  Asian  no  less  than  for  French  ears
— that  it  had  a  keen  interest  in  resolving  the  Indochina  problem  rather  than


156 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

seeing  the  conference  give  way  to  new  American  military  pressures  and  a
possibly  wider  war.

Finally,  Peking  paid  considerable  attention  to  Dulles'  stay  in  Paris  and  to  his
dispatch  of  Smith  to  Geneva.  Dulles'  sudden  trip  to  the  French  capital  was
said  to  reveal  American  determination  to  obstruct  progress  in  the  negotiations
by  pressuring  Mendes-France  not  to  grasp  the  settlement  that  lay  just  around  the
corner.  Dulles  originally  had  no  intention  of  upgrading  the  American  delegation,
according  to  Peking.  "But  Bedell  Smith  had  to  be  sent  back  to  Geneva  because  of
strong  criticism  in  the  Western  press,  and  Washington  was  fearful  lest  agreement
could  be  reached  quickly  despite  American  boycotting  of  the  conference."  Yet
China's  optimism  over  a  settlement  did  not  diminish:  "Chinese  delegation  circles,"
NCNA  reported,  "see  no  reason  whatsoever  why  the  Geneva  Conference  should
play  up  to  the  U.S.  policy  and  make  no  efforts  towards  achieving  an  agreement
which  is  acceptable  and  satisfactory  to  all  parties  concerned  and  which  is
honorable  for  the  two  belligerent  sides."  If  Smith's  return,  then,  was  viewed  from
Peking  as  a  challenge  to  its  diplomatic  ingenuity,  the  Chinese  (and,  we  may
surmise,  the  Soviets)  were  prepared  to  accept  it.

In  doing  so,  however,  the  Chinese  evidently  were  not  about  to  sacrifice  in  those
areas  of  dispute  where  they  had  a  special  interest,  namely,  Laos  and  Cambodia.
On  July  14,  Chou  called  on  Nong  Kimny  to  state  China's  position.  The  premier
said  first  that,  in  accord  with  his  recent  talks  with  Nehru,  U  Nu,  and  Ho  Chi
Minh,  he  could  report  a  unanimous  desire  for  peace  in  Indochina,  for  the  unity
of  each  of  the  three  Associated  States,  and  for  their  futiire  cordial  relationship
with  the  Colombo  Powers.  Chou  then  asked  about  the  status  of  Cambodian
talks  with  the  Viet  Minh.  When  Nong  Kimny  replied  that  Pham  Van  Dong,  in
two  recent  get-togethers,  had  insisted  on  interjecting  political  problems  into  dis-
cussions of  a  military  settlement — as  by  requesting  Cambodia's  retention  of
certain  provincial  officials  appointed  by  the  Free  Khmers,  and  by  suggesting  the
royal  government's  preservation  of  a  Free  Khmer  youth  movement — Chou  is
said  to  have  laughed  off  these  claims  and  to  have  replied  that  these  were  indeed
matters  for  Cambodia  to  handle  by  herself.

Chou  had  his  own  views  on  what  Cambodia  should  and  should  not  do;  how-
ever, Khmer  sovereignty  should  not  mean  discrimination  against  the  resistance
elements,  the  establishment  of  foreign  military  bases  in  Cambodia,  Laos,  and
Vietnam,  or  the  conclusion  of  military  alliances  with  other  states.  Chou  was  less
adamant  only  on  the  subject  of  Cambodia's  importation  of  arms  and  military
personnel;  when  Nong  Kimny  flatly  stated  that  Phnom  Penh  would  absolutely
reject  any  limitations  inasmuch  as  these  would  be  incompatible  with  Cambodian
sovereignty,  Chou  did  not  contradict  him.  Instead,  he  promised  to  study  the
matter  further  and  asked  to  know  precisely  what  quantities  of  arms  and  person-
nel the  royal  government  had  in  mind.  Later  on,  he  became  a  bit  more  flexible  by
saying  that  a  prohibition  on  arms  and  personnel  should  apply  only  to  the  armi-
stice period,  not  permanently.  Only  in  Vietnam,  Chou  said,  would  there  be  a  flat
proscription  against  military  equipment  and  troops.

Chou  and  Nong  Kimny  met  again  three  days  later,  on  July  17.  On  this  occa-
sion, Chou  was  obviously  less  conciliatory  (as  Nong  Kimny  reported),  stating
China's  position  more  in  terms  of  demands  than  suggestions.  He  urged  the
Cambodian  government  to  incorporate  resistance  elements  into  the  army,  police,
and  civil  service.  But  he  reserved  his  emphasis  for  Cambodia's  future  security
position.  In  a  thinly-veiled  warning,  Chou  said  that  should  Cambodia  join  the
pact,  permit  foreign  bases  on  its  territory,  or  accept  American  military  in-
structors, "the  consequences  would  be  very  serious  and  would  aggravate  the  situa-


The  Geneva  Conference,  May— July,  1954  157

tion  with  unfortunate  consequences  for  Cambodian  independence  and  territorial
integrity"  (Smith's  paraphrase).  Cambodia  could  have  French  or  British  in-
structors, Chou  said.  But  his  three-fold  limitation,  obviously  directed  at  assuring
against  future  Cambodia-U.S,  defense  ties,  remained^ — and,  he  added,  it  applied
to  Laos  and  Vietnam  as  well.

The  Chinese  were  clearly  out  to  get  from  the  conference  what  they  could,  with-
out Russian  assistance,  before  a  settlement  was  concluded.  Chou  did  not  stop  at
warning  Nong  Kimny,  either.  On  July  17  he  took  his  case  to  Eden,  telling  the
foreign  secretary  that  while  the  CPR  stood  ready  to  join  in  guaranteeing  the
freedom  and  independence  of  all  three  Indochinese  states,  membership  in  a
Southeast  Asia  pact  would  change  everything.  Evidently  intent  on  removing
what  he  may  have  sensed  was  a  possible  last-minute  obstacle,  Eden  implied
that  he  knew  of  no  proposal  for  including  the  United  States  in  the  pact,  although
he  did  not  deny  American  interest  in  forming  a  defense  organization  for  South-
east Asia.  Chou  said  he  had  no  objections  to  ANZUS  (it  was  directed  against
Japan,  he  thought),  but  he  went  into  a  lengthy  discourse  on  the  danger  to  China
of  having  foreign  bases  in  Indochina.

Eden's  assurances  evidently  did  not  [words  illegible]  Chou  deeply.  On  July  18
Chou  met  with  the  Laotian  foreign  minister  and  presented  "unofficial"  but  ex-
travagant demands  which  the  latter  found  totally  unacceptable.  Laos  was  willing
to  provide  the  resistance  elements  with  [words  illegible]  zones  in  the  northern
provinces  of  Phong  Saly  and  Sam  Neua;  Chou  proposed,  additionally,  portions
of  Luang  Prabang  and  Xien  Khouang  provinces.  The  royal  government  was  fur-
ther willing  to  concede  the  insurgents  freedom  of  movement  in  those  zones,  but
Chou  demanded  administration  by  joint  royal-insurgent  committees  and  a  super-
visory joint  committee  in  Vientiane  until  the  general  elections  of  August  1955.
Finally,  where  the  Laotians  thought  the  issue  of  French  Union  bases  had  been
resolved  in  their  favor,  Chou  now  said  the  bases  should  be  completely  eliminated
even  though  established  by  Franco-Laotian  treaty.

Chou's  obsession  with  foreign  military  bases  and  related  issues  led  to  an  effort
to  make  a  settlement  contingent  upon  Western  acceptance  of  Chinese  neutraliza-
tion plans.  A  Chinese  informant  (probably  Huang  Hua)  told  Seymour  Topping
that  Western  willingness  to  bar  foreign  military  bases  from  Indochina  and  to
deny  the  Associated  States  admission  to  any  military  blocs  would  assure  agree-
ment by  July  20.  IVIore  than  that,  the  informant  said,  the  United  States  had  also
to  subscribe  to  and  guarantee  the  final  settlement,  evidently  in  the  belief  that
America's  signature  would  make  Indochinese  participation  in  SEATO  illegal.
[Doc.  74]  A  more  direct  statement  was  made  by  NCNA's  "special  correspondent"
in  Geneva,  who  drew  a  harsh  characterization  of  a  cease-fire  agreement  that  left
the  door  open  to  Indochinese  involvement  in  a  military  alliance:

If  efforts  are  made  at  the  same  time  negotiations  for  peace  are  taking  place
to  drag  the  three  Indochinese  countries  into  an  aggressive  military  bloc
whose  purpose  is  to  unleash  war,  then  the  cease-fire  would  mean  nothing
other  than  a  respite  for  adjusting  battle  lines  and  dispositions  of  strength  in
order  to  start  the  fighting  again  on  an  even  larger  scale.  In  such  circum-
stances, the  armistice  agreement  would  become  no  more  than  a  scrap  of
paper.

Whether  the  Chinese  seriously  believed  that  the  United  States  would  sign  the  ac-
cords in  order  to  achieve  a  settlement,  or  that  Laos  and  Cambodia  [words  missing]
out  of  the  Southeast  Asia  collective  defense  is  at  best  debatable.  There  seems


158 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  I

little  doubt,  however,  that  Peking  sincerely  considered  a  written  prohibition  on
the  accords  against  Indochinese  alliances  or  foreign  bases  as  a  major  step  toward
the  neutralization  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  area's  eventual  dissociation  from  the
American  defense  system.

General  Smith  felt  that  Topping's  report  dovetailed  with  growing  Communist
intransigence  in  the  past  few  days,  particularly  on  the  part  of  Molotov.  He  be-
lieved that  Molotov,  who  had  urgently  requested  a  restricted  session  for  the  18th,
would  likewise  raise  the  question  of  explicit  American  acquiescence  in  a  final
settlement.  [Doc.  74]  When  the  meeting  came,  however,  Molotov  did  not  re-
iterate Huang  Hua's  implication  that  American  failure  to  sign  the  accords  might
scuttle  the  conference.  Perhaps  aware  that  a  warning  of  that  kind  would  not
work,  Molotov  instead  limited  himself  to  talking  of  the  conference's  achievements
to  date.  He  complimented  those  who  had  been  engaged  in  private  negotiations,
and  went  so  far  as  to  voice  confidence  that  a  settlement  of  outstanding  problems
relating  to  Laos  and  Cambodia  could  be  achieved.  He  closed  by  pointing  out  that
two  drafts  were  before  the  conference  relating  to  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in
Vietnam  and  Laos,  two  on  Cambodia,  and  two  on  a  final  declaration  dealing  with
political  matters.  That  ended  Molotov's  contribution,  leaving  the  Americans,  and
probably  others,  wondering  why  the  Soviet  foreign  minister  had  hastily  sum-
moned the  meeting.  [Doc.  76]

E.  AGREEMENT

If  Molotov's  refusal  at  the  July  18  restricted  session  to  warn  the  conference  of
failure  signaled  renewed  Communist  efforts  toward  agreement,  his  subsequent
actions  proved  the  point.  Between  July  18  and  21,  the  conferees  were  able  to
iron  out  their  differences  sufficiently  to  produce  agreements  now  commonly  re-
ferred to  as  the  Geneva  "accords."  In  fact,  the  accords  consist  of  military  agree-
ments for  Vietnam,  Cambodia,  and  Laos  to  fulfill  the  conference's  primary  task
of  restoring  peace  to  Indochina,  and  a  Final  Declaration  designed  to  establish
the  conditions  for  future  political  settlements  throughout  Indochina.  The  nature
of  the  eleventh-hour  compromises  reached,  and  a  broad  outline  of  the  settlement,
are  treated  below.

Vietnam

The  Geneva  accords  temporarily  established  two  zones  of  Vietnam  separated
by  a  line  running  roughly  along  the  17th  parallel  and  further  divided  by  a  de-
militarized zone.  Agreement  to  the  demarcation  line  was  apparently  the  work
of  Molotov,  who  gained  French  acceptance  of  the  17th  parallel  when  he  found
the  French  flatly  opposed  to  the  16th,  a  late  Viet  Minh  compromise  perhaps
prompted  by  Molotov  himself.  [Doc.  72]  Precisely  what  motivated  Molotov  to
make  his  proposal  is  not  clear.  Speculatively,  he  may  simply  have  traded  con-
siderable territorial  advantage  which  the  Viet  Minh  enjoyed  for  a  specific  election
date  he,  Chou,  and  Pham  Van  Dong  wanted  from  the  outset.  The  Western
negotiators  certainly  recognized  the  trade-off  possibility:  Eden  considered  a  line
between  the  17th  and  18th  parallels  worth  exchanging  for  a  mutually  acceptable
position  on  elections;  and  Mendes-France  observed  in  a  conversation  with  Molo-
tov that  the  election  and  demarcation  questions  might  be  linked  in  the  sense
that  each  side  could  yield  on  one  of  the  questions.  [Doc.  72]

Whether  or  not  a  trade-off  actually  took  place,  the  fact  remains  that  the  French
came  off  much  better  in  the  matter  of  partition  than  on  elections,  which  they  had


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  159

insisted  not  be  given  a  specific  date.  On  July  16,  Molotov  had  proposed  holding
elections  in  1955,  with  the  exact  date  to  be  decided  between  Vietnamese  and
Viet  Minh  authorities.  [Doc.  72]  The  Chinese  were  more  flexible.  In  a  talk  with
a  member  of  the  British  delegation,  Li  K'e-nung  argued  for  a  specific  date,  but
said  his  government  was  willing  to  set  it  within  two  or  three  years  of  the  cease-
fire. [Doc.  76]  The  compromise  formula  was  reportedly  worked  out  by  Molotov,
who,  at  a  meeting  July  19  attended  also  by  Eden,  Mendes-France,  Chou,  and
Dong,  drew  the  line  at  two  years.  It  was  agreed  in  the  Final  Declaration  that  the
Vietnamese  of  the  two  zones  would  consult  together  in  July  1955  and  reunify
Vietnam  by  national  plebiscite  one  year  later.  Importantly  for  the  Viet  Minh,
the  demarcation  line  was  said  to  be  "provisional  and  should  not  in  any  way  be
interpreted  as  constituting  a  political  or  territorial  boundary."  Representatives
of  the  member  states  on  the  ICC  would  act  as  a  commission  to  supervise  the
national  elections,  which  were  to  be  freely  conducted  by  secret  ballot.  As  shall
be  pointed  out  later,  however,  the  evident  intention  of  all  the  conferees  (includ-
ing the  United  States  and  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam)  to  see  Vietnam
reunified  was  to  a  large  extent  undercut  by  the  nature  of  the  military  and  political
settlements.

The  military  accords  on  Vietnam  also  stipulated  that  the  Joint  Commission,
which  was  to  take  over  the  work  of  the  military  commission  that  had  met  at
Trung  Gia,  would  have  general  responsibility  for  working  out  the  disengagement
of  forces  and  implementation  of  the  cease-fire.  French  Union  soldiers  were  to  be
removed  from  North  Vietnam  in  stages  within  300  days  (article  15),  a  lengthy
period  in  keeping  with  French  demands.  Thereafter,  the  introduction  into  the  two
zones  of  fresh  arms,  equipment,  and  personnel  was  prohibited  with  the  exception
of  normal  troop  rotation  and  replacement  of  damaged  or  destroyed  materiel
(articles  16  and  17).  The  establishment  of  new  military  bases  in  Vietnam,  and
the  adherence  of  either  zone  to  military  alliances,  were  also  proscribed  under
articles  18  and  19.

The  membership  and  powers  of  the  International  Control  Commission  were
finally  resolved  (Chapter  VI  of  the  accords).  Apparently  through  Chou  En-lai's
efforts,  agreement  was  reached  that  India,  Poland,  and  Canada  should  be  the
member  states  of  the  ICC.  The  ICC  was  empowered  to  form  fixed  and  mobile
inspection  teams  and  to  have  full  freedom  of  movement  in  both  zones  of  Viet-
nam. In  the  performance  of  these  tasks,  the  ICC  was  to  expect  complete  coopera-
tion from  local  civil  and  military  officials.  Its  functions  extended  to  control  of
the  movement  of  armed  forces  and  the  release  of  prisoners  of  war,  and  to  super-
vision of  the  demarcation  line,  frontiers,  ports,  and  airfields.

Less  clearly  decided  was  the  delicate  question  of  the  ICC's  relationship  to  the
Joint  Commission.  Generally,  the  plan  adopted  was  close  to  that  originally  sub-
mitted by  the  French  in  early  July,  wherein  the  ICC's  supremacy  was  tacitly
admitted.  The  ICC  was  to  be  informed  by  the  Joint  Commission  of  disputes
arising  out  of  differences  of  interpretation,  either  of  a  provision  or  of  fact,  that
the  Joint  Commission  could  not  resolve.  The  ICC  would  then  (article  40)  have
the  power  of  recommendation;  but,  quite  aside  from  the  limited  effectiveness  of
a  recommendation,  there  remained  the  problem  of  majority  or  unanimous  voting
by  the  ICC  in  reaching  agreement  to  recommend.  Under  article  42,  the  rule  of
unanimity  was  to  apply  to  "questions  concerning  violations,  or  threats  of  viola-
tions, which  might  lead  to  a  resumption  of  hostilities,"  namely,  a  refusal  to
regroup  is  provided  in  the  accords,  or  an  armed  violation  by  one  party  of  the
territory  of  the  other.  The  West,  which  had  pushed  hard  for  majority  rule,  had
to  settle  for  its  application  to  those  less  volatile  questions  that  would  not  be


160 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

considered  threats  to  the  peace.  Furthermore,  under  article  43,  recognition  was
taken  of  possible  splits  among  the  three  members  by  providing  for  majority  and
minority  reports;  but  these,  like  ICC  decisions,  could  be  no  more  than  suggestive,
and  as  such  wholly  dependent  upon  the  cooperativeness  of  the  conference  mem-
bers who  had  created  it.

Cambodia  and  Laos

In  conflict  with  the  wishes  of  the  Cambodian  and  Laotian  delegations,  cease-
fires in  their  countries  occurred  simultaneously  with  the  cessation  of  hostilities
in  Vietnam.  Nevertheless,  in  most  other  respects,  their  persistence  was  largely
responsible  for  settlements  highly  favorable  to  their  respective  interests.

In  the  first  place,  the  Agreement  on  the  Cessation  of  Hostilities  in  Cambodia
called  for  the  removal  of  nonnative  Free  Khmer  troops,  whether  Communist
Vietnamese  or  Cambodians,  ninety  days  from  the  cease-fire  date  (July  20).
(French  Union  units,  but  not  instructors,  were  also  scheduled  for  departure.)
As  the  Cambodian  delegation  had  promised,  those  insurgents  still  in  the  country
would  be  guaranteed  the  right  to  rejoin  the  national  community  and  to  partici-
pate, as  electors  or  candidates,  in  elections  scheduled  under  the  constitution  for
1955;  but  the  agreement  assured  their  demobilization  within  one  month  of  the
cease-fire.  Separate  joint  and  international  supervisory  commissions  for  Cambodia
were  established,  as  Phnom  Penh  had  demanded.  Finally,  a  declaration  issued
July  21  by  the  Cambodian  delegation  was  incorporated  into  the  accord  pro-
claiming, in  effect,  Phnom  Penh's  inherent  right  of  self-defense.  The  royal  gov-
ernment vowed  not  to  enter  into  military  alliances  "not  in  conformity  with  the
principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations";  nor,  so  long  as  its  security  was
not  threatened,  would  Cambodia  permit  the  establishment  of  foreign  military
bases.  As  for  war  materiel  and  military  personnel,  the  delegation  made  clear  that
these  would  not  be  solicited  during  the  period  July  20,  1954,  to  the  election  date
in  1955  "except  for  the  purpose  of  the  effective  defence  of  the  territory."  Thus,
after  the  elections,  Cambodia  proclaimed  itself  free  to  take  any  steps  it  considered
necessary  for  its  security,  whether  or  not  such  steps  were  absolutely  necessary  for
self-defense.

Cambodia's  acquisition  of  considerable  latitude  was  entirely  in  keeping  with
the  royal  government's  expressed  insistence  on  not  being  either  neutralized  or
demilitarized.  On  this  point,  the  Cambodians  received  indirect  assurance  from
the  United  States  that  their  security  would  in  some  way  be  covered  by  the  South-
east Asian  pact  despite  their  unilateral  declaration.  Toward  the  end  of  the  con-
ference, Philip  Bonsai  of  the  State  Department  and  the  American  delegation,  told
Sam  Sary  that  he  (Bonsai)  "was  confident  U.S.  and  other  interested  countries
looked  forward  to  discussing  with  Cambodian  government"  the  security  problem
upon  implementation  of  a  cease-fire.  When  Sam  Sary  called  a  few  days  later  on
Smith  in  the  company  of  Nong  Kimny,  the  Under  Secretary  recommended  that
Phnom  Penh,  at  the  conference,  state  its  intention  not  to  have  foreign  bases  on
its  territory  and  not  to  enter  into  military  alliances.  At  the  same  time,  though,
Cambodia  would  be  free  to  import  arms  and  to  employ  French  military  instruc-
tors and  technicians.  Cambodia  might  not  be  able  to  join  SEATO  under  this  ar-
rangement, Smith  said,  but  it  could  still  benefit  from  it.  Smith:

assured  the  Cambodian  Foreign  Minister  that,  in  our  view,  any  aggression
overt  or  covert  against  Cambodian  territory  would  bring  pact  into  operation
even  though  Cambodia  not  a  member.  I  took  position  that  French  Union


The  Geneva  Conference,  May— July,  1954  161

membership  afforded  Cambodia  adequate  desirable  means  of  securing
through  France  necessary  arms  some  of  which  would  be  American  as  well
as  necessary  instructors  and  technicians  some  of  which  might  well  be  Ameri-
can trained.

Nong  Kimny  replied  that  Cambodia  relied  heavily  on  the  United  States  for  pro-
tection against  future  aggression.  The  way  was  thus  cleared  for  the  subsequent
inclusion  of  Cambodia  in  the  Protocol  to  the  SEATO  treaty.

The  cease-fire  agreement  on  Laos  followed  lines  similar  to  those  drawn  for
Cambodia.  A  separate  joint  commission  was  set  up  to  supervise  the  withdrawal
of  Pathet  Lao  units,  although  provision  was  made  for  their  prior  regroupment
in  the  provinces  of  Phong  Saly  and  Sam  Neua.*  Although  Laos  was  prohibited
from  seeking  to  augment  its  military  establishment,  the  royal  government  was
specifically  permitted  a  maximum  of  1,500  French  training  instructors.  More-
over, the  prohibition  against  the  establishment  of  foreign  military  bases  on  Lao-
tian territory  did  not  apply  to  two  French  bases  in  operation  under  a  1949  treaty,
and  employing  3,500  Frenchmen.  Laos,  like  Cambodia,  was  allowed  to  import
arms  and  other  military  equipment  essential  for  self-defense;  but  Vientiane  also
issued  a  unilateral  declaration  on  July  21  making  clear,  in  terms  that  nearly
duplicated  those  used  in  Cambodia's  declaration,  that  its  refrainment  from  alli-
ances and  foreign  military  bases  was  limited  to  situations  in  which  Laotian  se-
curity was  not  threatened.  In  view  of  Vientiane's  expressed  hope  for  American
protection,  its  delegates  had  succeeded  admirably  in  getting  a  settlement  con-
taining terms  that  restricted,  but  did  not  eliminate,  Laotian  control  over  their
security  requirements.

F. DISSENTING  VIEWS:  THE  AMERICAN
AND  VIETNAMESE  POSITIONS

No  delegate  at  the  final  plenary  session  on  Indochina  July  21  should  have
been  surprised  when  Under  Secretary  Smith  issued  a  unilateral  statement  of
the  American  position.  The  United  States  had  frequently  indicated,  publicly  and
privately,  directly  and  indirectly,  that  it  would  not  be  cosignatory  with  the  Com-
munist powers  to  any  agreement  and  that,  at  best,  it  would  agree  only  to  "respect"
the  final  settlement.  At  the  restricted  session  of  July  18,  Smith  had,  moreover,
indicated  the  points  which  were  to  become  basic  features  of  his  final  statement.
Despite  the  fact  that  the  accords  were  in  line  with  the  Seven  Points  in  nearly
every  particular,  it  would  have  been  presumptuous  of  any  delegation  to  believe
that  the  United  States,  given  the  implacable  hostility  of  Administration  leaders
to  Communist  China  and  to  any  agreement  that  would  imply  American  approval
of  a  territorial  cession  to  the  Communists,  would  formally  sign  the  Geneva  ac-
cords.

Bedell  Smith,  revealing  a  considerably  more  pliant  approach  to  dealing  with
the  Communist  world,  was  able  to  exact  from  Washington  agreement  to  partial
American  acceptance  of  the  Final  Declaration.  On  July  19  he  had  been  ap-
proached by  Mendes-France,  who  from  the  beginning  had  sought  to  identify  the
United  States  as  closely  as  possible  with  the  final  terms,  with  the  proposal  that

*  The  Laotian  delegation  also  issued  a  declaration  averring  the  government's  willingness
to  integrate  former  insurgents  into  the  national  community  without  reprisal.  Elections
in  Laos  were  scheduled  for  September  1955,  and  former  Pathet  Lao  were  promised  the
right  to  participate  in  the  balloting  as  electors  or  candidates.


162 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  1

Washington  not  simply  respect  any  military  agreements  reached,  but  in  addition
take  note  of  them  and  the  political  statements  that  comprised  the  first  nine  para-
graphs of  the  proposed  conference  declaration.  Mendes-France  indicated  the
French  would  be  sharply  disappointed  if  the  United  States  could  not  at  least
take  note  of  those  portions  of  the  declaration.  Smith,  apparently  swayed  by  the
premier's  views,  recommended  to  Washington  that  his  instructions  be  amended
to  provide  for  taking  note  in  the  event  the  Final  Declaration  was  substantially
as  the  French  had  indicated.  [Doc.  80]  Dulles  gave  his  approval,  demurring  only
on  the  second  part  of  paragraph  9  (in  the  final  version,  paragraph  13),  which
the  Secretary  said  "seems  to  imply  a  multilateral  engagement  with  Communists
which  would  be  inconsistent  with  our  basic  approach  and  which  subsequently
might  enable  Communist  China  to  charge  us  with  alleged  violations  of  agreement
to  which  it  might  claim  both  governments  became  parties."  [Doc.  81]  When
Smith,  therefore,  issued  his  unilateral  statement,  note  was  taken  only  of  the  first
twelve  paragraphs  of  the  Final  Declaration;  but  this  was  much  more  than  had
been  called  for  in  his  revised  instructions  of  July  16.

In  line  with  his  instructions.  Smith  declared  on  behalf  of  the  Government  that
the  United  States  would  "refrain  from  the  threat  or  the  use  of  force  to  disturb"
the  accords.  Moreover,  the  United  States  "would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggres-
sion in  violation  of  the  aforesaid  agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously
threatening  international  peace  and  security."  Finally,  Smith  reiterated  a  U.S.
policy  declaration  of  June  29,  made  during  the  visit  of  Eden  and  Churchill,  that
registered  Washington's  support  of  UN  supervision  of  free  elections  to  reunify
countries  "now  divided  against  their  will.  .  .  ."  Smith  mentioned  on  this  point
that  the  United  States  could  not  associate  itself  with  any  arrangement  that  would
hinder  "its  traditional  position  that  peoples  are  entitled  to  determine  their  own
future.  .  .  ."

Smith's  caution  against  "any  renewal  of  aggression"  deserves  additional  com-
ment inasmuch  as  it  was  cited  by  President  Kennedy  (in  a  letter  to  President
Ngo  Dinh  Diem  on  December  14,  1961)  as  the  basis  for  the  American  commit-
ment to  South  Vietnam's  defense.  Viewed  in  the  context  of  the  conference,  the
statement  does  not  seem  to  have  been  intended  as  an  open-ended  American  com-
mitment to  South  Vietnam  against  possible  aggression  from  the  North.  Rather,
the  Administration  apparently  intended  the  statement  as  a  warning  to  the  Viet
Minh  that  should  they,  within  the  two-year  interval  before  general  elections,
"renew"  what  Washington  and  Saigon  regarded  as  their  "aggression"  since  1946,
the  United  States  would  be  gravely  concerned.  Smith's  statement,  in  short,  seems
to  have  been  limited  to  the  period  July  1954  to  July  1956.

That  part  of  Smith's  unilateral  statement  dealing  with  United  Nations  super-
vision of  elections  is  also  noteworthy.  Coming  in  the  wake  of  Dulles'  expressed
concern  over  provision  in  the  accords  for  ICC  supervision,  [Doc.  81]  Smith's
reference  to  the  UN  may  have  forecast  American  unwillingness  to  back  an  elec-
toral process  not  supervised  by  the  Organization.  Inasmuch  as  the  United  States
delegation  had  consistently  pushed  at  Geneva  for  United  Nations  rather  than  any
other  form  of  international  machinery.  Smith  may  have  meant  to  give  an  advance
signal  of  American  displeasure  with  free  Vietnamese  elections  that  the  UN  would
be  prevented  from  overseeing.

American  qualifications  to  the  Geneva  accords  paled  beside  those  made  by  the
South  Vietnam  delegation.  However  naively,  the  "South"  Vietnamese  refused  to
accept  a  divided  country  and  believed,  to  the  end  of  the  conference,  that  the
French  had  brazenly  and  illegally  sold  out  Vietnamese  interests.  Vietnam's  anger
at  French  manipulation  of  its  political  future  was  reflected  in  a  note  handed  to


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  163

the  French  delegation  on  July  17  by  Nguyen  Huu  Chau.  [Doc.  73]  The  note
maintained  that  not  until  the  day  before  (an  exaggeration  by  about  three  weeks,
it  would  appear)  did  Vietnam  learn  that  at  the  very  time  the  French  High  Com-
mand had  ordered  the  evacuation  of  troops  from  important  areas  in  the  Tonkin
Delta,  the  French  had  also  "accepted  abandoning  to  the  Viet  Minh  all  of  that
part  situated  north  of  the  eighteenth  parallel  and  that  the  delegation  of  the  Viet
Minh  might  claim  an  even  more  advantageous  demarcation  line."  The  Vietnamese
delegation  protested  against  having  been  left  "in  complete  ignorance"  of  French
proposals,  which  were  said  not  to  "take  any  account  of  the  unanimous  will  for
national  unity  of  the  Vietnamese  people."

While  it  may  have  been  absurd  for  the  Vietnamese  to  believe  that  partition  was
avoidable  given  Viet  Minh  strength,  their  rationale  for  keeping  the  country
united  was,  as  matters  developed,  eminently  clear-sighted.  In  speeches  during
June  and  July,  their  leaders  had  warned  that  partition  would  be  merely  a  tem-
porary interlude  before  the  renewal  of  fighting.  When  the  Viet  Minh  first  pro-
posed a  temporary  division  of  territory,  the  Defense  Minister,  Phan  Huy  Quat,
said  in  Saigon  on  June  2  that  partition  would  "risk  reviving  the  drama  of  the
struggle  between  the  North  and  the  South."  Diem,  in  his  investiture  speech  of
early  July,  warned  against  a  cease-fire  that  would  mean  partition,  for  that  arrange-
ment "can  only  be  the  preparation  for  another  more  deadly  war.  .  .  ."  And  Gen-
eral Nguyen  Van  Hinh,  head  of  the  Vietnamese  National  Army,  declared:

To  realize  a  cease-fire  by  partition  of  Vietnamese  territory  can  be  only  a
temporary  measure  to  stop  the  bloodshed  but  not  to  end  the  war.  And  it  is
possible  that  we  shall  have  to  face  a  cold  war  as  in  Korea  where  both  sides'
troops  have  their  fingers  on  the  triggers  of  their  guns  all  the  time,  and  people
are  thinking  only  of  recovering  what  has  been  given  up  under  the  pressure
of  the  circumstances.

Although  their  struggle  against  partition,  which  reached  a  climax  in  the  after-
math of  the  signing  of  the  accords  with  huge  rallies  in  the  major  cities,  proved
futile,  the  Vietnamese  early  gave  notice  that  they  would  accept  neither  partition
nor  a  fixed  date  for  national  elections.  We  need  only  recall  the  statements  by
Bao  Dai's  cabinet  in  Paris  on  the  eve  of  the  conference  to  find  evidence  of  Viet-
nam's early  determination  that  it  would  not  be  party  to  a  sell-out  of  its  own
territory.  When  partition  became  certain  in  July  with  the  circulation  of  draft
final  declarations,  the  Vietnamese  delegation  became  more  vocal.  At  the  final
plenary  session,  Tran  Van  Do  said:  ".  .  .  the  Government  of  the  State  of  Viet-
Nam  wishes  the  Conference  to  take  note  of  the  fact  that  it  reserves  its  full  free-
dom of  action  in  order  to  safeguard  the  sacred  right  of  the  Vietnamese  people
to  its  territorial  unity,  national  independence,  and  freedom."  When  asked  to  con-
sent to  the  military  accords  and  the  Final  Declaration,  Do  requested  insertion  of
the  following  text  into  the  Declaration:

The  conference  takes  note  of  the  Declaration  of  the  Government  of  the  State
of  Viet-Nam  undertaking:

to  make  and  support  every  effort  to  reestablish  a  real  and  lasting  peace  in
Viet-Nam;

not  to  use  force  to  resist  the  procedures  for  carrying  the  ceasefire  into
effect,  in  spite  of  the  objections  and  reservations  that  the  State  of  Viet-Nam
has  expressed,  especially  in  its  final  statement.

The  request  was  denied.


164 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

As  for  elections,  the  Vietnamese  believed  that  the  war  situation  compelled  the
postponement  of  elections  until  the  country  had  achieved  a  measure  of  internal
stability.  As  early  as  May,  Diem  indicated  his  opposition  to  elections  for  a  Na-
tional Assembly,  much  less  to  national  elections  for  the  presidency.  In  its  note
to  the  French  delegation,  moreover,  the  Vietnamese  asserted  that  a  cease-fire
without  disarmament  was  incompatible  with  elections;  the  regroupment  of  the
armed  forces  of  the  belligerents  into  separate  zones  was  said  to  compromise
their  freedom  in  advance.  In  Vietnam's  view,  elections  could  only  be  considered
after  security  and  peace  had  been  established,  thereby  excluding  a  set  time  inter-
val of  two  years.  [Doc.  73]

Having  taken  these  positions,  the  Vietnamese  could  hardly  adhere  to  the  Final
Declaration.  At  the  same  time,  they  protested  against  the  "hasty  conclusion  of
the  Armistice  Agreement  by  the  French  and  Vietminh  High  Commanders
only  .  .  ."  (as  Tran  Van  Do  put  it  at  the  July  21  session).  Inasmuch  as  the
military  accords,  by  prearrangement,  were  signed  by  French  and  Viet  Minh
commanders  precisely  to  avoid  seeking  Vietnamese  consent,  there  was  nothing
Saigon  could  do  but  protest.  Nevertheless,  by  having  protested,  they  were  assert-
ing that  the  treaties  with  France  of  June  4  had  indeed  made  Vietnam  a  sovereign
state,  that  the  interests  of  non-Communist  Vietnamese  were  deeply  involved  in
the  settlement,  and  that  France's  by-passing  of  the  Bao  Dai  government  only
made  the  settlement  possible,  not  legal.  Despite  article  27  of  the  agreement  on
Vietnam,  which  bound  "successors"  (such  as  Vietnam)  to  the  signatories  to  re-
spect and  enforce  the  agreement,  Vietnam  was  in  a  legally  persuasive  position
to  argue  that  France  could  not  assume  liabilities  in  its  behalf,  least  of  all  to  the
political  provisions  contained  in  the  Final  Declaration,  which  was  an  unsigned
document.*


G.  SUMMARY

Throughout  the  rapid  series  of  compromises  in  the  last  thirty  days  of  the
Geneva  Conference,  American  diplomacy  revealed  a  constancy  of  purpose  fully
in  line  with  the  Eisenhower  Administration's  global  foreign  policy.  Based  largely
on  the  unfortunate  experiences  at  Panmunjom,  the  Administration  could  not  rec-
oncile itself  to  the  notion  that  Sino-Soviet  negotiating  tactics  in  the  post-Stalin
period  of  peaceful  coexistence  had  changed.  Consequently,  even  as  the  realiza-
tion dawned  that  the  Communists  could  not  be  expelled  from  Indochina  and  that
some  compromise  with  them  by  France  was  inevitable,  the  Administration  stuck
fast  to  the  position  that  the  United  States  delegation  to  the  conference  would
only  assist,  but  not  take  an  active  part,  in  bringing  about  an  acceptable  settlement.
From  June  on,  the  delegation  was  under  instructions  to  remain  clear  of  any  in-
volvement in  the  negotiations  such  as  might  implicate  or  commit  the  United
States  to  the  final  terms  reached,  yet  simultaneously  was  to  maintain  an  influential
role  in  making  the  best  of  difficult  circumstances.  British  and  French  agreement
to  the  Seven  Points  proved  a  diplomatic  victory,  not  because  their  acceptance
of  them  assured  a  reasonable  settlement  but  because,  quite  contrary  to  American
expectations,  they  returned  to  Geneva  prepared  to  hold  the  line  against  exorbitant

*  Article  27,  which  is  frequently  cited  to  demonstrate  that  Vietnam  was  bound  to  abide
by  the  accords,  and  particularly  the  elections  provision,  refers  to  "signatories  of  the
present  [military]  Agreement.  .  .  ."  Hence,  the  article  would  seem  not  to  obligate
France's  "successor"  with  respect  to  any  provisions  of  the  Final  Declaration,  a  docu-
ment to  which  South  Vietnam  did  not  adhere.


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  165

Communist  demands.  Allied  agreement  to  future  discussions  of  a  regional  defense
system  for  Southeast  Asia  was  really  a  hedge  against  a  French  sell-out  at  Geneva;
in  the  event  Vietnam,  and  parts  of  Cambodia  and  Laos,  were  ceded  to  the  Com-
munist insurgents,  the  United  States  would  at  least  have  Anglo-French  consent
to  protect  the  security  of  what  remained  of  Indochina  and  its  neighbors.

The  Seven  Points  represented  principles,  not  American  objectives.  They  con-
stituted not  a  statement  of  goals  to  be  achieved  by  the  United  States,  but  of
principles  to  be  adopted  by  the  British  and  French  negotiators  toward  concluding
a  satisfactory  settlement.  In  this  manner,  the  Administration  could  preserve  its
dignity  before  anticipated  Vietnamese  outrage  at  partition  and  domestic  displeas-
ure at  further  Communist  inroads  in  the  Far  East  without  losing  its  ability  to
influence  the  terms.  Under  Secretary  Smith's  final  statement  taking  note  of  the
agreements  and  vowing  not  to  disturb  them  thus  culminated  a  careful  policy  that
rejected  an  American  commitment  to  the  accords  such  as  might  identify  the  Ad-
ministration with  a  cession  of  territory  and  people  to  the  Communist  bloc.

The  Geneva  Conference  left  much  work  undone,  especially  on  a  political  settle-
ment for  Vietnam.  The  State  of  Vietnam,  like  the  United  States,  had  refused  to
adhere  to  the  Final  Declaration  and  was  not  signatory  to  the  military  accord  that
partitioned  the  country.  In  the  next  section,  the  focus  is  therefore  on  the  practical
effect  of  the  Geneva  accords,  the  expectations  of  the  conferees  concerning  them,
and  the  extent  to  which  the  major  powers,  in  reaching  a  settlement,  achieved  the
objectives  they  had  set  for  themselves.

VIII. THE  MEANING  OF  GENEVA

Much  of  the  controversy  surrounding  the  American  involvement  in  Vietnam
relates  to  the  post-Geneva  period,  in  particular  to  the  two-year  interval  before
national  elections  were  to  bring  about  Vietnam's  reunification.  To  address  the
question  whether  the  United  States  instigated  or  colluded  with  the  Government
of  Vietnam  to  defy  the  Final  Declaration's  stipulation  for  national  elections
would  broaden  this  paper  beyond  its  intended  scope.  What  is  relevant,  however,
are  the  documented  or  presumed  expectations  and  objectives  of  the  major  partici-
pants concerning  Vietnam,  as  well  as  Cambodia  and  Laos,  at  the  time  the  con-
ference closed.  How  had  the  accords  met  the  aims  of  the  participants,  and  to
what  extent  were  objectives  intertwined  with,  or  perhaps  divorced  from,  expec-
tations? To  anticipate,  the  present  argument  over  the  failure  to  hold  elections  in
July  1956  overlooks  the  relative  unimportance  of  them,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,
to  the  five  major  powers  at  the  Geneva  Conference;  their  objectives  only  second-
arily took  into  account  the  expectations  of  the  Vietnamese,  north  and  south.

An  assessment  of  the  hopes  and  goals  of  the  Geneva  conferees  in  the  immedi-
,  ate  aftermath  of  the  conference  should,  in  the  first  place,  be  differentiated  from
:  the  practical  effect  of  the  accords  they  drew  up.  The  distinction  not  often  made,
yet  highly  important  to  an  understanding  of  the  conference  and  its  achievements,
is  between  the  intent  of  the  parties  regarding  Vietnam  and  the  seemingly  contra-
dictory consequences  of  their  agreement.

A. THE  PRACTICAL  NATURE  OF  THE  ACCORDS

With  the  exception  of  South  Vietnam,  every  nation  represented  at  the  confer-
ence came  to  believe  that  partition  was  the  only  way  to  separate  the  combatants,
settle  the  widely  disparate  military  and  political  demands  of  the  French  and  Viet
Minh,  and  conclude  an  armistice.  It  might  further  be  argued  (although  the  evi-


166 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

dence  available  does  not  actually  permit  a  definitive  statement  one  way  or  the
other)  that  these  eight  delegations  intended  the  partition  line  to  be  temporary
inasmuch  as  they  all  desired  Vietnamese  elections  in  1956.  But  what  needs  to  be
pointed  out  is  that  the  accords  themselves  did  not  further  that  intent.  By  creating
two  regimes  responsible  for  "civil  administration"  (article  14-a  of  the  Vietnam
armistice  agreement),  by  providing  for  the  regroupment  of  forces  to  two  zones
and  for  the  movement  of  persons  to  the  zone  of  their  choice,  and  by  putting  off
national  elections  for  two  years,  the  conferees  had  actually  made  a  future  po-
litical settlement  for  Vietnam  extremely  unlikely.  Certainly,  the  separation  of
Vietnam  at  the  17th  parallel  was  designed  to  facilitate  the  armistice,  not  to  create
political  subdivisions;  but  its  unintended  effect  was  to  allow  time  for  the  de-
velopment of  two  governments,  headed  by  totally  divergent  personalities  and
committed  to  antithetical  political  philosophies,  foreign  policies,  and  socio-eco-
nomic systems.  Thus,  the  call  for  elections  in  the  Final  Declaration  had  as  little
chance  of  implementation  in  Vietnam  as  previously  in  Korea  and  Germany,  a
point  brought  home  by  Vietnamese  officials  and  reinforced  by  the  failure  of  the
same  Geneva  conferees  to  agree  on  a  political  settlement  in  Korea.  "Elections,"
Victor  Bator  has  commented  "can,  indeed,  decide  secondary  problems  of  co-
existence in  circumstances  where  some  measurable  minimum  basis  for  political
agreement  exists.  But  they  are  incapable  of  acceptance  by  two  opposing  states,
or  parts  of  a  state,  when  diametrically  opposite  philosophies  are  involved."  If  the
intent  of  the  Geneva  accords  was  subverted,  the  subverters  were  the  conferees
themselves,  who  aspired  to  an  ideal  political  settlement  incompatible  with  the
physical  and  psychological  dismemberment  of  Vietnam  on  July  21,  1954.

B. OBJECTIVES  OF  THE  PARTICIPANTS:  THE  COMMUNIST  SIDE

Whether  or  not  one  accepts  the  view  offered  here  that  the  central  political
provision  of  the  Final  Declaration  was  decisively  undercut  by  provisions  of  the
military  accords  and  the  Declaration  itself,  an  examination  of  the  objectives  of
the  Soviet  Union  and  Communist  China  can  go  far  toward  determining,  albeit
by  surmisal,  the  importance  they,  as  distinct  from  the  DRV,  attached  to  Viet-
namese unity.  For  it  is  the  conclusion  here  that  Vietnamese  unity,  whether
achieved  by  free  elections  or  the  disintegration  of  South  Vietnam,  was  not  a
priority  objective  of  Moscow  or  Peking  even  though  both  powers  may  well  have
anticipated  an  all-Communist  Vietnam  by  July  1956.  If  this  is  so,  we  may  ask,
what  were  the  primary  aims  of  Moscow  and  Peking  in  supporting  a  settlement?
Why  did  the  Communists  apparently  strive  for  a  settlement,  and  why  did  Molo-
tov  in  particular,  who  was  not  personally  identified  in  Western  eyes  at  the  time  as
a  vigorous  proponent  of  detente,  play  such  a  key  role  in  keeping  the  conference
from  the  brink  of  failure?

Although  it  would  appear  that,  on  the  major  issues  at  least,  the  Soviet  Union
coordinated  its  actions  with  Communist  China,  the  two  Communist  powers  were
clearly  pursuing  separate  national  interests  in  working  toward  a  setdement  of  the
war.  The  reconciliation  of  those  interests  seems  to  have  been  achieved  not  so
much  through  Soviet  ability  (which  did  exist)  to  compel  Chinese  acquiescence
as  through  a  common  desire  for  a  settlement.

Soviet  Objectives  at  the  Conference

In  retrospect,  the  Soviet  Union  seems  to  have  had  four  major  objectives  at  the
conference:  (1)  to  avert  a  major  war  crisis  over  Indochina  that  would  stimulate
Western  unity,  enable  the  United  States  to  gain  support  it  previously  lacked  for


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  167

"united  action,"  and  conceivably  force  Moscow  into  a  commitment  to  defend
the  Chinese;  (2)  to  reduce  the  prospects  for  successful  passage  of  EDC  in  the
French  National  Assembly;  (3)  to  heighten  the  prestige  of  the  Soviet  Union  as
a  world  peacemaker;  (4)  to  bolster  the  prestige  of  Communist  China,  probably
more  as  an  adjunct  to  the  Soviet  drive  for  leadership  of  the  "peaceful  coexistence"
movement  than  as  a  means  of  supporting  any  Chinese  claim  to  unrivaled  leader-
ship in  Asia.

On  the  first  point,  the  Soviets  were  surely  aware  that  the  United  States,  under
certain  conditions,  was  prepared  to  consider  active  involvement  in  the  war.  While
united  action  was  a  dead  issue  in  Washington  by  mid-June,  the  Soviets  (and  the
Chinese  as  well)  could  not  have  known  this.  Moreover,  newspaper  reports  of  the
time  added  both  credence  and  uncertainty  to  American  military  plans.  In  the
course  of  private  discussions  at  Geneva,  Molotov  indicated  his  concern  that  a
breakdown  of  the  conference  might  lead  to  continued  fighting  right  up  to  the
point  of  World  War  III.  The  French  and  British  did  nothing  to  dispel  those  fears.
Chauvel,  for  instance,  told  the  Russian  delegate,  Kuznetsov,  that  France's  pro-
posed division  of  Vietnam  at  the  1  8th  parallel  would  be  more  acceptable  to  the
other  conferees  than  the  unreasonable  Viet  Minh  demand  for  the  13th  parallel,
and  that  a  settlement  along  the  French  line  would  thereby  avert  the  risk  of  an
internationalization  of  the  conflict.  And  Mendes-France  vowed  to  back  his  call
for  conscripts  by  informing  Molotov  he  "did  not  intend  Geneva  would  turn  into
a  Panmunjom."

The  possibility  of  renewed  fighting  leading  to  a  wider  war  was  particularly
influential  on  the  Soviets,  it  would  seem,  as  a  consequence  of  Moscow's  inner
debate  during  1953  and  1954  over  American  strategic  intentions  and  their  mean-
ing for  the  Soviet  defense  system.  The  views  of  the  so-called  Khrushchev  wing
apparently  won  out  in  the  spring  of  1954:  The  United  States  was  considered
fully  capable  of  initiating  a  nuclear  exchange  and  a  new  world  war.  Free-wheeling
discussion  in  the  Western  press  on  the  foreign  policy  implications  of  Eisenhower's
"New  Look"  and  Dulles'  "massive  retaliation"  speech  of  January  12,  1954,  was
closely  followed  by  the  Soviets,  who  may  have  been  persuaded  in  their  pessimistic
assumptions  regarding  American  strategy  by  the  very  ambiguity  of  American
"reliance"  on  nuclear  weapons  to  combat  Communist  aggression.  In  fact,  it  can
,  be  argued  that  even  though  the  United  States  and  its  allies  went  to  the  conference
;  table  from  a  position  of  diplomatic  weakness,  their  hands  were  considerably
strengthened  because  of  Soviet  uncertainty  over  what  the  West  might  do  in  the
event  the  conference  failed.  Inasmuch  as  Soviet  analyses  by  no  means  excluded
American  recklessness  with  nuclear  weapons,  Moscow  might  have  been  highly
reluctant  to  press  too  vigorously  for  the  West's  acceptance  of  exorbitant  Viet
Minh  demands.  Soviet  awareness  that  the  United  States  had  seriously  considered
active  involvement  in  Indochina  prior  to  the  fall  of  Dienbienphu  may  therefore
have  been  a  significant  lever  for  the  West  in  the  Geneva  negotiations.  Had  the
opposite  perception  been  true — had  the  Soviets,  that  is,  been  confident  that  the
American  Administration  would  be  highly  sober,  conservative,  and  cautious  in
responding  to  war  situations — Molotov  might  have  been  instructed  to  play  a  far
more  audacious  game  while  the  Viet  Minh  intensified  their  military  operations.
Dulles'  reputation  as  a  militant  anti-Communist  with  tremendous  influence  on
Eisenhower  probably  served  the  Western  cause  well  at  Geneva.

As  a  result,  to  conclude  on  this  point,  one  of  the  Soviets'  principal  aims  at  the
conference  was  to  diminish  the  possibility  of  American  unilateral  or  multilateral
intervention  in  the  likely  belief  that  intervention  would  have  built  up  tremendous
pressure  on  Moscow  to  make  new  commitments  in  Southeast  Asia.  While  this


168 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

outlook  did  not  prevent  the  Soviets  from  at  first  seeking  to  capitalize  on  the
change  in  government  in  Paris  from  Laniel  to  Mendes-France,  it  did  work  in  the
general  direction  of  a  reasonable  settlement  that  would  be  honorable  for  the
French  and  still  valuable  to  the  Viet  Minh.  The  Russians  evidently  believed  that
so  long  as  the  French  (and  the  British)  were  kept  interested  in  a  settlement,  the
Americans  would  be  hard-pressed  to  disregard  their  allies  and  intervene.

That  Moscow  may  have  been  anxious  about  a  wider  war  does  not,  however,
address  the  incentives  it  may  have  had  in  concluding  the  cease-fire.  Here,  the
European  Defense  Community  treaty  must  have  been  uppermost  in  Molotov's
mind.  No  evidence  has  been  found  to  support  the  contention  that  Molotov
explicitly  baited  Mendes-France  with  a  lenient  Indochina  settlement  in  return  for
Assembly  rejection  of  EDC.  But  Molotov  need  not  have  been  that  obtrusive.
Throughout  1953  and  into  1954,  Soviet  propaganda  was  dominated  by  comments
on  EDC  and  the  danger  of  a  rearmed  Germany.  It  was  certainly  in  Soviet  inter-
ests to  pressure  the  Viet  Minh  for  concessions  to  the  French,  since  removal  of
the  French  command  from  Indochina  would  restore  French  force  levels  on  the
Continent  and  thereby  probably  offset  their  need  for  an  EDC.  Soviet  interests
thus  dictated  the  sacrifice  of  Viet  Minh  goals  if  necessary  to  prevent  German  re-
militarization. Given  Moscow's  belated  attention  to  the  Indochina  war,  it  appears
that  the  consolidation  of  Viet  Minh  gains  short  of  complete  reunification  of  Viet-
nam was  more  than  sufficient  to  justify  termination  of  the  struggle  in  Soviet  eyes
— and  this  perception,  it  might  be  added,  dovetailed  with  what  seems  to  have
been  the  Chinese  outlook.

Thirdly,  the  worldwide  Soviet  peace  offensive  which  gained  priority  in  the
aftermath  of  Stalin's  death  could  be  given  added  impetus  through  vigorous  Soviet
support  of  an  Indochina  settlement.  This  point,  in  fact,  was  the  theme  of  Molo-
tov's closing  remarks  to  the  conference  on  July  21.  He  called  the  accords  "a
major  victory  for  the  forces  of  peace  and  a  major  step  towards  a  reduction  of
international  tensions."  Considering  that  the  conference  had  demonstrated  the
value  of  international  negotiations  to  settle  dangerous  disputes,  Molotov  said:
"The  results  of  the  Geneva  Conference  have  confirmed  the  rightness  of  the
principle  which  is  fundamental  to  the  whole  foreign  policy  of  the  Soviet  Union,
namely,  that  there  are  no  issues  in  the  contemporary  international  situation  which
cannot  be  solved  and  settled  through  negotiations  and  by  agreements  designed  to
consolidate  peace."  At  a  time  when  the  United  States  was  alleged  to  be  jeopard-
izing world  peace  with  its  "policy  of  strength,"  the  Soviet  Union  could  lay  claim
to  sparing  no  effort  in  the  struggle  for  ways  to  avoid  a  nuclear  holocaust.

In  this  light.  Communist  China  was  important  to  the  USSR  as  a  partner  in  the
peace  offensive.  While  Moscow  could  not  have  wished  to  see  China  so  gain  in
prestige  as  to  rival  the  Soviet  Union  in  Asia  or  elsewhere,  the  Russians  do  seem,
in  1954,  to  have  considered  a  gain  in  Chinese  influence  highly  desirable  if  only
because  the  United  States  would  be  bound  to  suffer  a  corresponding  loss.  As
Molotov  phrased  it  on  July  21 :

.  .  .  the  Geneva  Conference  indicated  the  great  positive  importance  that
the  participation  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  has  in  the  settlement  of
urgent  international  problems.  The  course  of  work  at  this  Conference  has
shown  that  any  artificial  obstacles  on  the  road  to  China's  participation  in  the
settlement  of  international  affairs,  which  are  still  being  put  up  by  aggressive
circles  of  some  countries,  are  being  swept  away  by  life  itself.

Noteworthy  is  Molotov's  omission  of  the  additional  claim  made  at  the  time  by
Peking  that  China's  participation  was  absolutely  essential  to  the  solution  of  Asian


The  Geneva  Conference,  May— July,  1954  169

problems.  While  the  Soviet  foreign  minister  was  perhaps  thinking  in  terms  of
CPR  admission  to  the  United  Nations,  the  Chinese  apparently  were  looking  be-
yond the  UN  to  the  kind  of  full-scale  diplomatic  effort  that  would  earn  them
Asia's  respect  as  founders  of  what  was  later  termed  the  "Bandung  spirit."  Nor
did  Molotov  assert  that  China's  work  at  the  conference  had  earned  it  a  status
equivalent  to  one  of  the  major  powers.  The  Soviets  were  willing  to  admit  that
Peking  had  gained  a  new  importance  as  a  result  of  the  conference,  but  they
refused  to  go  as  far  as  the  Chinese  in  asserting  China's  first-rank  status  either  in
Asia  or  worldwide.

The  Soviets,  then,  had  much  to  gain  from  an  honorable  settlement  of  the
Indochina  war  and  much  to  risk  in  permitting  the  talks  to  drag  on  inconclusively.
The  Viet  Minh  had  proven  their  strength  as  a  national  liberation  movement  and
had  been  amply  rewarded  with  a  firm  territorial  base  assured  by  international
agreement.  With  overriding  interests  in  Western  Europe,  Moscow  no  doubt  found
great  appeal  in  giving  the  French  a  face-saving  "out"  from  Indochina.  That  EDC
was  eventually  defeated  in  the  National  Assembly  (in  August)  was  testimony
not  to  the  cleverness  of  any  Soviet  "deal"  with  Mendes-France,  but  simply  to  a
low-cost  Soviet  diplomatic  gamble  that  paid  off  handsomely.

I  Chinese  Objectives

\ For  Peking,  a  negotiated  settlement  of  the  Indochina  war  represented  an  im-

!  portant  opportunity  to  propel  China  forward  as  a  major  Asian  power  whose
voice  in  Asian  councils  could  not  be  ignored.  When  the  Berlin  Conference  de-
cided in  February  1954  to  hold  an  international  conference  on  Indochina,  the

;  Chinese  applauded  the  move  and  prophesied  then  that  the  People's  Republic,  as
an  invitee,  would  thereby  gain  recognition  of  its  major  role  in  Asian  affairs.  With
the  Geneva  Conference  coming  at  a  time  of  vigorous  Chinese  diplomatic  activity
in  India  and  Burma,  Peking  probably  considered  a  settlement  short  of  a  com-
plete Viet  Minh  victory  acceptable,  since  it  would  prove  China's  sincere  com-
mitment to  peace.  Had  the  CPR  spurred  the  Viet  Minh  on,  it  not  only  would
have  been  in  conflict  with  the  Soviets,  whose  aid  was  vital  to  China's  economic
recovery  plans,  but  would  also  have  lost  considerable  ground  in  the  support

;  Chou  En-lai's  travels  had  earned.  The  war  in  Indochina  had  become,  for  China,
a  demonstration  test  of  its  sincerity  in  promoting  peaceful  coexistence.  From  the
tactical  standpoint,  devotion  to  peaceful  coexistence  may  also  have  been  seen
as  reducing  the  prospects  of  widespread  Asian  support  of,  or  participation  in,  the
American  plan  for  a  regional  alliance.  With  the  conference  ended,  China  was
in  a  position  to  offer  Asian  nations  an  alternative  to  alliance  with  the  United
States — the  concept  of  "collective  peace  and  security,"  sustained  by  mutual  agree-
ment to  foster  the  five  principles.

1  The  motive  force  behind  China's  drive  for  Asian  leadership  during  the  period
of  the  Geneva  Conference  was  the  theme  that  negotiated  solutions  were  possible

'  for  all  outstanding  world  problems.  By  the  time  of  Geneva,  Peking  had  already
been  party  to  the  armistice  in  Korea,  to  agreement  with  India  over  Tibet,  and  to
statements  of  mutual  respect  issued  bilaterally  with  India  and  Burma.  Moreover,
China  had  joined  with  Moscow  in  supporting  negotiations  of  the  Indochina  war
as  early  as  September  1953,  while  the  Sino-Indian  and  Sino-Burmese  statements

\  also  contained  calls  for  an  early  settlement.  The  major  role  played  by  Chou  En-

I  lai  at  Geneva  therefore  not  simply  affirmed  China's  interest  in  peace,  but  as  im-
portantly established  China's  reputation  as  a  flexible  bargainer  willing  to  negotiate

I  disputes  and  make  concessions  to  resolve  them.  Indeed,  once  the  conference


170 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

ended,  Peking  declared  that  the  conference  had  proved  that  negotiations  could
resolve  such  other  East-West  problems  as  a  final  Korea  settlement,  arms  control,
nuclear  weapons  proliferation,  German  unification,  and  European  security.

Relatedly,  China  urged  that  the  Geneva  Conference  was  a  benchmark  in  the
rise  of  the  People's  Republic  to  new  prominence  on  the  international  scene.  "The
great  significance  of  the  convening  of  the  Geneva  Conference,"  the  People's
Daily  proclaimed  before  its  close,  "lies  in  the  fact  that  the  Chinese  People's  Re-
public is  participating  in  the  settlement  of  Asian  questions  as  one  of  the  Great
Powers,  thus  putting  an  end  to  the  era  when  the  Asian  peoples  were  denied  their
say  in  their  own  problems."  China  stood  not  only  for  a  resurgent,  decolonialized
Asia,  but  also  as  a  Great  Power.  As  stated  by  the  authoritative  World  Culture:

The  contributions  of  the  CPR  at  the  Geneva  Conference  to  the  search  for
peace,  and  its  efforts  to  establish  collective  security  in  Asia,  have  received
the  universal  recognition  and  trust  of  the  world's  peace-loving  peoples  and
nations.  Because  of  this,  the  position  of  the  CPR  as  one  of  the  world's  great
nations  has  been  even  more  affirmed  and  its  international  prestige  greatly
elevated.  The  Chinese  people  feel  extraordinary  glory  because  of  this.

The  fact  that  China  had,  in  Indochina  and  as  was  not  the  case  in  Korea,  been
invited  to  join  with  the  Big  Four  in  discussing  measures  for  the  restoration  of
peace  was  considered  by  Peking  to  have  given  the  CPR  still  more  international
authority.

Augmentation  of  Chinese  prestige  in  Asia  and  throughout  the  world  was  a
benefit  due  to  the  conference;  but  it  does  not  fully  explain  why  China  ap-
parently pressed  for  a  settlement  when  she  did  rather  than  prolong  the  talks
until  better  terms  were  available.  Having  negotiated  at  Panmunjom  for  two
years,  why  did  she  take  less  than  three  months  to  conclude  a  cease-fire  in  Indo-
china? There  seem  to  have  been  three  reasons  for  China's  reluctance  to  engage
in  extended  discussions:  (1)  agreement  with  the  Soviets  that  the  United  States
could  intervene  to  spark  a  wider  war;  (2)  consideration  that  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia had  been  effectively  neutralized;  (3)  satisfaction  that  a  communist  state
had  been  established  on  China's  southern  flank.

In  the  first  place,  Peking  was  convinced,  to  judge  from  its  published  com-
ments on  the  war,  that  influential  men  in  Washington,  including  Secretary  Dulles
and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  were  quite  prepared  to  move  directly  against  China
if  circumstances  permitted.  Washington's  warnings  to  Peking  in  1953  left  room
for  the  continuation  of  Chinese  aid  to  the  Viet  Minh,  but  Peking  could  never  be
certain  when  that  aid  might  become  the  pretext  for  active  American  intervention.
By  1954,  moreover,  the  Chinese  had  evinced  greater  concern  than  before  over
the  military  effectiveness  of  nuclear  weapons.  Having  been  through  a  costly  war
in  Korea,  and  having  decided  as  early  as  the  fall  of  1952  to  give  priority  to
"socialist  reconstruction"  at  home,  Peking  had  nothing  to  gain  from  provoking
the  United  States.  Were  the  Viet  Minh  encouraged  to  strive  for  the  maximum
territorial  advantage,  the  United  States — Peking  may  have  calculated — might
withdraw  from  the  conference  and  change  the  nature  of  the  war.  Once  those
events  occurred,  the  Chinese  advocacy  of  peace  through  diplomacy  would  have
been  irreparably  undercut.

Peking,  moreover,  was  made  clearly  aware  of  the  dangers  inherent  in  con-
tinued fighting.  At  the  conference,  Eden  used  the  implied  threat  of  American
involvement  against  Chou  in  much  the  same  way  as  Chauvel  had  used  it  against
Kuznetsov.  During  late  May,  for  example,  Eden  warned  Chou  "again"  of  the
dangers  in  the  Indochina  situation;  unpredictable  and  serious  results  could  come


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  171

about.  When  Chou  said  he  was  counting  on  Britain  to  prevent  these  from
happening,  the  foreign  secretary  replied  Chou  was  mistaken,  since  Britain  would
stand  by  the  United  States  in  a  showdown.  Furthermore,  with  the  Eisenhower-
Churchill  warning  of  June  28  that  unacceptable  demands  made  against  France
would  "seriously  aggravate"  the  international  situation,  with  Dulles'  perceived
pressure  on  Mendes-France  at  the  Paris  meeting  of  mid-July,  and  with  the
return  of  Smith  to  the  conference  table,  the  Chinese  were  given  unmistakable
signs  that  Western  unity  had  finally  been  achieved  and  some  kind  of  coordina-
tion worked  out  on  the  settlement.  At  that  juncture,  the  outstanding  issue  for
Peking  was  not  how  much  territory  the  DRV  would  ultimately  obtain,  but  how
far  Cambodia  and  Laos  could  be  pressed  before  the  July  20  deadline  passed.

By  the  deadline,  as  we  have  seen,  Chou  En-lai's  hardened  attitude  in  con-
versations with  the  Cambodian  and  Laotian  delegates  had  not  swayed  them  from
their  hope  of  eventual  security  coverage  by  the  United  States.  From  China's
standpoint,  however,  the  vital  agreement  had  been  secured:  None  of  the  Indo-
chinese  states  was  permitted  to  join  a  military  alliance  or  to  allow  the  establish-
ment of  foreign  military  bases  on  their  soil.  Whether  the  Chinese  recognized
the  alternative  for  the  three  states  of  obtaining  protection  through  a  device  such
as  the  SEATO  Protocol  is  not  known.  When  the  accords  were  signed,  Peking
greeted  them  with  the  remark  that  the  restrictions  upon  Indochina's  military
ties  to  the  West  had  dealt  a  severe  blow  to  American  regional  security  ambitions.
So  long  as  the  United  States  was  not  permitted  to  establish  bases  in  the  three
countries  and  to  introduce  military  personnel  there,  China's  security  require-
ments were  fulfilled  even  though,  in  their  internal  political  make-up,  the  three
states  might  take  a  strong  anti-Communist  line.  It  was  perhaps  because  the  CPR
had  emerged  with  these  advantages  that  a  Chinese  journalist  confided  on  July
23:  "We  have  won  the  first  campaign  for  the  neutralization  of  all  Southeast
Asia."

The  supposed  "neutralization"  of  Cambodia  and  Laos  was  coupled  with  the
securance  of  a  solid  territory  for  the  DRV  along  China's  southern  frontier.
Further  territorial  gains  by  the  Viet  Minh  would  augment  DRV  resources,  but
would  not  significantly  enhance  China's  security.  With  agreement  by  the  con-
ference to  stabilize  the  military  assets  of  both  zones  of  Vietnam  and  to  forbid
their  military  alignment  with  other  nations,  China  could  feel  some  confidence
that  a  divided  Vietnam  would  not  present  an  immediate  threat.  Thus,  the  agree-
ments on  Cambodia  and  Laos  complemented  the  Vietnam  accord  in  bolstering
China's  security  from  the  south  even  as  it  also  meant  a  sacrifice  of  the  Viet
Minh's  capability  for  overrunning  all  Vietnam.

The  argument  here  is,  in  summary,  that  the  Soviet  Union  and  Communist
China  were  less  concerned  with  the  specific  terms  of  the  settlement  than  with
attaining  it  once  their  basic  objectives  had  been  achieved.  A  settlement  along
lines  that  would  satisfy  the  Viet  Minh  need  for  territory,  give  France  the  satis-
faction that  it  had  not  sold  out,  go  far  toward  fulfilling  Chinese  security  re-
quirements and  political  ambitions  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  reduce  the  possi-
bility of  a  precipitate  American  withdrawal  from  the  conference  was,  to  Moscow
and  Peking,  acceptable  and  even  desirable.  They  saw  advantages  to  themselves  in
an  early  equitable  agreement  that  clearly  conflicted  with  Viet  Minh  terms,  but
not  with  their  own  objectives.

Precisely  how  Chou  and  Molotov  reasoned  with  Ho  Chi  Minh — by  threat,
persuasion,  or  a  combination  of  the  two — will  likely  never  be  known;  but  it
seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  given  the  precarious  political  situation  in  South
Vietnam,  the  multitude  of  armed  sects  and  other  groups  hostile  to  the  Saigon


172 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

government,  the  continued  exacerbating  presence  of  the  French,  and  the  eco-
nomic and  social  vulnerabilities  of  a  society  wracked  by  war,  Peking  and  Moscow
could  argue  convincingly  that  South  Vietnam  would  never  cohere  sufficiently  to
pose  a  viable  alternative  to  the  DRV.  It  may  thus  have  been  the  Communists'
expectation  that  the  DRV  would  as  likely  assume  control  of  the  entire  country
by  default  as  by  an  election  victory  in  1956.  The  Chinese,  to  be  sure,  accepted
the  notion  that  the  Geneva  accords  had,  temporarily  at  least,  created  two
Vietnamese  governments  rather  than  simply  divided  the  country  administratively.
[Doc.  64]  But  it  is  improbable  that  either  they  or  the  Soviets  anticipated  that
even  an  American-supported  South  Vietnam  could  survive.  Put  another  way,  the
possibility  of  a  prospering,  anti-Communist  South  Vietnam  may  simply  not
have  been  a  serious,  and  certainly  was  not  an  immediate,  concern  for  either
Communist  power.  The  Geneva  Conference  had  created  French  goodwill  for
Moscow  and  added  security  for  Peking;  what  might  happen  in  South  Vietnam
may,  in  1954,  have  seemed  inconsequential.

Viet  Minh  Objectives

The  Viet  Minh  did  not  emerge  as  "losers"  in  the  negotiations.  They  received
the  territorial  benefits  of  the  settlement  without  having  to  cede  the  French  or
any  neutral  body  control  of  enclaves  in  northern  Vietnam.  In  addition,  the  DRV
was  promised  an  opportunity  within  two  years  to  gain  full  control  of  the  country
through  a  ballot  box  victory,  although  it  appears  that  Viet  Minh  leaders  put
more  stock  in  a  collapse  of  the  southern  regime  before  the  election  date  as  the
path  to  complete  control  of  the  country.  In  Laos,  the  Pathet  Lao  had  not  been
disarmed  immediately;  instead,  they  were  permitted  to  regroup  over  a  wide  ex-
panse of  terrain  that  would  make  disarmament  difficult  to  accomplish.  And  in
both  Laos  and  Cambodia,  the  resistance  elements  were  to  be  accorded  full
political  rights  to  participate,  as  individuals,  in  the  1955  elections.

In  their  public  commentaries  on  the  Geneva  accords,  Viet  Minh  leaders  dis-
played full  satisfaction.  Military  victories  had  gained  political  recognition,  they
said,  thanks  to  the  support  rendered  by  the  Soviet  and  Chinese  delegations.
Vietnam's  independence  and  territorial  integrity  were  admitted  by  Paris,  Ho
Chi  Minh  proclaimed.  Moreover,  the  regroupment  to  two  zones  in  Vietnam  was,
as  he  put  it,  "a  temporary  action,  a  transitional  step  in  the  realization  of  a
cease-fire,  toward  restoring  peace  and  attaining  the  unification  of  our  country
by  means  of  general  elections."  No  "administrative  partition"  was  intended;  nor
would  the  "zonal  arrangements"  be  permitted  to  interfere  with  Vietnam's  future
unification:

.  .  .  North,  Central  and  South  Viet  Nam  are  territories  of  ours.  Our
country  will  certainly  be  unified,  our  entire  people  will  surely  be  liberated.
Our  compatriots  in  the  South  were  the  first  to  wage  the  war  of  Resistance.
They  possess  a  high  political  consciousness.  I  am  confident  that  they  will
place  national  interests  above  local  interests,  permanent  interests  above
temporary  interests,  and  join  their  efforts  with  the  entire  people  in  strength-
ening peace,  achieving  unity,  independence  and  democracy  all  over  the
country  ....  our  people,  armymen  and  cadres  from  North  to  South  must
unite  closely.  They  must  be  at  one  in  thought  and  deed.

And  Ton  Due  Thang  vowed:  "The  Vietnam  State  will  undoubtedly  be  unified
through  general  elections."


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  173

Despite  these  protestations  of  satisfaction  and  confidence,  Tillman  Durdin's
report  from  Geneva  that  members  of  the  Viet  Minh  delegation  were  sharply
disappointed  by  the  results  and  vexed  at  pressure  applied  by  their  Chinese  and
Russian  comrades  seems  on  the  mark.  The  Viet  Minh  command  evidently  be-
lieved— and  no  French  authority  on  the  spot  doubted  this — that  they  could
eliminate  the  French  from  Tonkin  with  one  major  offensive  and  proceed  from
there  against  a  weakened,  demoralized  Franco-Vietnamese  army  in  Annam.
Surely  Ho  Chi  Minh  must  have  considered  the  possibility  of  American  inter-
vention— although  this  concern  does  not  emerge  as  clearly  from  Viet  Minh
public  commentaries  as  it  does  from  the  official  Moscow  and  Peking  organs.  But
the  Viet  Minh  looked  to  the  Korea  experience  as  having  demonstrated  that  fight-
ing and  talking  simultaneously  was,  as  put  by  a  mid-May  VNA  broadcast,  a
tactic  they  could  pursue  for  two  years  (like  the  Chinese  during  the  Panmunjom
talks)  in  order  to  maximize  territorial  gains.  Whether  the  Viet  Minh  ultimately
envisaged  the  conquest  of  all  Vietnam  before  reaching  agreement  with  the  French
to  cease  fire  is  debatable;  at  the  least,  they,  like  the  French,  probably  regarded
maximum  control  of  population  and  territory  as  insurance  against  future  elec-
tions. Thus,  to  the  Viet  Minh,  a  settlement  at  the  17th  parallel  could  only  have
been  regarded  as  a  tactical  blunder  in  violation  of  the  guerrilla  war  theory  and
practice  they  had  mastered.

Forfeiture  of  considerable  territory  in  Vietnam  was  undoubtedly  not  the  only
ground  for  the  Viet  Minh's  displeasure.  Their  frequent  pronouncements  on  the
"indivisibility"  of  the  Viet  Minh,  Free  Khmer,  and  Pathet  Lao  were  largely
ignored  by  Chou  and  Molotov,  whose  agreement  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  seems
to  have  given  priority  to  Chinese  interests.  Account  had  been  taken,  as  Chou
insisted,  of  the  desirability  of  integrating  the  resistance  forces  into  the  national
Khmer  and  Laotian  communities,  but  those  forces  were  eventually  to  be  dis-
armed and  disbanded,  or  withdrawn.  Conceivably,  the  Viet  Minh  leaders  never
intended  to  leave  Laos,  or  were  assured  by  the  Chinese  and  Soviets  that  the
agreements  reached  regarding  the  Pathet  Lao  were  not  meant  to  exclude  future
North  Vietnamese  support.  Nevertheless,  any  future  Viet  Minh  contacts  with
the  rebels  would  be  a  clear  violation  of  the  Geneva  accords  and  provide  the
occasion  for  intensified  Laotian  ties  to  the  West.

The  Viet  Minh  also  yielded  ground  on  national  elections.  Their  hopes  for  an
all- Vietnamese  political  settlement  soon  after  the  cease-fire  were  quashed  by  the
Soviets  and  Chinese,  who  were  disposed  to  accept  a  longer  waiting  period.
:  Furthermore,  the  political  settlement  itself  was  not  given  the  priority  the  Viet
Minh  had  originally  demanded;  it  would  be  achieved,  as  phrased  in  the  Final
Declaration,  "in  the  near  future,"  as  the  result  of  rather  than  as  the  precondition
;  to. a  military  (cease-fire)  settlement.  Finally,  when  the  time  for  a  political  settle-
j  ment  was  at  hand,  the  Declaration  specified  that  an  international  body  would
1  supervise  it  rather  than  the  Viet  Minh  and  "South"  Vietnamese  alone.  The
:  overriding  interests  of  the  Soviets  and  Chinese  had  taken  the  heart  out  of  the
I  initial  Viet  Minh  proposals  of  May  10  and,  in  addition,  had  considerably  under-
j.  cut  their  "fallback"  positions  expressed  in  late  May  and  June.  Jean  Chauvel  was
I  apparently  correct  when  he  perceived,  after  private  talks  with  the  Chinese,  that
j  the  Viet  Minh  were  really  on  the  end  of  a  string  being  manipulated  from  Moscow
'  and  Peking.  When  they  moved  forward  too  quickly,  Chou  and  Molotov  were
always  at  hand  to  pull  them  back  to  a  more  accommodating  position.  Briefly
;  put,  the  Viet  Minh  very  likely  felt  they  had  been  compelled  to  give  away  much
!  of  what  they  had  earned  even  as  they  acquired  the  attributes  of  sovereignty  for
which  they  had  fought.


174 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


C.  OBJECTIVES  OF  THE  PARTICIPANTS:  THE  WESTERN  BIG  THREE
The  British

For  Great  Britain,  the  accords  signalled  the  end  of  a  war  that  more  than  once
threatened  to  involve  the  United  States  and  risk  a  regional  conflagration.  Had
the  point  of  direct  American  intervention  been  reached,  the  Churchill  govern-
ment would  have  been  faced  with  an  extraordinarily  difficult  decision:  whether
to  join  with  an  old  ally  in  a  war  venture  that  Britain  considered  politically  wrong
and  militarily  foolish,  or  to  break  with  Washington  and  thereby  throw  into
question  the  Anglo-American  alliance.  Britain's  consistent  advice  to  delay  ir-
reversible military  steps,  including  formation  of  a  Southeast  Asia  defense  organi-
zation, until  the  Communists  had  been  given  an  opportunity  to  make  good  on
their  proclaimed  devotion  to  a  peaceful  solution  over  Indochina  had  been
grudgingly  accepted  by  the  United  States;  the  choice  of  following  or  ignoring
American  leadership  was  averted.

A  diplomatic  untangling  of  the  Indochina  problem,  as  Britain's  first  hope,
also  became  in  large  measure  its  responsibility.  If  the  allies  were  not  to  be
pressed  into  a  military  response,  it  was  as  much  up  to  Eden  as  to  Bidault  (and,
later,  Mendes-France),  to  establish  the  grounds  for  a  settlement.  Although  final
agreement  at  the  conference  required  Soviet  and  Chinese  preparedness  to  offer
equitable  terms,  Eden's  own  contributions  cannot  be  exaggerated.  Working
closely  with  Molotov  and  Chou,  Eden  apparently  earned  their  respect  as  a
forthright,  flexible,  but  firm  negotiator.  That  the  accords  were  drawn  up  testified
to  Eden's  persistence.  They  were  a  triumph  of  British  diplomacy  to  the  extent
that  the  Chinese  and  Soviets,  in  press  commentaries  immediately  following  the
close  of  the  Conference,  accorded  the  UK  delegation  the  unusual  accolade  of
having,  along  with  their  delegations,  rendered  the  most  important  services  in
the  agonizing  process  of  reaching  agreement.

At  the  same  time  as  the  British  successfully  pushed  through  a  settlement  by
diplomatic  rather  than  military  means,  they  also  reserved  the  right  to  join  with
the  United  States  in  a  regional  security  arrangement  immediately  after  the  con-
ference. As  Eden  had  told  Chou,  the  formation  of  a  SEATO  would  not  be  put
off,  even  though  the  Associated  States  would  not  become  members.  British  mem-
bership in  SEATO  represented  another  significant  diplomatic  victory.  They  had
on  several  occasions  informed  the  United  States  that  a  Southeast  Asia  pact
formed  in  advance  of  or  during  the  Geneva  deliberations  might  be  interpreted
as  provocatory  by  the  Chinese  and  reduce,  if  not  eliminate,  chances  for  a  settle-
ment. The  British  never  opposed  the  concept  of  SEATO,  but  they  cautioned
against  poor  timing.  SEATO's  establishment  in  September  1954  was  thus
doubly  welcomed  by  London:  It  satisfied  Britain's  conviction  that  a  much-
needed  regional  organization  should  be  formed  to  preserve  what  remained  of
Indochina,  not  to  take  action  to  recover  it  all  from  the  Viet  Minh.

Britain's  opposition  to  forming  SEATO  before  or  during  the  conference  so  as,
in  part,  not  to  provoke  the  Chinese  fitted  with  London's  aspirations  for  better
Sino-British  relations.  Quite  unlike  the  dominant  voices  in  Washington,  Church-
ill and  Eden  were  amenable  to  attempting  to  achieve  some  kind  of  working
relationship  with  Peking,  particularly  in  view  of  the  ongoing  guerrilla  war  in
Malaya.  The  conference,  as  Eden  noted  in  his  June  23  speech  to  the  Commons,
had  resulted  in  an  improvement  of  Sino-British  relations,  demonstrated  by
Peking's  agreement  on  June  17,  after  four  years  of  silence,  to  exchange  charges


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  175

d'affaires.  In  the  remaining  month  of  the  conference,  moreover,  British  youth
delegations  traveled  to  China,  and  there  were  hopeful  comments  from  both
countries  on  the  possibilities  for  stepped  up  trade  and  the  exchange  of  cultural
delegations.  Thus,  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  United  States,  Great  Britain  fully
exploited  this  period  of  harmony  through  diplomacy  to  change,  rather  than
preserve,  its  pattern  of  contact  with  Peking.

The  French

France  probably  had  as  much  cause  for  satisfaction  with  the  outcome  at
Geneva  as  any  other  party  to  the  conference.  Paris  had  extricated  itself  from
la  sale  guerre  with  honor,  yet  had  also  retained  a  foothold  in  South  Vietnam  and
a  close  relationship  with  Cambodia  and  Laos.  The  French  Union  lost  much  of
its  strength,  but  not  all  of  its  appeal,  in  Indochina.  At  least  in  mid-1954,  it
appeared  that  French  cultural  and  economic  interests  in  all  three  former  colonies
would  be  substantially  preserved;  and  even  the  DRV  had  indicated,  at  the  close
as  well  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  negotiations,  that  it  aspired  to  membership  in
the  Union.  French  military  power  would  have  to  be  surrendered,  of  course;*
but  French  influence  could  (and  did)  remain  in  all  three  countries.

While  the  British  were  ready  to  join  with  the  United  States  and  other  inter-
ested nations  in  SEATO,  the  French  clearly  intended,  as  evidenced  by  their  con-
cern over  the  location  of  the  demarcation  line,  that  South  Vietnam  have  a
defensible  territory  within  which  to  establish  a  stable  regime  competitive  with
the  DRV.  As  already  observed,  Paris  was  not  motivated  by  altruism  alone;
a  substantial  territorial  base  was  as  much  for  the  preservation  of  French  eco-
nomic holdings  in  the  South  as  for  the  future  security  of  the  Saigon  govern-
ment. To  judge  from  the  French  attitude,  the  Paris  government,  no  less  than  the
American  administration,  looked  forward  to  participating  fully  in  the  consolida-
tion and  rehabilitation  of  the  GVN  at  least  in  the  two  years  before  nationwide
elections.

The  Americans

The  United  States  viewed  the  conference  results  with  mixed  emotions.  On  the
one  hand,  the  terms  of  the  settlement  conformed  surprisingly  well  to  those  the
Administration  had  agreed  with  the  French  and  British  would  be  acceptable.
Even  as  the  Administration  could  not  do  more  than  agree  to  "respect"  and
"take  note"  of  the  Geneva  accords,  it  had  to  concede  that  they  represented  a
reasonable  outcome  given  the  chaotic  state  of  Allied  relations  before  the  con-
ference, the  rejection  by  France  of  a  possible  military  alternative,  and  the  un-
deniable military  superiority  of  the  Viet  Minh  beyond  as  well  as  within  Vietnam.
On  the  other  hand,  the  settlement,  viewed  through  the  special  lenses  of  the
Eisenhower-Dulles  Administration,  also  contained  the  elements  of  defeat.  Part

*  Even  as  most  French  troops  were  withdrawn,  a  French  military  presence  remained
for  some  time.  The  last  troops  did  not  leave  Vietnam  until  February  1956  while,
under  the  military  accords,  French  instructors  remained  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  and
two  bases  continued  to  function  in  Laos.

  French  interest  was  not  confined  to  South  Vietnam  after  July  21,  1954.  Soon
thereafter,  Paris  dispatched  Jean  Sainteny,  its  former  chief  negotiator  with  the  Viet
Minh  at  Fontainebleau  and  Dalat  in  1946,  to  Hanoi  to  represent  French  interests
without  conferring  recognition  on  the  DRV.  France  recognized  only  one  Vietnam  but
in  fact  dealt  with  two.


176 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

of  the  Free  World's  "assets"  in  the  Far  East  had  been  "lost"  to  the  Sino-Soviet
bloc  (much  as  China  had  been  "lost"  to  Mao  Tse-tung's  forces);  our  allies  had
begged  off  when  offered  a  chance  to  deal  with  the  Communists  by  force  of  arms
and,  later,  by  an  Asian-Western  anti-Communist  alliance  ready  for  action;  and
the  United  States  had  been  compelled  to  attend  an  international  conference
which  not  only  confirmed  to  the  Communists  by  diplomacy  what  they  had
gained  by  force,  but  also  enhanced  their  image  elsewhere  in  Asia  and  worldwide
as  standard-bearers  of  peace.

The  view  that  Geneva  had  come  out  better  than  could  have  been  expected
was  the  one  offered  publicly.  The  President,  at  a  July  21  news  conference,  de-
clined to  criticize  the  accords.  He  said  they  contained  "features  which  we  do  not
like,  but  a  great  deal  depends  on  how  they  work  in  practice."  He  announced  the
Government's  intention  to  establish  permanent  missions  in  Laos  and  Cambodia,
and  said  the  United  States  was  actively  "pursuing  discussions  with  other  free
nations  with  a  view  to  the  rapid  organization  of  a  collective  defense  in  South-
east Asia  in  order  to  prevent  further  direct  or  indirect  Communist  aggression  in
that  general  area."

Under  Secretary  Smith  likewise  was  very  guarded  in  remarks  two  days  later.
Denying  that  Geneva  was  another  "Munich,"  Smith  said:  "I  am  .  .  .  convinced
that  the  results  are  the  best  that  we  could  possibly  have  obtained  in  the  circum-
stances," adding  that  "diplomacy  has  rarely  been  able  to  gain  at  the  conference
table  what  cannot  be  gained  or  held  on  the  battlefield."  When  Dulles  spoke  (also
on  July  23 ) ,  he  was  much  less  interested  in  the  past  than  in  the  future.  Referring
to  "the  loss  in  Northern  Vietnam,"  the  Secretary  expressed  the  hope  that  much
would  be  learned  from  the  experience  toward  preventing  further  Communist
inroads  in  Asia.  Two  lessons  could  be  culled,  he  observed.  First,  popular  sup-
port was  essential  against  Communist  subversion;  "the  people  should  feel  that
they  are  defending  their  own  national  institutions."  Second,  collective  defense
should  precede  rather  than  come  during  the  aggression — a  pointed  criticism  of
British  policy  during  the  crisis.  A  collective  security  system  now  in  Southeast
Asia,  he  concluded,  would  check  both  outright  aggression  and  subversion.

A  point-by-point  comparison  of  the  Seven  Points  with  the  provisions  of  the
accords  indicates  that  quite  apart  from  what  had  happened  to  American  in-
terests in  Southeast  Asia  as  a  consequence  of  the  conference,  American  diplomacy
had,  on  balance,  succeeded:

(1)  The  integrity  and  independence  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  were  preserved,
and  Viet  Minh  forces  were  to  be  withdrawn  or  disarmed  and  disbanded.

(2)  Southern  Vietnam  was  retained,  although  without  an  enclave  in  the  North
and  with  the  partition  line  somewhat  south  of  Dong  Hoi.

(3)  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  "retained"  Vietnam  were  not  prevented  from  form-
ing "non-Communist  regimes"  (in  the  case  of  Vietnam,  within  the  two-year  pre-
election period);  nor  were  they  expressly  forbidden  "to  maintain  adequate  forces
for  internal  security."  Vietnam's  right  to  import  arms  and  other  war  materiel
was,  however,  restricted  to  piece-by-piece  replacement,  and  its  employment  of
foreign  advisers  to  the  number  in  the  country  at  the  war's  close.

(4-5)  Recalling  Dulles'  interpretation  of  July  7  that  elections  should  "be  only
held  as  long  after  cease-fire  agreement  as  possible  and  in  conditions  free  from
intimidation  to  give  democratic  elements  best  chance,"  the  accords  did  not
"contain  political  provisions  which  would  risk  loss  of  the  retained  area  to  Com-
munist control";  nor  did  they  "exclude  the  possibility  of  the  ultimate  reunifica-
tion of  Vietnam  by  peaceful  means."  Although  Dulles  and  Mendes-France  pre-
ferred that  no  date  be  set  for  the  elections,  the  compromise  two-year  hiatus  gave


The  Geneva  Conference,  May-July,  1954  177

the  Americans,  the  French,  and  the  South  Vietnamese  a  considerable  breathing
spell.  The  first  priority,  therefore,  was  to  "give  democratic  elements  best  chance";
as  was  subsequently  determined  by  Washington,  this  meant  providing  South
Vietnam  with  economic  assistance  and  political  support.  Elections,  as  Dulles
indicated  then,  and  as  the  OCB  concurred  in  August,  were  agreeable  to  the
United  States;  but  they  were  two  years  away,  and  the  immediate,  primary  task
was  "to  maintain  a  friendly  non-Communist  South  Vietnam.  .  .  ."  Thus,  the
corollary  objective  (stated  by  the  NSC  in  August  and  approved  by  the  President)

j  "to  prevent  a  Communist  victory  through  all-Vietnam  elections"  did  not  connote
American  intention  to  subvert  the  accords;  read  in  context,  the  phrase  meant  that
American  influence  would  aim  at  assuring  that  the  Communists  not  gain  an
electoral  victory  through  deceitful,  undemocratic  methods  in  violation  of  the
Final  Declaration's  stipulation  that  they  be  "free."

j (6)  The  accords  expressly  provided  for  the  transfer  of  individuals  desiring  to

I  move  from  one  zone  to  another.

j  (7)  The  accords  did  seem,  at  the  time,  to  have  basically  fulfilled  the  precon-
dition of  providing  "effective  machinery  for  international  supervision  of  the

;  agreement."  Although  the  machinery  would  be  the  ICC's  rather  than  the  UN's,

\  Under  Secretary  Smith  noted  that  the  ICC  would  have  a  veto  power  on  im-
portant questions  (referring,  evidently,  to  the  unanimity  rule);  would  be  com-
posed of  one  genuine  neutral (India) and  one  pro-Western  government

[  (Canada) ;  and  would  be  permitted  full  freedom  of  movement  into  demilitarized
zones  and  frontier  and  coastal  areas.  Smith  gave  this  assessment:

Taking  everything  into  consideration,  I  strongly  feel  this  [the  control  and
supervision  arrangement]  is  satisfactory  and  much  better  than  we  were  able
to  obtain  in  Korea.  French  feel,  and  Eden  and  I  agree,  that  with  such
composition  built-in  veto  will  work  to  our  advantage.  This  setup  is  best
French  or  anybody  else  could  get,  and  I  feel  it  is  within  spirit  of  point  7.
[Doc.  79]

Despite  the  overall  concordance  of  major  provisions  of  the  accords  with  the
Seven  Points,  the  fact  that  another  piece  of  territory  had  been  formally  ceded
to  the  Communists  obviously  weighed  heavily  on  the  Administration.  When,  in
August,  papers  were  drawn  up  for  the  National  Security  Council,  the  Geneva
Conference  was  evaluated  as  a  major  defeat  for  United  States  diplomacy  and  a
potential  disaster  for  United  States  security  interests  in  the  Far  East.  The  Oper-
ations Control  Board,  in  its  progress  report  on  the  then-current  NSC  paper  5405,
stated  that  the  Final  Declaration  of  the  conference  "completed  a  major  forward
stride  of  communism  which  may  lead  to  the  loss  of  Southeast  Asia.  It  therefore

•  recorded  a  drastic  defeat  of  key  policies  in  NSC  5405  and  a  serious  loss  for
the  free  world,  the  psychological  and  political  effects  of  which  will  be  felt
throughout  the  Far  East  and  around  the  globe."  In  a  separate  report,  the  NSC

I  was  somewhat  more  specific  concerning  the  extent  of  the  damage,  but  no  less
restrained.  The  Communists  had  acquired  "an  advance  salient"  in  Vietnam  for
use  in  military  and  nonmilitary  ways;  the  United  States  had  lost  prestige  as  a
leader  in  Asia  capable  of  stemming  Communist  expansion;  the  Communist  peace
line  had  gained  at  America's  expense;  and  Communist  military  and  political
prestige  had  been  enhanced  as  the  result  of  their  proven  ability  to  exploit  un-
stable situations  in  Southeast  Asian  countries  without  resort  to  armed  attack.

The  conclusion  that  emerges  from  the  obvious  contrast  between  the  public
and  private  comments  of  Administration  officials  and  organs  is  that  where


178 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

American  diplomacy  fell  down  was  not  at  the  conference  but  during  the  Indo-
china crisis  as  a  whole.  Nearly  all  the  revised  American  negotiatory  principles
had  emerged  unscathed;  but  American  objectives  in  Indochina — the  elimination
of  the  Viet  Minh  threat,  preservation  of  the  strategically  vital  Tonkin  Delta,  and
obstruction  of  Communist  political  and  military  expansionist  policies  in  the
region  (all  of  which  were  enumerated  in  NSC  5405 — had  still  been  defeated.  The
United  States  had  admirably  maneuvered  at  Geneva  in  its  self-limited  role  of
interested  party;  but  the  Administration,  convinced  that  any  attrition  of  what
had  been  regarded  as  "Free  World"  territory  and  resources  was  inimical  to
American  global  interests,  could  only  view  the  settlement  as  the  acceptance  of
terms  from  the  Communist  victors.  The  task  in  Vietnam  in  the  two  years  ahead
was  therefore  to  work  with  what  had  been  "retained"  in  the  hope,  by  no  means
great,  that  the  Diem  government  could  pull  the  country  up  by  its  bootstraps  in
time  to  present  a  meaningful  alternative  to  Ho  Chi  Minh's  DRV.


179


4. U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956


Summary

AID  FOR  FRANCE  IN  INDOCHINA,  1950-1954

The  United  States  decision  to  provide  military  assistance  to  France  and  the
Associated  States  of  Indochina  was  reached  informally  in  February/March  1950,
funded  by  the  President  on  May  1,  1950,  and  was  announced  on  May  8  of  that
year.  The  decision  was  taken  in  spite  of  the  U.S.  desire  to  avoid  direct  involve-
ment in  a  colonial  war,  and  in  spite  of  a  sensing  that  France's  political-military  |
situation  in  Indochina  was  jad  and  wasjdeteriqrating.  Moreover,  predictions  that  |
U.S.  aid  would  achieve  a  marked  difference  in  the  course  of  the  Indochina  War  •
were  heavily  qualified.

The  situation  in  which  the  decision  was  made  was  completely  dominated  by  the
take-over  of  and  consolidation  of  power  in  China  by  the  communists.  Nationalist  ,
Chinese  forces  had  been  withdrawn  from  mainland  China  and  Communist  Chi-
nese troops  had  arrived  on  the  border  of  Indochina  in  late  1949.  This  period  was
the  high  water  mark  of  U.S.  fears  of  direct  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in
Indochina.  NIE  5  of  29  December  1950  stated:  "Direct  intervention  by  Chinese  ,
Communist  troops  may  occur  at  any  time  ...  it  is  almost  certain  to  occur  in  j
strength  whenever  there  is  danger  either  that  the  Viet  Minh  will  fail  to  maintain  j
its  military  objective  of  driving  the  French  out  of  Indochina,  or  that  the  Bao-  ;
Dai  Government  is  succeeding  in  undermining  the  support  of  the  Viet  Minh."

The  rationale  of  the  decision  was  provided  by  the  U.S.  view  that  the  Soviet-
controlled  expansion  of  communism  both  in  Asia  and  in  Europe  required,  in  the
interests  of  U.S.  national  security,  a  counter  in  Indochina.  The  domino  thesis  was
quite  prominent.  On  6  March  1950,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  wrote  the  President
as  follows:  "The  choice  confronting  the  United  States  is  to  support  the  legal
government  in  Indochina  or  to  face  the  extension  of  communism  over  the  re-
mainder of  the  continental  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  possibly  westward  .  .  ."
Despite  this  statement,  it  was  a  generally  accepted  proposition  that  "regardless  of  |
current  U.S.  commitments  for  certain  military  assistance  to  China,  the  U.S.  will  I
not  commit  any  of  its  armed  forces  to  the  defense  of  Indochina  against  overt,  '
foreign  aggression,  under  present  circumstances."

The  decision  to  begin  military  assistance  to  France  and  the  Associated  States
of  Indochina  was  not  made  under  the  illusion  of  great  expectations.  In  April  1950,
the  Joint  Chiefs  woiard  go  no  further  than  to  say  that  prompt  delivery  of  the  aid
would  do  no  more  than  create  the  "possibility  of  success."  In  July  1950,  General
Erskine,  after  completing  his  Presidential  mission  to  Indochina,  reported  that  "the
amount  of  aid  and  the  scope  of  the  assistance  thus  far  requested  by  the  French
were  inadequate  to  the  needs  of  the  situation."  All  U.S.  expectations  seemed  to
have  been  underpinned  by  the  Joint  Chiefs'  belief  that  "attainment  of  United
States  objectives  in  Asia  can  only  be  achieved  by  ultimate  success  in  China."

Results  of  the  decision  were  mixed.  Although  implementation  of  the  decision
was  partially_  successful  in  that  it  enabled  the  French  to  continue  the  military
campaign  in  Indochina  to  the  time  of  the  Geneva  Accords,  military  assistance  was


180 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

by  and  large  a  failure  as  an  instrument  of  U.S.  policy:  the  U.S.  neither  assured
the  French  a  military  success,  influenced  the  political  situation  to  advantage,  nor
prevented  the  loss  of  North  Vietnam  to  the  communists  at  Geneva.

The  U.S.  MAAG  Indochina  was  unable  to  perform  even  the  limited  functions
assigned  it.  The  French,  never  eager  for  U.S.  advice,  succeeded  in  limiting  the
function  of  MAAG  to  order-taking  in  the  commercial  sense.

Contributing  to  the  initial  U.S.  decision  to  aid  the  French,  and  to  limiting  the
effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  program  of  assistance,  were  (1)  settiag  impracticable
preconditions  for  assistance  upon  the  French,  (2)  the  U.S.  proclivity  to^accept
a  slender  chance  of  success  withoutjveighing  alternatives,  (3)  the  suppression
of  aTtelriatives  leading  to  decisional  circularity  and  reinforcement  of  existing
policies,  (4)  repeated  failures  of  the  U.S.  to  bargain  effectively  with  the  French,
and  (5)  the  vulnerability  of  the  U.S.  policy-making  machinery  to  spoofing,  par-
ticularly as  regards  U.S.  credulity  in  accepting  French  information  at  face  value
and  in  being  susceptible  to  "red"  scares.

The  decision  to  provide  assistance  to  France  and  the  Associated  States  is  the
focus  of  this  discussion;  it  was  but  one  issue  among  hundreds  preoccupying  the
United  States  Government  in  the  time  period  under  consideration — the  fall  of
China  and  the  Korean  War — and  it  was  probably  not  regarded  by  those  who  made
policy  as  among  their  critical  decisions.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  high  U.S.
official  arguing  that  any  significant  commitment  threshold  was  being  crossed.
There  were,  however,  those  who  maintained  that  the  important  anti-colonial  stand
of  the  U.S.  was  being  undermined.  These  voices  (and  they  were  basically  from
the  public  domain )  were  drowned  out  by  those  who  advocated  immediate  security
needs.  The  importance  of  the  decision  was  that  when  the  U.S.  was  faced  with  an
unambiguous  choice  between  a  policy  of  anti-colonialism  and  a  policy  of  anti-
communism,  it  chose  the  latter.  And,  although  the  decision  was  not  perceived  as
getting  the  U.S.  more  deeply  "involved"  in  Indochina,  it  did  mark  a  tangible  first
step  in  that  direction.

THE  U.S.  AND  FRANCE'S  WITHDRAWAL
FROM  VIETNAM,  1954-1956

Vietnam  was  the  crucible  of  contemporary  France.  Military  defeat  by  the  Viet
Minh — unprecedented  victory  of  Asian  over  European — was  but  one  political
reagent:  there  was  also  intense  frustration  and  disappointment  among  French  of
Rightist-colon  convictions  that  sneaker-shod  Asian  peasants  could  undo  a  century
of  costly  labor  at  France's  "civilizing  mission,"  and  jeopardize  the  largest  invest-
ment of  French  capital  in  the  Far  East.  The  Tonkin  Delta  region  represented  in  a
special  way  all  that  Vietnam  meant  to  France.  Tonkin,  of  all  Vietnam,  was  where
French  economic  stakes  were  highest,  where  the  culture  of  France  most  com-
pletely overglossed  indigenous  ways,  where  stood  educational  focus  of  Vietnam —
the  University  of  Hanoi,  with  its  French  faculty — and  where  Catholicism  flour-
ished among  the  rural  folk.  Thus,  evacuation  of  Tonkin  per  the  dictates  of  the
Geneva  Settlement  stung  less  from  a  sense  of  humiliation  over  Dien  Bien  Phu  than
from  a  sense  of  abandonment:  an  epoch  had  closed,  France  was  demeaned.

Had  the  Geneva  Settlement  been  fulfilled,  France  might  have  retained  a  pres-
ence and  influence  in  Vietnam  that  would  have  mollified  both  the  Right  and  Left.
After  all,  no  significant  body  of  opinion  in  France  held  the  French  should  con-
tinue to  mold  Vietnamese  politics  or  that  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  should
remain  there  undiminished — the  reality  of  the  DRV  and  the  exigencies  of  North
Africa  rendered  such  a  position  untenable.  The  Left  and  the  Center  were  quite


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  181


willing  for  France  to  withdraw  under  the  Geneva  formula;  even  the  "Indochina"
clique  within  the  army  recognized  the  priority  of  Algeria.  But  France  in  the  end,
at  American  instance,  had  to  accept  withdrawal  without  the  cover  of  general
elections,  and  to  accede  to  a  second,  further,  more  final  abandoment.

The  supplanting  of  France  by  the  U.S.  in  South  Vietnam,  and  theiailure  of  the
Geneva  Settlement,  both  well  advanced  by  mid- 1956,  denied  the  French  Left  its
prospects  for  cooperation  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  in  a  precedent-setting  experiment
in  coexistence.  It  disappointed  moderates  who  had  hoped  to  preserve  French  cul-
tural influence  and  salvage  French  capital.  It  enraged  Rightists  who  interpreted
American  policies  in  Vietnam  invidiously.  None  of  these  factions  was  prepared  to
take  a  stand  for  France's  staying,  but  all  attempted  to  draw  political  sustenance
from  acerbic  treatment  of  the  U.S.

The  whole  episode  of  French  withdrawal  from  Vietnam,  in  fact,  soured  the
Western  alliance.  It  is  possible  that  France's  rejection  of  the  European  Defense
Community  on  August  30,  1954,  may  have  been  in  part  payment  for  Soviet  good
offices  on  behalf  of  France  at  Geneva.  But  it  is  certain  that  many  French  were
persuaded  that  the  U.S.  and  the  UK  furnished  inadequate  support  to  France  dur-
ing the  latter  phases  of  the  war,  and  at  the  Conference.  And  it  is  equally  certain
that  American  policy  in  the  aftermath  of  Geneva  widely  alienated  affection  for
the  U.S.  in  France,  and  created  that  lack  of  confidence  which  the  Suez  crisis  of
summer,  1956,  translated  into  outright  distrust.

After  the  Geneva  Conference,  all  the  governments  involved  in  the  Accords,  with
one  significant  exception,  anticipated  that  France  would  remain  in  Vietnam.  The
exception  was  the  State  of  Vietnam,  whose  Premier,  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  was  de-
termined to  uproot  French  influence  as  a  concomitant  to  the  establishment  of  a
genuinely  independent  nationalist  government.  The  policy  of  the  United  States
was  initially  directed  toward  a  partnership  with  France,  a  joint  sponsorship  of
Diem  and  the  newly  independent  nation  he  headed.

Almost  at  once,  however,  U.S.  policy  began  to  respond  to  military  urgency,
and  this  in  turn  caused  the  U.S.  to  move  beyond  partnership  to  primacy.  In  Sep-
tember of  1954,  SEATO  was  brought  into  being,  its  protection  extended  to  Viet-
nam by  a  protocol  to  the  Manila  Pact.  The  U.S.  resolved  through  SEATO  to  balk
further  expansion  of  communist  dominion,  and  looked  to  transforming  Vietnam
into  a  key  redoubt  in  the  line  of  containment.  The  U.S.  was  determined  that
Vietnam  would  become  politically  sound,  economically  self-sufficient,  and  mili-
tarily capable  of  providing  for  its  own  internal  security,  coping  with  invasion
from  North  Vietnam,  and  contributing  to  the  deterrent  strength  of  the  SEATO
coalition.  France,  then  beset  with  internal  political  divisions,  and  plagued  with
Algeria,  evidenced  doubt,  indecision,  and  occasional  reluctance  in  aiding  Vietnam
toward  the  foregoing  objectives.  The  U.S.  was  not  prepared  to  wait.  In  late  Sep-
tember 1954,  the  U.S.  cut  out  the  French  as  middle-men  in  all  its  assistance  for
Vietnam,  and  began  to  deal  directly  with  Diem,  his  government,  and  his  armed
forces.

France  did  not  readily  accept  this  enlarged  American  role,  nor  was  there  com-
plete agreement  with  the  U.S.  Government  that  the  United  States  should  pursue
a  further  shouldering  aside  of  France.  Through  the  fall  of  1954,  France-U.S.
relations  worsened,  and  a  policy  debate  developed  in  Washington.  Once  again,
military  considerations  emerged  as  paramount.  The  JCS  were  originally  opposed
to  the  United  States  assuming  responsibility  for  training  the  Army  of  Vietnam.
They  took  the  position,  however,  that  if  political  considerations  dictated  such  a
U.S.  involvement  "the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  would  agree  to  the  assignment  of  a
training  mission  to  MAAG  Saigon,  with  safeguards  against  French  interference


182 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

with  the  U.S.  training  mission."  On  October  26,  1954,  the  Secretary  of  Defense,
acting  on  behalf  of  the  President,  instructed  the  JCS  to  prepare  a  "long-range
program  for  the  organization  and  training  of  a  minimum  number  of  free  Vietnam
forces  necessary  for  internal  security."  The  development  of  this  plan  and  an  ap-
propriate working  relationship  with  the  French  continued  into  1955,  and  neces-
sitated the  dispatch  to  Vietnam  of  General  J.  Lawton  Collins,  with  Ambassadorial
status,  to  obtain  a  tri-partite  agreement  acceptable  in  Saigon,  in  Paris,  and  in
Washington.  During  November  1954,  the  JCS  expressed  serious  reservations
about  the  success  of  such  a  combined  undertaking.  Nevertheless,  the  NSC  con-
sidered the  policy  sound,  and  this  judgment  was  confirmed  from  the  field  by  Gen-
eral Collins.  Collins  reported  that:

It  would  be  disastrous  if  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  would  be  with-
drawn prematurely  since  otherwise  Vietnam  would  be  overrun  by  an  enemy
attack  before  the  Manila  Pact  Powers  could  be  enacted.

Collins  recommended  that  the  United  States  continue  military  aid  to  France  to
"encourage  the  French  to  retain  sufficient  forces."  In  the  meantime,  events  in
Vietnam  seemed  to  support  those  who,  like  the^  ICS,  continued  to  entertain  strong
reservations  about  the  future  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  and  his  government.  Diem  man-
aged to  survive  attempted  coups  by  army  leaders,  and  succeeded  in  maintaining
an  unhappy  peace  with  the  several  armed  factions  of  Cochinchina.  But  his  politi-
cal future  remained  questionable  at  best.  At  the  same  time,  the  French  mission
in  Hanoi  pressed  hard  to  preserve  French  economic  and  cultural  prerogatives  in
North  Vietnam,  and  certain  French  political  leaders  in  Paris  spoke  grandilo-
quently of  a  cooperative  modus  vivendi  with  the  DRV  becoming  a  model  for
east-west  relations — a  disquieting  message  for  the  U.S.  Secretary  of  State  and
those  who  shared  his  convictions  within  the  Administration.  Finally,  parallel  to
these  developments,  the  Emperor  Bao  Dai,  retaliating  for  Diem's  vituperative
political  campaign  against  him,  actively  sought  to  supplant  Diem.

All  the  foregoing  tension  resolved  to  two  central  issues  between  the  United
States  and  France.  The  first  was  the  question  of  how  and  by  whom  Vietnam's
armed  forces  were  to  be  trained.  The  second,  and  more  far-reaching,  was  whether
Ngo  Dinh  Diem  was  to  remain  at  the  head  of  Vietnam's  government,  or  whether
he  was  to  be  replaced  by  another  nationalist  leader  more  sympathetic  to  Bao  Dai
and  France.  The  first  issue  was  resolved  relatively  quickly.  General  Collins  struck
an  agreement  with  General  Ely  in  Vietnam  by  which,  despite  serious  misgivings
in  Paris,  France  agreed  to  turn  over  the  training  of  the  Vietnamese  army  to  the
U.S.  and  to  withdraw  French  cadres.  On  February  12,  1955,  the  U.S.  assumed
responsibility  for  training  Vietnamese  forces,  and  the  French  disassociation  began.

But  the  political  controversy  over  Diem  was  less  easily  resolved.  Diem  exacer-
bated matters  with  increasingly  vehement  stricture  against  the  French  and  Bao
Dai.  The  United  States  on  its  part  was  insensitive  to  the  impact  within  France  of
Diem's  militant  anti-communism — frequently  directed  at  the  French  Left — and  of
the  rancor  aroused  by  U.S.  statements  portraying  America  as  the  only  friend  of
Vietnamese  nationalism.  The  U.S.  did  alert,  however,  to  French  statements  that
Diem  was  categojjcaUx. incapable  of  unifying  Vietnamese  nationalisls.  French
advice  to  the  U.S.  that  Diem  should,  therefore,  be  replaced  was  seconded  by
Ambassador  Collins  from  Vietnam.  Throughout  the  winter  and  spring.  Secretary
Dulles  and  the  Department  of  State  in  general  seemed  disposed  to  consider  fa-
vorably suggestions  that  an  alternative  leader  for  the  Vietnamese  be__placed  in
power.  However,  despite  an  ostensibly  thorough  search,  no  nationalist  leader  with
qualities  competitive  with  Diem's  was  identified.


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  183

Both  the  U.S.  and  France  were  then  caught  up  in  the  sweep  of  events.  The
armed  sects  directly  challenged  Diem's  authority,  and  he  responded  with  force.
An  uneasy  truce  ended  the  first  clash  in  March,  and  amid  the  mounting  tension
in  April  1955,  the  U.S.,  France,  and  amid  the  mounting  tension  in  April  1955,
the  U.S.,  France,  and  Bao  Dai  all  sought  actively  to  bring  about  a  change  in  the
GVN.  On  28  April,  Diem,  against  U.S.  advice,  against  French  advice,  and  against
the  advice  of  his  cabinet,  moved  again  against  the  sects.  When  Binh  Xuyen  re-
sisted in  Saigon,  he  committed  the  Vietnamese  army  to  battle.  Diem's  forces  won
an  immediate  military  victory,  and  simultaneously  Diem's  brother,  Nhu,  co-opted
a  committee  of  nationalist  figures  who  called  for  Bao  Dai's  removal,  and  transfer
of  civil  and  military  power  to  Diem.

Encouraged  by  Diem's  success,  the  U.S.  declared  its  unequivocal  support  for
him  as  apposed  to  Bao  Dai.  The  U.S.  choice  presented  acute  difficulties  for
France.  The  French  Government  was  convinced  that  Nhu's  "Revolutionary  Com-
mittee" was  under  Viet  Minh  influence,  and  was  strongly  resentful  of  a  renewed
GVN  campaign  against  French  presence.  In  May  1955,  France,  the  U.S.,  and
Britain  met  in  Paris  to  discuss  European  defense,  but  France  promptly  made
Vietnam  the  principal  agenda  item.  France  maintained  that  the  U.S.,  in  backing
Diem,  forced  upon  France  the  necessity  for  withdrawing  altogether  from  Viet-
nam. The  French  Foreign  Minister  Faure  held  that  Diem  was  "not ^nly  incapable
but  mad  .  .  .  France  can  no  longer  take  risks  with  him."  Secretary  Dulles  in
reply  indicated  that  the  U.S.  was  aware  of  Diem's  weaknesses,  but  stressed  Diem's
recent  successes  as  indicating  redeeming  qualities.  But,  Dulles  pointed  out  "Viet-
nam is  not  worth  a  quarrel  with  France,"  and  offered  U.S.  withdrawal  in  prefer-
ence to  allied  disunity.  No  decision  was  taken  immediately,  and  during  a  recess
Secretary  Dulles  received  advice  from  the  ICS  that  Diem  seemed  the  most  prom-
ising avenue  to  achievement  of  U.S.  objectives,  and  that  while  withdrawal  of  the
French  Expeditionary  Corps  is  "ultimately  to  be  desired,"  a  precipitate  with-
drawal was  to  be  prevented  since  it  would  "result  in  an  increasingly  unstable  and
precarious  situation"  and  the  eventual  loss  of  South  Vietnam  to  communism.  Sec-
retary Dulles  then  proposed  to  the  French  that  they  continue  to  support  Diem
until  a  national  assembly  were  elected.  British  support  for  Diem  seems  to  have
swayed  Faure,  and  he  accepted  Dulles'  proposal.  The  tri-partite  meeting  ended
on  a  note  of  harmony,  but  the  undertones  were  distinct:  the  days  of  joint  U.S.-
French policy  were  over;  thereafter,  the  U.S.  would  act  independently  of  France
in  Vietnam.

Backedjby  the  United  States,  Diem  refused  to  open  consultation  with  the  j
North  Vietnamese  concerning  general  elections  when  the  date  for  these  fell  due  j
in  July  1955.  Pressing  his  military  advantage  against  the  sects,  he  moved  to  con-
solidate his  position  politically  within  South  Vietnam.  In  October,  he  won  a  re-
sounding victory  in  a  popular  referendum  in  which  voters  were  given  a  choice
between  Diem  and  Bao  Dai.  As  Diem's  political  strength  grew,  his  relations  with
Paris  deteriorated.  In  December  1955,  Diem  suddenly  terminated  the  existing
economic  and  financial  agreements  with  France,  and  called  upon  France  to  de-
nounce the  Geneva  agreements  and  break  relations  with  Hanoi.  Soon  thereafter,
he  withdrew  South  Vietnamese  representatives  from  the  French  Union  Assembly.

On  January  2,  1956,  general  elections  in  France  produced  a  government  under
Socialist  Guy  Mollet,  a  third  of  the  members  of  which  were  communists  or  avowed
neutralists.  In  early  March,  MoUet's  Foreign  Minister,  Pineau,  declared  in  a
speech  to  the  Anglo-American  Press  Association  in  Paris  that  France  would  ac-
tively seek  policy  position  bridging  East  and  West,  and  that  there  was  no  unanim-
ity of  policy  among  the  U.S.,  UK,  and  France.  He  cited  UK  Middle  East  policy


184 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  U.S.  support  for  Diem  as  contrary  to  French  interests,  and  condemned  both
powers  for  stirring  up  the  Moslem  world  to  France's  distinct  disadvantage  in
North  Africa.  A  few  days  later,  at  a  SEATO  Council  meeting  in  Karachi,  Pineau
proclaimed  the  end  of  the  "era  of  aggression,"  and  called  for  a  "policy  of  coex-
istence."

Action  followed  Pineau's  line.  On  March  22,  1956,  France  agreed  with  Diem
to  withdraw  the  FEC  altogether.  On  April  26,  1956,  the  French  High  Command
in  Saigon  was  disestablished.  On  the  due  date  for  the  general  elections  agreed  to
at  Geneva,  France  possessed  no  military  forces  in  Vietnam.  And  the  date  for  the
fulfillment  of  the  political  portions  of  the  Settlement,  July  1956,  coincided  with
the  inception  of  the.  Suez  crisis.

End  of  Summary

1. AID  FOR  FRANCE  IN  INDOCHINA,  1950-1954
A. THE  AMERICAN  PERSPECTIVE  DEVELOPS

1. The  U.S.  and  the  French  Colonial  War

Because  the  early  phase  (1946-1949)  of  the  Indochina  war  was  an  overt  at-
tempt by  the  French  to  reassert  authority  and  control  over  their  Indochinese
colonies,  the  United  States,  although  aware  that  European  Recovery  Program
(ERP)  funds  were  mdjrectly  med Jo  finance  the  war,  refused  to  support  that  war
directly.  However,  American  actions  taken  to  assure  a  neutral  position — refusal
to  sell  armaments  to  the  French  for  use  in  Indochina;  refusal  to  transport  troops,
arms,  or  ammunition  "to  or  from  Netherlands  East  Indies  or  French  Indochina"
— accompanied  by  public  and  private  statements  of  anti-colonialist  sentiments,
did  constitute,  at  least  in  French  eyes,  a  policy  hostile  to  the  French  interest  in
Indochina.  Therefore,  early  in  1947,  the  Department  of  State  attempted  to  reas-
sure the  French  Government,  and  to  make  U.S.  policies  and  actions  more  pa-
latable to  them:

...  In  spite  any  misunderstanding  which  might  have  arisen  in  minds
French  in  regard  to  our  position  concerning  Indochina  they  must  appreciate
that  we  have  fully  recognized  France's  sovereign  position  in  that  area  and
we  do  not  wish  to  have  it  appear  that  we  are  in  any  way  endeavoring  under-
mine that  position,  and  French  should  know  it  is  our  desire  to  be  helpful
and  we  stand  ready  assist  any  appropriate  way  we  can  to  find  solution  for
Indochinese  problem.  At  same  time  we  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  fact  that
there  are  two  sides  this  problem  and  that  our  reports  indicate  both  a  lack
French  understanding  of  other  side  (more  in  Saigon  than  in  Paris)  and  con-
tinued existence  dangerously  outmoded  colonial  outlook  and  methods  in
area.  .  .  .

Neither  direct  nor  indirect  assistance  to  the  French  effort  in  Indochina  was
deemed  "appropriate,"  however,  until  the  French  took  concrete  steps  to  grant
autonomy  to  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Vietnam.  The  U.S.  was  prepared  to  support
the  "Bao  Dai  solution"  for  Vietnam  when  and  if  Bao  Dai  acquired  genuine  inde-
pendence. The  U.S.  warned  France  against  settling  for  a  "native  government
[headed  by  Bao  Dai]  which  by  failing  to  develop  appeal  among  Vietnamese  might
become  virtually  [a]  puppet  government,  separated  from  [the]  people  and  existing
only  by  [the]  presence  [of]  French  military  forces."


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  185

In  March,  1949,  in  the  so-called  Elysee  Agreement,  France  contracted  with
Bao  Dai  to  grant  "independence  within  the  French  Union"  to  Vietnam,  Cam-
bodia, and  Laos.  Despite  U.S.  urgings,  the  Elysee  Agreement  remained  a  po-
tentially empty  and  ill-defined  French  promise  for  eleven  months.  In  that  period,
the  Nationalist  forces  of  Chiang  Kai-shek  were  driven  from  the  China  mainland,
and  in  November,  Mao's  legions  arrived  at  the  Indochina  border.  In  January,
1950,  Ho  Chi  Minh  declared  that  his  was  the  "only  legal  government  of  the  Viet-
namese people"  and  indicated  his  willingness  to  cooperate  with  any  nation  willing
to  recognize  it  on  the  basis  of  "equality  and  mutual  respect  of  national  sover-
eignty and  territory."  The  Communist  Chinese  promptly  responded  with  recog-
nition, followed  by  the  Soviets.  In  France,  there  was  a  sharp  debate  in  the  Na-
tional Assembly  between  Leftist  advocates  of  an  immediate  truce  with  the  Viet
Minh,  and  Government  supporters  of  ratification  for  the  Elysee  Agreement.  On
2  February  1950,  the  French  Government  prevailed,  and  the  Elysee  Agreement
was  formally  ratified.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  United  States  determined
that  this  action  met  its  minimum  requirements  for  tangible  French  progress  to-
wards Vietnamese  autonomy.  On  3  February,  President  Truman  approved  recog-
nition of  the  States  of  Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia.  Within  three  months  the
United  States  decided  to  extend  economic  and  military  aid  to  the  new  States.  On
8  May  1950,  the  Secretary  of  State  announced  that:

The  United  States  Government,  convinced  that  neither  national  inde-|
pendence  nor  democratic  evolution  exist  in  any  area  dominated  by  Soviet  |
imperialism,  considers  the  situation  to  be  such  as  to  warrant  its  according'
economic  aid  and  military  equipment  to  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina
and  to  France  in  order  to  assist  them  in  restoring  stabiHty  and  permitting
these  states  to  pursue  their  peaceful  and  democratic  development.

The  U.S.  involvement  in  the  Vietnam  war  originated  with  its  decision  to  pro-
vide assistance  to  France  and  the  Associated  States,  and  to^form  MAAG  Indo-
china. Therefore,  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  understand  the  reasons  for  the
decision,  the  form  of  its  execution,  and  its  effects.

2. The  Containment  of  Communism

U.S.  chagrin  and  increasing  concern  over  the  post-World  War  II  expansion  of
the  Soviet  Union  in  Europe,  together  with  fear  of  further  gains  by  communism,
set  the  tone  of  U.S.  policy  toward  Asian  communist  nations  in  the  1948-1950
period.  As  the  Secretary  of  State's  statement  above  indicates,  these  were  the  days
of  the  "monoHthic  Communist  bloc,"  dominated  by  the  Soviet  Union.  A  National
Security  Council  policy  paper  of  1949  stated  that:

The  USSR  is  now  an  Asiatic  power  of  the  first  magnitude  with  expand-
ing influence  and  interest  extending  throughout  continental  Asia  and  into
the  Pacific.  Since  the  defeat  of  Japan  .  .  .  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  able
to  consolidate  its  strategic  position  until  the  base  of  Soviet  power  in  Asia
comprises  not  only  the  Soviet  Far  East,  but  also  China  north  of  the  Great
Wall,  Northern  Korea,  Sakahalin,  and  the  Kuriles.

The  question  of  how  best  to  oppose  the  expansion  of  communism  in  Asia  was
raised  to  crisis  proportions  by  the  "loss"  of  China.  An  extensive  and  acrimonious


186 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I

national  debate  on  foreign  policy  was  stirred,  conducted  in  the  midst  of  growing
public  apprehension  over  communist  penetration,  espionage,  and  subversion  in
Europe  and  within  the  United  States.  Many  advocated  increased  aid  to  the  Chinese
Nationalists,  who  were  regarded  by  many,  even  at  this  late  date,  as  the  bulwark
containing  communism  in  Asia.  Although  no  major  emphasis  was  given  Indo-
!  china  in  1949,  NSC  papers  did  discuss  the  importance  of  the  Franco-Viet  Minh
struggle,  and  link  the  future  of  Indochina  with  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world:

In  any  event,  colonial-nationalist  conflict  provides  a  fertile  field  for  sub-
versive communist  activities,  and  it  is  now  clear  that  Southeast  Asia  is  the
target  of  a  coordinated  offensive  directed  by  the  Kremlin.  In  seeking  to  gain
control  of  Southeast  Asia,  the  Kremlin  is  motivated  in  part  by  a  desire  to
acquire  Southeast  Asia's  resources  and  communication  lines,  and  to  deny
them  to  us.  But  the  political  gains  which  would  accrue  to  the  USSR  from
communist  capture  of  Southeast  Asia  are  equally  significant.  The  extension
of  communist  authority  in  China  represents  a  grievous  political  defeat  for
us:  if  Southeast  Asia  also  is  swept  by  communism  we  shall  have  suffered
a  major  political  rout  the  repercussions  of  which  will  be  felt  throughout  the
rest  of  the  world,  especially  in  the  Middle  East  and  in  a  then  critically  ex-
posed Australia.

It  was  precisely  the  extension  of  communist  authority  over  China  referred  to
above  that  led  to  increased  emphasis  in  U.S.  policy  on  Indochina  in  late  1949
and  1950.

Following  the  Chinese  Communist  victories  of  1949  and  the  movement  of
Chinese  Communist  troops  to  the  border  of  Indochina  in  November  of  that  year,
NSC  64  (February  27,  1950)  [Doc.  1]  concluded  that  "the  Departments  of  State
and  Defense  should  prepare,  as  a  matter  of  priority,  a  program  of  all  practicable
measures  designed  to  protect  U.S.  security  interests  in  Indochina."  On  the  same
P  day,  following  the  Communist  Chinese  (January  18)  and  the  Soviet  (January  30)
recognition  of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  regime,  the  United  States  announced  its  recogni-
tion of  the  Bao  Dai  Government.  Theretofore,  the  U.S.  had  remained  neutral,
hesitating  to  choose  between  supporting  France,  a  friendly  colonial  power  engaged
in  re-establishing  its  authority,  or  supporting  the  Viet  Minh,  a  communist-domi-
nated independence  movement  in  opposition  to  that  European  ally.  This  dilemma
had  been  resolved  by  the  victory  of  the  Chinese  Communists  over  the  National-
ists, and  by  the  threat  posed  to  Indochina.  The  United  States  policy  of  support
for  the  French  and  the  Associated  States  was  adjudged  one  befitting  an  anti-
colonial  democracy:  support  of  nationalism  and  independence;  opposition  to  at-
tempted encroachments  thereon  by  international  communism.

3. "The  Line  of  Containment"  and  "The  Domino  Theory"

The  logic  of  this  shift  in  U.S.  policy  is  found  not  only  in  the  direct  threat  to
Southeast  Asia  posed  by  Communist  China  (and  the  Soviet  Union),  but  also  in
the  broader  strategic  concept  of  a  line  of  containment,  and  in  the  early  articula-
tion of  what  later  became  known  as  the  "domino  theory."  Discussion  of  the  line
of  containment  centered  about  where  that  line  was  to  be  drawn:  Indochina,  and,
later,  Korea,  fell  on  the  free  side  of  that  line.  The  doming  notion  had  been  ad-
-jjL-fc-^  -  yanced  by  General  Claire  Chennault,  among^oth_ers,  injhe  reference  to  National-
ist  China;  the  domino  theory  as  applied  to  Indochina  reinforced  the  decision  of
where  to  draw  the  line  of  containment.  Both  ideas  were  embodied  by  the  Joint


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  187

Chiefs  of  Staff  in  a  1950  memorandum  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  evaluating
"the  strategic  importance,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  of  Southeast  Asia" :

c.  Southeast  Asia  is  a  vital  segment  in  the  line  of  containment  of  Com-
munism stretching  from  Japan  southward  and  around  to  the  Indian  Penin-
sula .  .  .  The  security  of  the  three  major  non-Communist  base  areas  in  this
quarter  of  the  world — Japan,  India,  and  Australia — depends  in  a  large  meas-
ure on  the  denial  of  Southeast  Asia  to  the  Communists.  If  Southeast  Asia  is
lost,  these  three  base  areas  will  tend  to  be  isolated  from  one  another;

d.  The  fall  of  Indochina  would  undoubtedly  lead  to  the  fall  of  the  other
mainland  states  of  Southeast  Asia  .  .  .

e.  The  fall  of  Southeast  Asia  would  result  in  the  virtually  complete  denial
to  the  United  States  of  the  Pacific  Littoral  of  Asia  .  .  .

f.  .  .  .  Soviet  control  of  all  the  major  components  of  Asia's  war  potential
might  become  a  decisive  factor  affecting  the  balance  of  power  between  the
United  States  and  the  USSR  .  .  .

g.  A  Soviet  position  of  dominance  over  the  Far  East  would  also  threaten
the  United  States  position  in  Japan  .  .  .  The  feasibility  of  retention  by  the
United  States  of  its  offshore  island  bases  could  thus  be  jeopardized.  [Doc.  3]

This  theory,  whether  more  or  less  completely  articulated,  appears  in  the  relevant
NSC  papers  of  the  Indochina  War  period,  and  underlies  all  major  U.S.  policy
decisions  taken  relevant  to  the  area.

4. U.S.  Perception  of  the  Chinese  Communist  Threat

In  the  words  of  NSC  64  (February,  1950),  "The  presence  of  Chinese  Com-
munist troops  along  the  border  of  Indochina  makes  it  possible  for  arms,  material
and  troops  to  move  freely  from  Communist  China  to  the  northern  Tonkin  area
now  controlled  by  Ho  Chi  Minh.  There  is  already  evidence  of  movement  of
arms."  NIE  5/maintained  somewhat  later,  as  the  decision  to  help  the  French  was
being  re-examined,  that:  "The  Communist  Chinese  regime  is  already  furnishing
the  Viet  Minh  materiel,  training,  and  technical  assistance.  Official  French  sources
report  that  Chinese  Communist  troops  are  already  present  in  Tonkin  in  some
strength  .  .  .  Direct  intervention  by  Chinese  Communist  troops  may  occur  at
any  time  ...  It  is  almost  certain  to  occur  in  strength  whenever  there  is  danger  '
either  that  the  Viet  Minh  will  fail  to  attain  its  military  objective  of  driving  the
French  out  of  Indochina,  or  that  the  Bao  Dai  Government  is  succeeding  in  un-  *
dermining  the  support  of  the  Viet  Minh."  NIE  5  appeared  on  December  29,  1950.

Although  the  threat  of  intervention  to  be  expected  from  Communist  China  did
not  again  reach  this  intensity  or  certainty  during  the  remainder  of  the  war — the
estimated  probability  of  intervention  declined  consistently  after  the  publication
of  NIE  5 — estimates  throughout  the  period  indicate  continuing  Communist
Chinese  provision  of  military  arms,  materiel,  and  training  to  the  Viet  Minh,  and
the  existence  of  Communist  Chinese  potential  for  direct  intervention.  No  direct
reference  was  made  to  possible  Viet  Minh  resentment  toward,  or  resistance  to,
direct  Chinese  intervention.

In  sum,  the  U.S.  perceived  a  major  Chinese  threat  at  the  time  the  decision  to
support  France  and  the  Associated  States  was  made;  a  high  probability  was  as-
signed direct  Chinese  Communist  intervention  at  the  time  this  decision  was  being
confirmed;  this  assigned  probability  declined  rapidly,  and  it  remained  low  through
the  post-Korean  war  period.  It  was  believed  that  the  Chinese  were  providing
assistance  to  the  Viet  Minh  throughout  the  period  late  1949-1954.


188 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

5. U.S.  Perceptions  of  the  Situation  Within  Vietnam

On  April  5,  1950,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  referring  to  intelligence  estimates,
indicated  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  their  view  that  "the  situation  in  Southeast
Asia  has  deteriorated,"  and  that,  further,  "without  United  States  assistance,  this
deterioration  will  be  accelerated."  (The  implication  that  U.S.  assistance  would
result  in  improvement  over  and  above  the  present  situation  cannot  be  detected  in
this  carefully  worded  statement.)  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  went  on  to  state  that:
"In  general,  the  basic  conditions  of  political  and  economic  stability  in  this  area,
as  well  as  the  military  and  internal  security  conditions,  are  unsatisfactory.  These
factors  are  closely  interrelated,  and  it  is  probable  that,  from  the  long-term  point
of  view,  political  and  economic  stability  is  the  controlling  factor.  On  the  other
hand,  the  military  situation  in  some  areas,  particularly  Indochina,  is  of  pressing
urgency."

NIE  5  was  the  over-all  U.S.  assessment  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  closest  in
time  to  the  U.S.  decision  to  support  the  French  and  the  Associated  States.  It  esti-
mated the  French  position  as  "critically  endangered  by  the  Viet  Minh,"  and  as
"precarious."  Combining  the  more  detailed  estimates  of  this  document  with  state-
ments and  estimates  contained  in  other  U.S.  documents  contemporary  with  NIE
5,  the  following  picture  emerges:

a.  The  Military  Situation

(1)  French-Viet  Minh  areas  of  control — see  Figures  1-5

(2)  Force  ratio — French  between  1.5  and  1.6  to  1  Viet  Minh;  vis-a-vis
regular  forces  in  the  Tonkin  Delta,  the  ratio  was  reversed — approxi-
mately 1.15  Viet  Minh  to  1  French  (NIE  5).

(3)  Equipment  status — French  superiority,  but  Viet  Minh  improving  due
to  Chinese  aid.

(4)  Mobility — Viet  Minh  superior;  French  roadbound.

(5)  Strategy — French  strategy  lacking  in  aggressiveness,  defensive,  of
doubtful  value.

{6)\  Status  of  Vietnamese  National  Army — essentially  none;  "only  a  slight
I  chance  that  the  French  can  maintain  their  military  position  long

\enough"  to  build  such  an  army.
(7)  Relative  capabilities — danger  of  a  major  military  defeat  of  the  French

by  the  Viet  Minh  in  Tonkin  within  six  to  nine  months,  which  would

jeopardize  the  French  position  in  the  remainder  of  Vietnam,  Laos,  and

Cambodia.

b.  The  Economic  and  Political  Situation

French  resources  badly  strained;  little  or  no  real  nationalist  Vietnamese  leader-
ship, government;  little  popular  support  of  Bao  Dai  regime;  political  and  economic
situation  generally  poor.

c.  French  Objectives  in  Vietnam

French  slowness  and  obstruction  over  the  years  in  creating  a  Vietnamese
national  government  and  national  army  (March  8,  1949,  agreements  were  not
ratified  by  France  until  February  2,  1950),  and  continued  slowness  in  giving  con-


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  189


TA


A


MILCS
I  1


100


L .  Eodnrd,  Tne  Culckrand  Vhr
( BoGton :  little,  Lrown,  (iCo . , ) ,
pp.it-5.


/V  G


y;^r.r?  ....  -^.^^'^^V


,.-r- -  -\ -->- I  lU'ii f)honn


.  'V


X/cnq
Khouanrj


sour  hi


^6*^ v^nnnkhct^'.^  Y\  Jg^c:^  -CHIN  A


o (^^~%>  Yo ursine — " ■"

Saravane :r""~

^  ALtopcu  i  ' '^-^^^^[llKEE
^  " \  ^

J '*^«^'<iO^^V  SEA  —

C  ''i<ontunj^^ZZL


\Ban  Me  Thuot^.


 uS>v r-J$r. ^\  DJiring  fphanrang


-\N ha  trcinc]
Da  la  t  V

. °  I


L^-^;  Violrninh-
c'omincifcd
Zones,  1949


.Lame';  I -/.J


u"  Po ( i(o  Cor  do  "'f


190 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


clbmlnafed  TONKIX  in  I9i9

Zones,  1949  '


Soiirce:  L.Eodr'.rd,Tr.e
Quj.ckD:md loswOa;  Little,

trol  of  the  bureaucracy  to  the  Vietnamese,  indicate  a  reluctant  departure,  if  any
departure,  from  colonial  objectives.

d. French  Resolve  to  Remain  in  Vietnam

.  .  there  are  grounds  for  questioning  the  French  will  to  remain  in  Indo-
china."

Thus,  the  American  perception  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  in  1950  was  generally
one  of  gloom,  with  little  light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel;  in  retrospect,  it  seems
reasonably  accurate.

B. THE  BEGINNING  OF  AMERICAN  AID

1. The  Decision  to  Assist  France  and  the  Associated  States

a. French  Request  Aid

United  States  involvement  in  the  bleak  Indochinese  situation  was  hastened
when,  on  February  16,  1950,  the  French  requested  U.S.  military  and  economic
assistance  for  the  prosecution  of  the  Indochinese  war.  The  French  forwarded


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  191


COCHINCIilNA  IN  1949


Vletminh-

dominated

ZonesJ949


Source:  L.  Eodard^

The  fijickc^.nd  Var
( Boston :  uCtlc ,  Ir  cr*'n3:Co.
1967), 30.


192 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I


DISSIDBNT  ACTIVITIES  IN  INDOCHINA

(3  November  /95oj


/■


Areas  in  ".vhich  dommunist-Icd  rebels
are  challenging  government  autiiority.

Areas  in  v/hich  Communist-instigated
guerrilla  attacks  riave  recentlyoccurred.


SOURCE:  CIA,r:iS-5

Map  Suppleniont
5  January  3-951


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  193


I.


194 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

their  request  after  deciding  "to  set  forth  to  the  United  States  Government  fully
and  frankly  the  extreme  gravity  of  the  situation  in  Indochina  .  .  ."

.  .  .  the  truth  of  the  matter  was  that  the  effort  in  Indochina  was  such
of  a  drain  on  France  that  a  long-term  program  of  assistance  was  necessary
and  it  was  only  from  the  United  States  that  it  could  come.  Otherwise  .  .  .
it  was  very  likely  that  France  might  be  forced  to  reconsider  her  entire  policy
with  the  possible  view  to  cutting  her  losses  and  withdrawing  from  Indochina
.  .  .  looking  into  the  future  it  was  obvious  .  .  .  that  France  could  not  con-
tinue indefinitely  to  bear  this  burden  alone  if  the  expected  developments  in
regard  to  increased  assistance  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  came  about  ...  In  any
event  the  French  Government  was  confronted  with  necessity  of  reducing
the  present  French  forces  in  Indochina  by  at  least  25,000  not  only  for
budgetary  reasons,  but  because  additional  men  were  urgently  needed  in  con-
nection with  French  national  military  program.

Yet  this  appeal  for  aid,  its  thinly-veiled  reinforcing  arguments  referring  to  with-
drawal and  the  defense  of  Europe  (on  the  day  following  the  severing  of  U.S.-
Bulgarian relations),  was  unaccompanied  by  a  willingness  to  satisfy  a  U.S.  request
for  France  to  announce  the  "evolutionary  nature"  of  the  governments  of  the
Associated  States,  or  to  clarify  otherwise  the  French  intentions  toward  Indo-
china.

On  February  27,  a  Department  of  State  report  on  the  position  of  the  United
States  with  respect  to  Indochina  was  submitted  for  the  NSC's  consideration.  Issued
on  February  27  as  NSC  64,  the  report  concluded  that:

10.  It  is  important  to  United  States  security  interests  that  all_practicable
measures?  be  taken  to  prevent  further  Communist  expansion  in  Southeast
Asia.  Indochina  is  a  key  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  is  under  immediate
threat.

11.  The  neighboring  countries  of  Thailand  and  Burma  could  be  expected
to  fall  under  Communist  domination  if  Indochina  were  controlled  by  a
Communist-dominated  government.  The  balance  of  Southeast  Asia  would
then  be  in  grave  hazard.

12.  Accordingly,  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense  should  prepare
as  a  matter  of  priority  a  program  of  all  practicable  measures^  designed  to  pro-
tect United  States  security  interests  in  Indochina.  [Doc.  1]

To  "facilitate"  Department  of  Defense  consideration  of  NSC  64,  then  Deputy
Under  secretary  of  State  Dean^ Rusk}  provided  Major  General  James  H.  Burns  of
OSD  a  brief  statement  of  Department  of  State  policy  in  Indochina  and  South-
east Asia:

The  Department  of  State  believes  that  within  the  limitations  imposed  by
existing  commitments  and  strategic  priorities,  the  resources  of  the  United
States  should  be  deployed  to  reserve  Indochina  and  Southeast  Asia  from
further  Communist  encroachment.  The  Department  of  State  has  accordingly
already  engaged  all  its  political  resources  to  the  end  that  this  object  be  se-
cured. The  Department  is  now  engaged  in  the  process  of  urgently  examining
what  additional  economic  resources  can  effectively  be  engaged  in  the  same
operation.


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  195


It  is  now,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Department,  a  matter  of  the  greatest
urgency  that  the  Department  of  Defense  assess  the  strategic  aspects  of  the
situation  and  consider,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  how  the  United
States  can  best  contribute  to  the  prevention  of  further  Communist  encroach-
ment in  that  area.

:

:  In  a  memorandum  for  the  President  of  March  6,  1950,  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense described  U.S.  options  as  follows:

The  French  are  irrevocably  committed  in  Indochina  and  are  supporting
'  the  three  states  as  a  move  aimed  at  achieving  non-Communist  political  sta-

bility .  .  .  The  choice  confronting  the  United  States  is  to  support  the  legal
governments  in  Indochina  or  to  face  the  extension  of  Communism  over  the
remainder  of  the  continental  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  possibly  west-
ward .  .  .

b. The  Griffin  Mission

While  the  choice  among  alternatives  awaited  provision  of  the  views  of  the  Joint
} Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the  military  departments,  the  Secretary  of  State  sent  to  the  Far
j East  "the  Griffin  Mission,"  which  was  given  the  task  of  surveying  "the  kinds  and
approximate  value  of  assistance  needed"  in  Indochina  (among  other  countries).
I Departing  when  it  did,  some  five  months  following  the  fall  of  Nationalist  China,
and  headed  by  the  former  Deputy  Chief  of  the  Aid  Mission  to  Mainland  China,
the  Griffin  Mission  was  probably  intended  to  avoid  further  attacks  on  the  State
I Department's  Asia  policy  as  well  as  to  determine  how  U.S.  economic  resources
I might  effectively  be  employed  in  Southeast  Asia.

I  On  March  22,  the  Griffin  Mission  report  recommended  U.S.  aid  for  a  program
\  of  rural  rehabilitation,  the  provision  of  limited  amounts  of  commodities  and  in-
j;  dustrial  equipment,  and  a  program  of  technical  assistance.  These  measures  were
I  estimated  to  cost  $23.5  million  for  the  period  through  June,  1951.  The  mission
i  also  recommended  the  "psychological  shock  of  ships  with  military  aid  material  in  [
!  the  immediate  future,"  as  a  measure  to  dramatize  the  U.S.  commitment  to  those  i
j on  the  scene.

i c. JCS  Views

!  On  April  5,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  responded  to  a  request  by  the  Secretary
of  Defense  with  recommendations  for  measures  which,  from  the  United  States
military  point  of  view,  might  prevent  communist  expansion  in  Southeast  Asia.
The  six  most  important  points  made  by  the  Chiefs  are  these:

( 1 )  A  recommendation  for  early  implementation  of  military  aid  programs  for
Indochina  and  the  other  states  of  Southeast  Asia,  with  funds  already  allocated
to  the  states  of  Southeast  Asia,  to  be  delivered  at  the  earliest  practicable  date  and
to  be  augmented  as  a  matter  of  urgency  with  funds  from  the  unallocated  portion
of  the  President's  emergency  fund.  For  the  next  fiscal  year,  an  estimated  $100
mllion  will  be  required  for  the  military  portion  of  this  program.

(2)  "In  view  of  the  history  of  military  aid  in  China,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  '
urge  that  these  aid  programs  be  subject,  in  any  event,  to  the  following  conditions:

"a.  That  United  States  military  aid  not  be  granted  unconditionally;  rather
that  it  be  carefully  controlled  and  that  the  aid  program  be  integrated  with  politi-  \
cal  and  economic  programs;  and


196 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"/>.  That  requests  for  military  equipment  be  screened  first  by  an  officer
designated  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  on  duty  in  the  recipient  state.
These  requests  should  be  subject  to  his  determination  as  to  the  feasibility  and  sat-
isfactory coordination  of  specific  military  operations.  It  should  be  understood  that
military  aid  will  only  be  considered  in  connection  with  such  coordinated  opera-
tional plans  as  are  approved  by  the  representative  of  the  Department  of  Defense
on  duty  in  the  recipient  country.  Further,  in  conformity  with  current  procedures,
the  final  approval  of  all  programs  for  military  materiel  will  be  subject  to  the
concurrence  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff."

(3)  "Formation  of  a  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Committee  is  recommended.

(4)  "The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recognize  the  political  implications  involved  in
military  aid  to  Indochina.  It  must  be  appreciated,  however,  that  French  armed
forces  .  .  .  are  in  the  field  and  that  if  these  were  to  be  withdrawn  this  year  be-
cause of  political  considerations,  the  Bao  Dai  regime  probably  could  not  survive
even  with  United  States  aid.  If  the  United  States  were  now  to  insist  upon  inde-
pendence for  Vietnam  and  a  phased  French  withdrawal  from  that  country,  this
might  improve  the  political  situation.  The  French  could  be  expected  to  interpose
objections  to,  and  certainly  delays  in  such  a  program.  Conditions  in  Indochina,
however,  are  unstable  and  the  situation  is  apparently  deteriorating  rapidly  so  that
the  urgent  need  for  at  least  an  initial  increment  of  military  and  economic  aid
is  psychologicaliy  overriding.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  therefore,  recommend  the
provision  of  military  aid  to  Indochina  at  the  earliest  practicable  date  under  a  pro-
gram to  implement  the  President's  action  approving  the  allocation  of  $15  million
for  Idochina  and  that  corresponding  increments  of  political  arid  economic  aid  be
programmed  on  an  interim  basis  without  prejudice  to  the  pattern  of  the  policy
for  additional  military,  political  and  economic  aid  that  may  be  developed  later."

(5)  ".  .  .  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  the  immediate  establishment  of
a  small  United  States  military  aid  group  in  Indochina  .  .  .  The  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff  would  expect  the  senior  member  of  this  group  to  sit  in  consultation  with
military  representatives  of  France  and  Vietnam  and  possibly  of  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia. In  addition  to  screening  requests  for  materiel,  he  would  be  expected  to
insure  full  coordination  of  military  plans  and  efforts  between  the  French  and
Vietnamese  forces  and  to  supervise  the  allocation  of  materiel."

(6)  "The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  in  the  possjbility  of  success  of  a  prompt
coordinated  United  States  program  of  military,  political,  and  economic  aid  to
Southeast  Asia  and  feel  that  such  a  success  might  well  lead  to  the  gaining  of  the
initiative  in  the  struggle  in  that  general  area."

The  last  of  these  points  is  clearly  fundamental  to  the  undertaking  of  any  pro-
gram of  assistance;  yet  in  the  Chiefs'  memorandum  it  appears  only  as  the  con-
cluding portion  of  the  paragraph  (paragraph  15)  recommending  establishment  of
a  military  aid  group  in  Indochina,  and  is  subsequently  subjected  to  the  qualifica-
tion that  "attainment  of  United  States  objectives  in  Asia  can  only  be  achieved  by
ultimate  success  in  China."  More  remarkable,  however,  is  the  rarity  with  which
even  such  equivocal  predictions  of  success  appear  in  the  available  documents  re-
lating directly  to  the  decision  to  provide  assistance  to  Indochina.  Direct  state-
ments on  the  probable  effectiveness  of  such  United  States  programs  of  the  period
are  typically  absent;  indirect  statements  are  typically  of  the  implied-imperative
("we  must  do  X  //  Asia  is  to  be  saved."),  or  the  negative-imperative  (if  we  do
not  do  X,  Asia  will  be  lost").  There  was  no  assurance  of  mihtary  success  given;
and  the  calculus  of  the  decision-making  process  relating  to  the  weighing  of  the
probability  of  success  against  the  costs  of  failure  of  U.S.  programs  in  the  1950
period  is  not  evident,  unfortunately,  in  available  documents.


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  197


d.  Presidential  Approval

On  May  1,  1950,  President  Truman  approved  the  allocation  of  $10  million  to
the  Department  of  Defense  to  cover  the  early  shipment  of  urgently  needed  military
assistance  items  to  Indochina,  thus  taking  the  first  crucial  decision  regarding  U.S.
military  involvement  in  Vietnam.  On  May  8,  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  a  statement
at  the  ministerial  level  meeting  in  Paris,  announced  United  States  assistance  to
the  Associated  States  and  France.  And  on  May  24,  the  governments  of  France
and  the  Associated  States  were  notified  of  the  United  States  intention  to  establish
an  economic  aid  mission  to  the  Associated  States,  thus  marking  the  implementa-
tion of  the  recommendations  of  the  Griffin  Mission.

On  June  27,  1950,  President  Truman,  in  announcing  the  onset  of  the  Korean
war,  also  stated  that  he  had  "directed  acceleration  in  the  furnishing  of  military
assistance  to  the  forces  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  in  Indochina  and  the
dispatch  of  a  military  mission  to  provide  close  working  relations  with  those
forces."  [Doc.  8]  The  concept  of  a  military  assistance  advisory  group  had  also
been  approved,  although  the  President  did  not  refer  to  MAAG  in  his  public
statement.  Also,  in  June,  following  the  recommendation  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff,  the  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Policy  Committee  was  established.

e.  Erskine  Mission

The  military  mission  dispatched  by  the  President  and  headed  by  Major  Gen-
eral Graves  B.  Erskine,  USMC,  arrived  in  Saigon  on  July  15,  and  reported  its
findings  on  August  5.  General  Erskine  reported  that  a  permanent  solution  of  the
Indochina  crisis  went  beyond  military  action  alone,  the  core  of  the  problem  be-
ing a  deep-seated  hatred  and  distrust  of  the  French  by  the  population  that  pre-
cluded their  cooperation  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war.  The  mission  also  reported
that  the  amount  of  aid  and  the  scope  of  the  assistance  thus  far  requested  by  the
French  were  inadequate  to  the  needs  of  the  situation.

The  first  elements  of  the  U.S.  MAAG  were  assigned  to  Indochina  on  August  3,
1950;  Brigadier  General  Francis  G.  Brink,  USA,  assumed  command  as  the  first
Chief  of  MAAG  on  October  10.  The  mission  of  the  MAAG  was  limited  to  pro-
vision of  material  assistance  to  the  French  forces  and  indirect  provision  of  mili-
tary aid  to  the  forces  of  the  Associated  States;  General  Brink  was  directed  not  to
assume  any  training  or  advisory  responsibilities  toward  the  indigenous  armies.  But
from  the  outset,  the  French  rigorously  limited  end-use  inspections  of  MAAG  to
a  small  number  of  carefully  prescribed  visits.

f.  JCS  Reevaluation

After  the  initial  decision  to  provide  assistance  to  France  and  the  Associated
States  had  been  taken,  the  formation  of  an  economic  mission  had  been  announced,
the  first  shipment  of  arms  and  equipment  had  arrived  in  Indochina,  and  the
MAAG  had  been  approved  and  was  in  the  process  of  formation,  concern  mounted
over  the  soundness  of  these  moves.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  were  again  asked  by
the  Secretary  of  Defense  to  formulate  a  position  on  future  U.S.  actions  with
respect  to  Indochina,  and  the  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Policy  Committee  (SEAAPC)
published,  on  October  11,  1950,  a  draft  "Proposed  Statement  of  U.S.  Policy  on
Indochina."  The  SEAAPC  statement  proposed  adding  another  dimension  to  U.S.
assistance  policy:  "Regardless  of  current  U.S.  commitments  for  provision  of  cer-


198 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

tain  military  assistance  to  Indochina,  the  U.S.  will  not  commit  any  of  its  armed
forces  to  the  defense  of  Indochina  against  overt,  foreign  aggression,  under  present
circumstances."  The  paper  also  recommended  that  the  U.S.  support  the  "prompt
acceleration  of  the  formation  of  new  national  armies  of  the  three  Associated
States,"  and  a  covering  memorandum  to  the  Secretaries  of  State  and  Defense
recommended  that  if  negotiations  were  conducted  with  the  French,  U.S.  represen-
tatives should:

.  .  .  secure  French  acceptance  of  the  following  conditions  which  shall
attach  to  the  extension  of  U.S.  assistance  in  the  formation  of  national  armies
in  Indochina:  (1)  French  Union  Forces  would  not  be  withdrawn  from  Indo-
china until  such  Associated  States  armies  are  fully  trained  and  ready  to  act
effectively  in  replacement;  (2)  France  would  not  decrease  its  outlays  for
Indochina  below  the  1950  rate  during  the  period  of  the  American  military
aid  requested;  (3)  the  national  armies  project  would  have  the  approval  of
the  three  Associated  States  governments;  (4)  the  High  Commissioner  for
Indochina,  the  French  Command,  and  the  three  Associated  States  would
maintain  full  consultative  relations  with  the  Legation  and  MAAG  during
the  period  of  the  formation  of  the  armies.

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  reevaluation  appeared  on  October  27:  military  aid
should  be  continued  on  an  expedited  basis.  Again  the  judgment  was  offered  that
genuine  autonomy  and  self-government  had  to  be  extended  to  the  people  of  Indo-
china to  ameliorate  the  basic  cause  of  the  deterioration  of  security  in  Indochina:
lack  of  popular  support  for  the  authorities.  But  the  most  clearly  articulated  and
complete  expression  of  the  Joint  Chiefs'  over-all  position  at  year  end  is  found
in  NSC  64/1,  a  November  28  paper  by  the  Chiefs  which  takes  account  of  a  report
from  General  Brink  and  the  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Policy  Committee's  draft  of
October  1 1 ;  in  fact,  this  statement  of  short-  and  long-run  objectives  contained  in
NSC  64/1  was  to  remain  the  basis  of  United  States  policy  toward  Indochina  for
the  duration  of  the  French-Indochina  war:

SHORT  TERM  OBJECTIVES

a.  The  United  States  should  take  action,  as  a  matter  of  urgency,  by  all
means  practicable  short  of  the  actual  employment  of  United  States  military
forces,  to  deny  Indochina  to  Communism.

b.  As  long  as  the  present  situation  exists,  the  United  States  should  con-
tinue to  insure  that  the  primary  responsibility  for  the  restoration  of  peace
and  security  in  Indochina  rests  with  the  French.

c.  The  United  States  should  seek  to  develop  its  military  assistance  pro-
gram for  Indochina  based  on  an  over-all  military  plan  prepared  by  the
French,  concurred  in  by  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina,  and  acceptable
to  the  United  States.

(1)  Both  the  plan  and  the  program  should  be  developed  and  imple-
mented as  a  matter  of  urgency.  It  should  be  clearly  understood,  however,
that  United  States  acceptance  of  the  plan  is  limited  to  the  logistical  support
which  the  United  States  may  agree  to  furnish.  The  aid  provided  under  the
program  should  be  furnished  to  the  French  in  Indochina  and  to  the  Associ-
ated States.  The  allocation  of  United  States  military  assistance  as  between
the  French  and  the  national  armies  of  Indochina  should  be  approved  by  the
French  and  United  States  authorities  in  Indochina.


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  199


(2)  Popular  support  of  the  Government  by  the  Indochinese  people  is
essential)to  a  favorable  settlement  of  the  security  problem  of  Indochina,
^erefore,  as  a  condition  to  the  provision  of  those  further  increases  in  mili-
tary assistance  to  Indochina  necessary  for  the  implementation  of  an  agreed
over-all  military  plan,  the  United  States  Government  should  obtain  as-
surances from  the  French  Government  that:

(a)  A  program  providing  for  the  eventual  self-government  of  Indo-
china either  within  or  outside  of  the  French  Union  will  be  developed,  made
public,  and  implementation  initiated  at  once  in  order  to  strengthen  the  na-
tional spirit  of  the  Indochinese  in  opposition  to  Communism.

(b)  National  armies  of  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina  will  be
organized  as  a  matter  of  urgency.  While  it  is  doubtful  that  the  buildup  of
these  armies  can  be  accomplished  in  time  to  contribute  significantly  to  the
present  military  situation,  the  direct  political  and  psychological  benefits  to
be  derived  from  this  course  would  be  great  and  would  thus  result  in  im-
mediate, although  indirect,  military  benefits.

(c)  Pending  the  formation  and  training  of  Indochinese  national
armies  as  effective  units,  and  as  an  interim  emergency  measure,  France  will
dispatch  sufficient  additional  armed  forces  to  Indochina  to  insure  that  the
restoration  of  peace  and  internal  security  in  that  country  will  be  accom-
plished in  accordance  with  the  timetable  of  the  over-all  military  plan  for
Indochina.

(d)  France  will  change  its  political  and  military  concepts  in  Indo-
china to  :

/.  Eliminate  its  policy  of  "colonialism."

//.  Provide  proper  tutelage  to  the  Associated  States.

Hi.  Insure  that  a  suitable  military  command  structure,  unhampered
by  political  interference,  is  established  to  conduct  effective  and  appropriate
military  operations.  .  .

(3)  At  an  appropriate  time  the  United  States  should  institute  checks  to
satisfy  itself  that  the  conditions  set  forth  in  subparagraph  c.(2)  above  are
being  fulfilled.

d.  The  United  Sttates  should  exert  all  practicable  political  and  diplomatic
measures  required  to  obtain  the  recognition  of  the  Associated  States  by  the
other  non-Communist  states  of  Southeast  and  South  Asia.

e.  In  the  event  of  overt  attack  by  organized  Chinese  Communist  forces
against  Indochina,  the  United  States  should  not  permit  itself  to  become  en-
gaged in  a  general  war  with  Communist  China  but  should,  in  concert  with
the  United  Kingdom,  support  France  and  the  Associated  States  by  all  means
short  of  the  actual  employment  of  United  States  military  forces.  This  sup-
port should  include  appropriate  expansion  of  the  present  military  assistance
program  and  endeavors  to  induce  States  in  the  neighborhood  of  Indochina
to  commit  armed  forces  to  resist  the  aggression.

/.  The  United  States  should  immediately  reconsider  its  policy  toward
Indochina  whenever  it  appears  that  the  French  Government  may  abandon
its  military  position  in  that  country  or  plans  to  refer  the  problem  of  Indo-
china to  the  United  Nations.  Unless  the  situation  throughout  the  world
generally,  and  Indochina  specifically,  changes  materially,  the  United  States
should  seek. to_dissuade  the  French  from  referring  the  Indochina  question
to  the  United  Nations.

g.  Inasmuch  as  the  United  States-sponsored  resolution,  "Uniting  for
Peace,"  has  been  adopted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations,


200 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  should  a  situation  develop  in  Indochina  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in
Korea  in  which  United  Nations  forces  were  required,  the  United  States
would  then  probably  be  morally  obligated  to  contribute  its  armed  forces
designated  for  service  on  behalf  of  the  United  Nations.  It  is,  therefore,  in  the
interests  of  the  United  States  to  take  such  action  in  Indochina  as  would  fore-
stall the  need  for  the  General  Assembly  to  invoke  the  provisions  of  the
resolution,  "Uniting  for  Peace."  .  .  .

The  JCS  also  proposed  long-term  objectives,  urging  the  development  of  an  under-
ground guerrilla  warfare  capability,  a  psychological  warfare  program  ("to  dem-
onstrate the  evils  of  Communism.  .  .  .  and  to  warn  ...  of  renewed  Chinese
imperialism"),  and  encouragement  of  an  appropriate  regional  security  arrange-
ment. These  concepts  formed  the  heart  of  an  NSC  Staff  Study  of  December  28.
The  initial  decision  to  give  assistance  was  confirmed  after  nearly  one  year's  con-
tinual re-examination,  and  remained  basic  to  U.S.  policy  for  the  remainder  of
the  war.

2. MAP  for  Indochina

a.  Magnitude

The  U.S.  military  assistance  program  to  the  French  and  Associated  States  was
implemented  rapidly,  considering  the  major  U.S.  commitment  to  the  Korean  war.
In  a  somewhat  premature  judgment  of  outcomes,  a  progress  report  on  the  imple-
mentation of  NSC  64  (March  15,  1951)  stated  that  "American  military  aid
furnished  the  States'  forces  and  the  Army  of  the  French  Union  may  have  been
the  decisive  factor  in  the  preservation  of  the  area  against  Communist  aggression."
Through  1952  and  into  1954  the  MDAP  shipments  to  Indochina  increased
steadily:  by  February  3,  1953,  the  United  States  had  shipped  137,200  long  tons
of  material  (224  ships'  cargoes);  by  July  1954,  approximately  150,000  long  tons
had  been  sent,  including  1,800  combat  vehicles,  30,887  motor  transport  vehicles,
361,522  small  arms  and  machine  guns,  438  naval  craft,  2  World  War  II  aircraft
carriers,  and  about  500  aircraft.  By  the  conclusion  of  the  Geneva  agreements  in
\  July,  1954,  the  U.S.  had  delivered  aid  to  Indochina  at  an  original  cost  of  $2^00_
million.  Nonetheless,  protests  of  the  French  at  the  slowness  of  deliveries  and  the
"interference"  of  MAAG  with  French  requests  were  recurrent,  and  peaked,  dur-
ing the  crisis  days  of  1954.  Yet  these  complaints  probably  reflected  less  genuine
U.S.  shortcomings  than  French  resentment  of  American  efforts  to  advise,  screen,
inspect,  and  verify,  and  sheer  frustration.  Moreover,  the  vagaries  of  the  French
logistic  system  not  only  made  the  MAAG  job  more  difficult,  but  further  impeded
combat  supplies.

b.  Effectiveness

In  spite  of  the  conditions  under  which  U.S.  assistance  to  France  and  the  As-
sociated States  was  given,  the  MAAG  during  the  period  of  the  Indochina  war  was
litde  more  than  a  small  (70  in  1950,  342  in  1954)  supply-support  group  which
exerted  far  more  influence  upon  U.S.  decisions  than  on  the  French.  The  French,
never  eager  for  American  advice,  not  only  succeeded  in  limiting  the  function  of
MAAG  to  order-taking  in  the  commercial  sense,  but  in  fact — through  adroit
pressuring  of  officials  above  the  MAAG — sometimes  reduced  MAAG  to  the
position  of  taking  their  military  orders.  Available  data  do  not  permit  detailed


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  201


evaluation  of  the  efficiency  of  MAP,  but  it  seems  clear  that  French  restrictions
on  the  U.S.  MAAG  reduced  it  to  virtual  impotence.

If  it  would  be  an  eror  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the  U.S.  program  in  terms
of  war  outcome,  and  if  the  efficiency  of  MAP  and  MAAG  cannot  meaningfully
be  analyzed,  it  remains  to  evaluate  the  degree  to  which  France  met  the  conditions
under  which  assistance  was  tendered,  which  presumably  impinged  directly  on
U.S.  political  objectives:

(1)  The  United  States  objective  of  insuring  "that  the  primary  responsibility
for  the  restoration  of  peace  and  security  in  Indochina  rests  with  the
French"  was  fulfilled;  in  fact,  it  was  insisted  on  by  the  French.  On  the
one  hand,  U.S.  military  forces  were  never  directly  engaged  in  the  Indo-
china war.  On  the  other  hand,  the  French,  in  retaining  this  primary  re-
sponsibility, preserved  the  prerogative  to  determine  policy  and  the  free-
dom to  reject  U.S.  advice.  U.S.  "leverage"  was  minimal.

(2)  The  condition  of  basing  the  assistance  program  on  "an  urgently  prepared
French  plan  acceptable  to  the  Associated  States  and  to  the  U.S."  was
frustrated  in  several  ways.  At  the  outset  no  overall  plan  was  presented,
and  those  portions  of  existing  plans  to  which  U.S.  authorities  were  privy
{e.g.,  Allessandri's  pacification  plan  for  the  Tonkin  Delta)  were  not  ac-
ceptable to  U.S.  thinking.  Second,  when  the  Letourneau-Allard  and  Na-
varre plans  were  finally  prepared  (in  1953,  three  years  after  the  U.S.  de-
cided that  a  plan  was  a  necessary  precondition  for  aid),  some  U.S.
observers  realized  that  these  were  more  concepts  than  plans.  U.S.  accept-
ance of  the  plans  was  more  reluctant  than  the  granting  of  $385  million
in  additional  assistance  might  indicate.  Finally,  the  plans,  once  "accepted,"
were  not  vigorously  carried  out.

(3)  The  French  met  pro  forma  the  condition  that  they  provide  the  U.S.  as-
surances that  they  would  grant  self-government  for  Indochina,  and  form
national  armies  for  the  Associated  States.  But  it  was  clear  throughout  the
war  that,  regardless  of  the  amounts  of  U.S.  assistance  rendered,  France's
declarations  of  intent  were  grudgingly  issued,  and  were  seldom  followed
by  action.  The  French  Indochina  war  had  to  be  lost  before  Vietnam  was
granted  genuine  independence.

(4)  Although  France  did  expand  its  forces  in  Indochina,  these  forces  were
never  sufficient  to  the  task.  French  draftees  were  never  employed  in  Indo-
china. France  continually  pointed  to  its  European  defense  posture  in
explanation.  In  at  least  one  case,  U.S.  personnel  were  requested  {e.g.,  as
aircraft  mechanics),  and  200  were  provided,  when  a  pool  of  suitable
personnel  existed  in  Metropolitan  France.

(5)  Statements  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  the  French  did  not  ameliorate
neo-mercantilism  or  other  colonial  policies,  or  provide  "proper  tutelage"
to  the  Associated  States;  nor  did  it  develop  a  command  structure  suitable
to  the  United  States.

(6)  The  U.S.  "checks  to  satisfy  itself  that  the  conditions"  imposed  were  being
satisfied,  were,  by  and  large,  few  and  far  between,  and  were  conducted  at
the  pleasure  and  within  the  specifications  of  the  French.

(7)  The  French  chose  not  to  refer  Indochina  to  the  United  Nations.  Certainly
the  U.S.  assistance  program  bore  on  this  decision;  whether  or  not  it  was
the  deciding  factor  is  unclear.

The  effectiveness  of  the  United  States  assistance  program  as  an  instrument  of
United  States  policy — quite  aside  from  the  outcome  of  the  war — was  thus  quite
low.


202 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


3.  Critique

As  earlier  sections  of  this  paper  have  suggested,  the  U.S.  was  persuaded  to
involve  itself  in  the  Indochina  war  by  the  perceived  need,  following  the  fall  of
Nationalist  China,  to  hold  a  line  against  communists.  This  strategic  drawing  of
the  line  at  the  Chinese-Indochina  border  was  reinforced  by  the  belief  that  the  fall
of  Indochina  would  undoubtedly  lead  to  the  fall  of  the  other  mainland  states  of
Southeast  Asia,  and  that  the  fall  of  Southeast  Asia  would  eventuate  in  the  virtu-
ally complete  denial  to  the  United  States  of  the  Pacific  Littoral  of  Asia.  Prospects
for  a  French  victory  in  Indochina  were  assessed  in  contemporary  U.S.  intelligence
documents  as  poor;  nonetheless,  the  U.S.  provided  military  and  economic  assist-
ance to  the  French  and  the  Associated  States  in  the  belief  that  a  prompt,  co-
ordinated United  States  program  of  military,  political,  and  economic  aid  offered
some  prospect  that  France  might  succeed  in  gaining  the  initiative  in  the  struggle
in  that  area.  Six  major  points  of  critique  of  U.S.  policy  follow:

a.  The  U.S.  Misestimated  France

U.S.  policymakers  apparently  realized  that  the  conditions  they  imposed  upon
the  French  were  impracticable  to  some  degree.  Nonetheless,  they  believed  that
pre-conditions  were  necessary  and  could  assist  in  convincing  the  French  to  mend
their  colonial  ways  and  to  pursue  the  war  with  American  methods,  diligence,  and
aggressiveness.  The  French,  long  noted  for  proficiency  and  precision  in  logic,
required  no  Descartes  to  realize  that  the  United  States  was  thus  asking  France

(1)  to  regain  full  responsibility  for  the  Indochina  War,  and  in  particular  for
fighting  and  taking  casualties  in  that  war;  (2)  to  follow  the  "guidance"  and  "ad-
vice" of  the  United  States  on  the  exercise  of  this  French  responsibility;  and  (3)
having  fought  the  war,  presumably  to  a  successful  conclusion,  to  relinquish  con-
trol over  Indochina.  In  view  of  the  French  willingness  to  retain  responsibility  for
the  war,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  were  reluctant,  at  best,  to  accept  propositions

(2)  and  (3).  Despite  French  pronouncements  on  their  role  in  fighting  com-
munism, there  is  little  reason  to  believe  that  they  regarded  the  Indochina  war  in
the  same  light  as  the  U.S.  viewed  the  Korean  War.  Rather,  their  behavior  re-
sembled that  of  other  colonial  powers  who  had  fought  to  retain  profitable  colo-
nies.

b.  Slim  Chance  Accepted  by  the  U.S.

Had  U.S.  policymakers  recp^nizfi.d  the  slimness  of  the  chance  of  persuading
France  to  accept  the  three  propositions  specified  above,  they  might  have  sought
alternative  courses  of  action  in  Indochina.  As  it  was,  the  possibility  (as  opposed
to  the  probability)  of  success  was  their  prime  consideration,  and,  overestimating
U.S.  leverage  for  influencing  a  favorable  outcome,  alternatives  were  not  con-
sidered.

c.  Circular  U.S.  Policy

Suppression  of  alternatives,  both  on  the  general  and  the  particular  level  (see
Note  48  for  an  example  of  the  latter),  led  to  a  circularity  in  and  reinforcement
of  existing  policies — constant  forced  choices  between,  "bad"  and  "worse."


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  203


d.  Poor  Bargaining

Having  taken  a  hard  policy  line  toward  the  French,  the  United  States  failed  to
bargain  effectively.  Thus,  in  circumstances  not  totally  dissimilar  from  those  pre-
vailing in  Vietnam  in  subsequent  time  periods,  the  U.S.  continued  to  provide  as-
sistance disregarding  infractions  of  pre-conditions;  moreover,  the  pre-conditions
for  aid  were  not  modified.  Without  modification,  the  conditions  became  worse
than  meaningless:  standing  testaments  to  U.S.  impotence,  to  be  recognized  only
when  and  how  the  French  chose.  The  U.S.  became  virtually  a  prisoner  of  its  own
policy.  Containment  of  communism,  concern  for  the  French  in  relation  to  the
postwar  Europe  of  NATO,  EDC,  and  the  Soviet  threat  in  the  West,  combined
with  a  fear,  based  on  World  War  II  strategy,  that  a  French  withdrawal  from
Indochina  would  leave  exposed  the  U.S.  flank  in  Korea,  all  compelled  the  U.S.
to  continue  aid.  Yet  none  of  these  considerations  should  have  precluded  modifi-
cation of  the  U.S.  bargaining  strategy.

e.  Misinformation

The  U.S.  policymaking  machinery  was  highly  vulnerable  to  spoofing,  on  at
least  three  counts:  (1)  the  very  strength  of  the  U.S.  position  regarding  com-
munism must  have  been  a  constant  temptation,  not  always  resisted,  for  other
parties  to  cry  "red"  and  thus  to  manipulate  the  U.S.;  (2)  dependence  on  official
French  sources  for  intelligence  and  other  information  was  potentially  misleading;
(3)  reliance  on  the  high-level  mission  technique  for  gathering  information  to  be
used  as  a  direct  input  to  policy  decisions  proved  unsatisfactory.

f.  Costs  Not  Weighed

Finally,  there  is  little  indication  that  U.S.  policymakers,  their  thoughts  domi-
nated by  the  objective  of  containing  the  monolithic  communist  bloc,  faced  up  to
the  costs  of  winning  the  Indochina  war,  even  while  direct  U.S.  intervention  was
being  considered.  Nor  does  the  evidence  suggest  that  consideration  was  given  to
the  tangible  and  intangible  costs  of  providing  U.S.  military  assistance  to  a  power
Iosing_.a  war,  including  the  potential  impact  on  the  U.S.  position  in  Asia.  And,
finally,  available  documents  fail  to  reveal  any  consideration  given  to  the  notion
of  sunk  costs.  There  were,  of  course,  voices  in  the  wilderness.  An  unsigned,  un-
dated memorandum  posed  eight  key  questions  to  be  answered  by  the  NSC  during
the  spring  of  1954.  Comment  on  the  following  four  questions,  in  relation  to  the
time  at  which  they  were  raised,  is  unnecessary:

— Just  how  important  is  Southeast  Asia  to  the  security  interests  of  the  U.S.?
Is  the  analysis  in  NSC  5405  still  valid?  Is  the  area  important  enough  to  fight
for?

— How  important  is  Indochina  in  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia?  Is  the  "dom-
ino theory"  valid?  Is  Indochina  important  enough  to  fight  for?  If  not,  what
are  the  strategic  consequences  of  the  loss  of  all  or  part  of  Indochina?

— If  the  U.S.  intervenes  in  Indochina,  can  we  count  on  the  support  of  the
natives?  Can  we  fight  as  allies  of  the  French  and  avoid  the  stigma  of  co-
lonialism?

— Is  there  a  strategic  concept  for  the  conduct  of  a  war  in  Indochina  which
offers  promise  of  early  success.  .  .  ?


204 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


The  decision  of  the  United  States  to  provide  assistance  to  France  and  the  As-
sociated States  during  the  Indochina  War  is  usually  treated  lightly,  if  at  all,  in
current  histories.  Yet,  both  the  taking  of  the  decision  and  its  implementation  were
significant  for  and  remarkably  simjiaiio- subsequent  U.S.  experiences  in  Vietnam.

II. THE  U.S.  AND  FRANCE'S  WITHDRAWAL  FROM  VIETNAM,
1954-1956

CHRONOLOGY

7  July  54 Diem  appointed  Premier  of  South  Vietnam


Urged  by  America  and  France,  Emperor  Bao  Dai  named  Ngo
Dinh  Diem  premier  of  South  (Free)  Vietnam.  Bao  Dai  remained
legal,  constitutionally  recognized  Chief  of  State.


France  became  guarantor  of  Vietnamese  sovereignty,  unity,  terri-
torial integrity  (Conference  Final  Declaration,  Article  7);  with  the
PAVN,  guarantor  of  armistice  agreements  (Geneva  Agreements,
Articles  22,  23),  and  all-Vietnam  elections  (Conference  Final
Declaration,  Article  7)  France  agreed  to  withdraw  the  French
Expeditionary  Corps  at  the  request  of  local  governments  (Con-
ference Final  Declaration,  Article  10,  Unilateral  Declaration,
France)


8,  12  Aug  54;  National  Security  Council  meetings;  NSC  5429/2
20  Aug  54 US  policies  toward  post-Geneva  Vietnam.


Economic:  disassociate  France  from  levers  of  command,  integrate
land  reform  with  refugee  resettlement,  work  with  the  French  but
"encourage"  them  to  turn  over  financial,  administrative,  economic
controls  to  the  Vietnamese.  Give  aid  directly  to  the  Vietnamese —
not  through  France.

Military:  work  with  France  only  insofar  as  necessary  to  build  up
indigenous  military  forces  able  to  provide  internal  security.
Political:  France  must  grant  total  independence  (including  right
to  withdraw  from  French  Union)  to  South  Vietnam  and  support  a
strong  indigenous  government.  Diem  must  broaden  the  govern-
mental base,  elect  an  assembly,  draft  a  constitution  and  legally
dethrone  Bao  Dai.  French  support  and  cooperation  for  these  pol-
icies was  necessary;  retention  of  the  FEC  was  essential  to  South
Vietnamese  security.


Jean  Sainteny  was  sent  to  Hanoi  to  find  ways  to  protect  French
economic  and  cultural  interests  in  the  DRV.  Political  overtones  of
the  mission  annoyed  the  US  and  General  Paul  Ely,  High  Com-
missioner in  the  South.  Ely  received  firm  assurance  from  Mendes-
France  that  France  was  not  playing  a  "double  game,"  has  not  sent
Sainteny  for  political  bridge-building  purposes.  Mendes-France
reaffirmed  French  support  for  an  independent,  strong  South
Vietnam.


21  July  54


Geneva  Accords  signed


Aug  54


Sainteny  Mission


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  205


8  Sep  54 Manila  Pact  Signed

Dulles'  anti-communist  military  alliance  was  realized  in  SEATO.
The  Associated  States  of  Indochina  were  covered  by  separate
protocol  ensuring  collective  defense  by  SEATO  nations  in  case  of
subversion  or  aggression.

27-29  Sep  54  Washington  Conference

France  agreed  to  support  Diem  (against  the  French  belief  that
Diem  would  prove  unable  to  unify  or  stabilize  the  country);
agreed  to  keep  the  FEC  in  South  Vietnam  but  received  no  indica-
tion of  possible  US  financial  aid  for  the  French  forces.  France
knew  economic  and  military  aid  would  be  given  directly  to  Viet-
nam but  was  led  to  believe  she  would  have  a  hand  in  its  distribu-
tion by  ambiguous  US-drafted  statements.  The  US  military  role  in
Vietnam  was  not  discussed  because  of  a  State- JCS  split  (Dulles
wanted  to  assume  training  responsibilities;  JCS  did  not  because  of
political  instability,  presence  of  French  troops  and  Geneva  re-
strictions).

22  Oct  54 NSC  Action  Program

The  U.S.  decided  to  take  firmer  steps  to  strengthen  Diem,  to  tell
Paris  that  French  support  had  been  inadequate.  An  earlier  JCS
concession  to  consider  a  training  program  for  the  NVA  opened
the  way  for  the  decision  to  inaugurate  a  "limited"  U.S.  role  in  mili-
tary affairs.

24  Oct  54 Eisenhower  letter  to  Diem

Announced  direct  economic  aid  and  military  assistance  from  the
U.S.;  demanded  no  Vietnamese  moves  as  reciprocation  for  aid.
France  called  it  a  carte  americaine,  said  it  violated  the  principle  of
joint  action  adopted  in  September.

8  Nov  54 Collins  Mission

General  J.  Lawton  Collins,  given  broad  authority  to  coordinate  all
U.S.  programs  and — with  French  support — get  things  moving,  ar-
rived in  Vietnam.

13  Dec  54 Collins-Ely  Minute  of  Understanding

France  will  grant  full  autonomy  to  the  VNA  by  July  1955,  the
U.S.  will  assume  training  responsibilities,  the  U.S.  MAAG,  Indo-
china, will  direct  the  training  program — under  General  Ely's  over-
all authority.  French  and  U.S.  instructors  will  be  phased  out  as
VNA  efficiency  increases.  Washington  approved  the  Minute;  Paris
objected,  particularly  to  the  phase-out  of  French  trainers.  France
did  not  relent  and  consent  until  11  February  1955.

16  Dec  54 Collins  recommends  Diem  be  replaced

Diem's  failure  to  include  Dr.  Quat  in  the  cabinet  as  Defense
Minister  confirmed  Collins'  doubts  about  Diem's  capacity  to
stabilize  the  government,  or  rally  support  for  his  regime.  He
recommended  Bao  Dai's  return  be  considered,  but  if  this  were
unacceptable,  recommended  the  U.S.  withdraw  from  Vietnam.

19  Dec  54 Trilateral  Meetings,  Paris  {U.K.,  U.S.,  France)

Mendes-France  insisted  the  time  had  come  to  consider  an  alterna-


206 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

tive  to  Diem.  Recommended  Collins  and  Ely  study  the  problem
and  come  up  with  suggestions  for  a  change  by  mid-January.
France  felt  Bao  Dai  should  be  involved  in  an  alternative  plan.
Dulles:  Diem  is  the  only  suitable  leader  but  we  will  consider
alternatives  and  will  allow  Collins  and  Ely  to  consider  the  matter.
But  Dulles  made  it  clear  that  Congress  would  probably  not  ap-
propriate funds  to  a  Vietnam  without  Diem.  U.S.  study  of  alterna-
tives was  cursory,  however;  Dulles  was  sure  Diem  could  succeed,
with  proper  direction;  he  was  more  sure  that  no  other  possible
leader  existed.

20  Jan  55 Collins'  report  to  NSC

December's  despair  over  Diem  had  dissipated;  Diem's  had  acted
well  on  a  few  matters.  Collins  recommended  continued  support
for  Diem  because  without  it  South  Vietnam  will  surely  fall  to
communism  and  the  rest  of  other  Southeast  Asia  will  soon  follow.
The  NSC  approved  Collins'  report.

12  Feb  55 Training  Relations  and  Instruction  Mission  (TRIM)  opens

General  O'Daniel,  under  Ely's  general  supervision,  took  charge  of
programs  to  train  and  reorganize  the  VNA  along  American  lines.
Despite  friction  between  French  and  Americans  in  Saigon  and
despite  Paris- Washington  disputes,  officers  in  TRIM  seemed  able
to  rise  above  differences  and  initiate  sound  programs  for  the  VNA.

22  Feb  55 United  Front  announced

French  subsidies  to  the  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sect  armies — about
40,000  men — ended  in  February.  When  Diem  refused  to  meet  sect
requests  for  financial  aid,  integration  of  forces  into  the  VNA  and
recognition  of  spheres  of  influence,  previous  sect  cooperation  with
Diem  ceased.  Representatives  of  the  Cao  Dai,  Hoa  Hao,  Dan  Xa
(Ba  Cut),  Lien  Minh  (Thinh  Minh  The)  and  Binh  Xuyen  (Bay
Vien)  forces  met  at  Tay  Ninh,  agreed  to  work  together  against
Diem.  Cao  Dai  Pope  Tac  headed  the  group.

21  Mar  55 United  Front  "ultimatum"

Claiming  to  speak  for  the  popular  will,  the  United  Front  asked
that  Diem  form  a  government  of  national  union  and  make  other
political,  economic,  military  reforms.  Diem  called  this  an  ulti-
matum and  refused  to  consider  the  request.  The  Front  then  sent
an  emissary  to  Bao  Dai  asking  him  to  intervene  on  its  behalf.  Bao
Dai  refused.

29-30  Mar  55  Diem  attacks  central  police  headquarters

Brewing  for  months,  the  fight  finally  broke  between  Diem  and  the
Binh  Xuyen  (a  coalition  of  gangsters  and  river  pirates  which  ran
gambling  and  prostitution  in  Cholon,  and  the  Saigon-Cholon
police,  paid  Bao  Dai  for  his  protection  and  enjoyed  some  French
support).  A  company  of  paratroopers  took  over  the  central  police
station,  driving  the  Binh  Xuyen  back  into  Cholon.  Diem  then
wanted  to  go  after  Police  Commissioner  Sang  and  end  Binh  Xuyen
control.  Defense  Minister  Minh  resigned  when  Diem  refused  to
consult  the  cabinet  over  this.  However,  French  representations  dis-
suaded Diem  from  taking  on  Bay  Vien's  600-man  force  at  this


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  207


time,  and  the  French  then  negotiated  a  truce  between  Diem  and
the  Binh  Xuyen.

7  Apr  55 Collins  and  Ely  agree  Diem  must  go

Collins  says  Diem  has  proved  himself  incapable  of  inspiring  unity,
and  must  be  replaced.  Dulles  demurs,  then  agrees  to  consider  a
change  if  Collins  will  fly  to  Washington  for  consultations.

23  Apr  55 Diem  proposes  to  broaden  the  government

Diem  calls  for  a  national  referendum  and  elections  for  a  national
assembly  within  six  months.  The  Front  scores  the  proposal.

26  A pr  55 Diem  fires  Sang

(Collins  had  left  Saigon  for  Washington.)  Diem  replaces  Sang
with  a  man  loyal  to  his  regime  but  Sang  refuses  to  resign  saying
only  Bao  Dai  had  the  legal  authority  to  remove  him.

27  Apr  55 Dulles  agrees  to  a  change  in  Saigon

Collins  met  with  Dulles  in  Washington.  Dulles  agreed  to  consider
an  alternate  to  Diem  but  was  determined  to  keep  this  from  the
French  until  their  purposes  were  clear  and  their  promise  to  une-
quivocally support  a  new  regime  firm.  Saigon  was  informed  of  this
new  policy.

28  Apr  55 Diem  hits  the  Binh  Xuyen

Diem  struck  at  the  Surete — and  Sang — after  fighting  erupted  be-
tween the  VNA  and  Binh  Xuyen  forces  in  Cholon.  The  French
said  Diem  instigated  the  fight;  Americans  supported  Diem's  ver-
sion that  the  Binh  Xuyen  began  firing  first.  Whatever  its  origin,
the  fight  ended  with  a  VNA  victory.  The  Binh  Xuyen  were  driven
out  of  Cholon  into  the  Rung  Sat  swamps.

30  Apr  55 Revolutionary  Congress  Announced

Diem's  brother  Nhu  had  a  hand  in  organizing  this  broad  amalgam
of  political  interests  behind  a  program  calling  for  support  of  Diem
against  the  Binh  Xuyen  sects  and  Bao  Dai,  in  favor  of  broad
representation  in  the  government.  Generals  The  and  Phuong,  tired
of  the  "weak"  Revolutionary  Congress,  formed  a  Revolutionary
Committee  whose  outlook  was  more  anti-Bao  Dai  and  anti-French
than  the  Congress.  Present  and  former  Vietminh  supporters  were
members  of  the  Congress  and  Committee.

1  May  55 Bao  Dai's  ultimatum

Bao  Dai  summoned  Diem  to  replace  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff  with
his  own  man.  Diem  ignored  the  summons  and  orders.

1  May  55 The  U.S.:  back  on  the  track  behind  Diem

Because  of  Diem's  victory — superficial  though  it  may  have  been
— over  the  Binh  Xuyen,  because  of  VNA  support  for  Diem,  Dulles
canceled  the  cable  of  28  April:  again,  the  U.S.  will  support  Diem.

8  May  55 A  National  Campaign  launched

Diem  announced  a  national  campaign  to  regain  "wayward"  prov-
inces and  unify  the  country.  Or:  he  declared  war  on  the  sects.  The
VNA  fought  over  a  year  against  Hoa  Hao  and  Binh  Xuyen


208 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

forces,  but  finally  established  control  over  them,  over  areas  of  sect
influence  and  control.

8-11  May  55  Tripartite  Talks,  Paris

Faure:  We  cannot  support  Diem — but  Vietnam  is  not  worth  a  split
in  Franco-American  relations.  Therefore,  France  offers  to  with-
draw from  Vietnam.  Dulles:  We  must  support  Diem.  But  if  a  U.S.
withdrawal  would  prevent  discord,  the  U.S.  will  consider  it.  Then,
after  hearing  JCS  and  Collins'  arguments  against  either  precipitate
French  withdrawal  or  a  U.S.  withdrawal,  Dulles  urged  Faure  to
[words  missing]  Diem  a  while  longer  on  the  grounds  that  he  will
broaden  the  government  and  call  for  elections.  Faure  agreed —
against  his  own  wishes  and  against  strong  popular  pressure  and
on  several  conditions  (most  of  which  required  action  from  Diem
and  which  Dulles  coud  not  guarantee).  Dulles  then  suggested
France  and  the  U.S.  apprise  each  other  of  policy  and  actions  but
pursue  them  more  independently  than  in  the  past.  The  days  of  joint
policy — of  togetherness  in  Vietnam — were  over.

July  1955 Diem  refuses  to  meet  with  the  DRV  about  elections

France  and  Britain  urged  Diem  to  hold  consultations  with  Hanoi
for  all-Vietnam  elections,  as  stipulated  in  the  Geneva  Accords.
The  U.S.  suggested  consultations  but  also  suggested  Diem  request
firm  guarantees  (for  secret  ballot,  UN  or  international  super-
vision) which  the  DRV  was  expected  to  reject.  But  Diem  refused
to  meet  with  the  North  Vietnamese.  He  had  not  signed  the  Geneva
Accords  and  denied  being  bound  by  them  in  any  way.

24  Oct  55 National  Referendum

With  98  percent  of  the  vote.  Diem  became  President  of  the  Re-
public of  Vietnam — and  Bao  Dai  was  dethroned.

Aug-Dec Franco-Vietnamese  Conferences

1955  Diem  wanted  renegotiation  of  economic  and  financial  accords

reached  in  1954;  transfer  of  Vietnamese  affairs  from  the  ministry
of  the  associated  states  to  the  Foreign  Office;  abolition  of  Ely's
former  post  of  High  Commissioner;  termination  of  the  military
High  Command  and  Vietnamese  authority  over  remaining  French
troops  in  Vietnam.  (The  FEC  now  numbered  about  35,000 — vice
the  150,000-man  force  which  France  spoke  of  retaining  in  Viet-
nam during  the  September  1954  Washington  Conference.)  France
could  not  accept  Diem's  last  demand;  had  difficulty  satisfying  the
others,  but  finally  made  major  concessions.  Diem's  response  was
to  withdraw  Vietnamese  representatives  from  the  French  Union
Assembly.

26  Apr  56 French  High  Command  abolished

Only  about  5,000  French  troops  remained  in  Vietnam;  most
French  instructors  had  left  TRIM.  A  French  liaison  mission  with
the  ICC  still  functioned,  however,  and  France  still  served  on  the
Joint  Armistice  Commission  with  DRV  military  representatives.


July,  1956


All-Vietnam  elections

Diem  had  refused  to  consult  with  the  DRV  about  elections  in


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  209


1955;  he  refused  to  hold  them  in  1956.  Diem  did  agree  to  take
over  the  French  responsibility  to  support  the  ICC;  France  would
continue  to  finance  ICC  operations.  The  Joint  Armistice  Commis-
sion gradually  died  of  inactivity.

KEY  AMERICAN  PERSONALITIES:  1954-1956
20  Jan  53-20  Jan  61
President:  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower
Secretary  of  State:  John  Foster  Dulles
Secretary  of  Defense:  Charles  E.  Wilson

Ambassador  to  Vietnam:  Donald  R.  Heath  (25  Jun  52-20  Apr  55) ;

Gen.  J.  Lawton  Collins,  Special  Mission  (8  Nov  54-6  May  55) ;

G.  Frederick  Reinhart  (20  Apr  55-14  Mar  57)
Chairman,  JCS:  Arthur  W.  Radford,  Adm.,  USN  (14  Aug  53-15  Aug  57)
Chief  MAAG,  Indochina:

John  W.  O'Daniel,  Lt.  Gen.,  USA  (31  Mar  54-23  Oct  55) ;

Samuel  T.  Williams,  Lt.  Gen.,  was  1st  Chief  of  MAAG  to  Vietnam  (24  Oct  55-
31  Aug  60)

KEY  FRENCH  PERSONALITIES:  1954-1956
\  Jun  54-Feb  55
Prime  Minister:  Pierre  Mendes-France
Foreign  Minister:  Georges  Bidault
Minister  for  Associated  States:  Guy  La  Chambre
Minister  for  National  Defense:  Rene  Pleven
High  Commissioner,  Vietnam :  General  Paul  Ely

:  23  Feb  55-31  Jan  56

Prime  Minister:  Edgar  Faure

Foreign  Minister:  Antoine  Pinay

Minister  for  Associated  States:  M.  La  Forest

Minister  for  National  Defense:  General  Pierre  Koenig
j  High  Commissioner,  Vietnam :  General  Ely's  post  abolished  after  his  departure,
j June  1955.  (Gen.  Jacquot  assumed  military  responsibilities  until  April,  1956)
i  Ambassador,  Vietnam:  Henri  Hoppenot  (July,  1955)

ii/  Jan  56-16  Apr  57
Prime  Minister:  Guy  Mollet
Foreign  Minister:  Christian  Pineau

Minister  for  National  Defense:  Maurice  Bourges-Maunouvy

I  High  Commissioner,  Vietnam:  (General  Jacquot — military  responsibilities  until
April  1956)

Ambassador,  Vietnam:  M.  Payart  (November,  1956)

KEY  SOUTH  VIETNAMESE  PERSONALITIES:  1954-1956

Mar  49-26  Oct  55

Head  of  State:  Bao  Dai,  Emperor

12  Jan  54-16  Jun  54
Head  of  State:  Bao  Dai
Premier:  Prince  Buu  Loc

Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs:  Nguyen  Quoc  Dinh


210 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


7  Jul  54-1  Nov  63

Head  of  State:  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  (President:  23  Oct  55)
Premier:  Ngo  Dinh  Diem

Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs:  Tran  Van  Do  (Jul  54-May  55)

Vu  Van  Mau  (Jul  55-Nov  63)
Minister  for  National  Defense:  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  (General  Minh  served  tempo-
rarily, early  1955).

A. INTRODUCTION:  POST-GENEVA  EXPECTATIONS

1.  France  Will  Stay  in  Vietnam

After  100  years  of  investment,  interest  and  influence,  France  got  out  of  Viet-
nam in  less  than  a  year  after  the  Geneva  Conference  of  July  1954,  And  France
did  not  want  to  leave.  On  July  25,  three  days  after  signing  the  Geneva  Accords,
Prime  Minister  Mendes-France  said  France  would  maintain  cultural  and  eco-
nomic ties  with  North  Vietnam  and  would  assist  the  development  of  Free  (South)
Vietnam.  The  predecessor  Laniel  Government  had  recognized  "Vietnam  as  a
fully  independent  and  sovereign  state  in  possession  of  all  qualifications  and  pow-
ers known  in  international  law"  on  June  4,  1954;  Mendes-France  pledged  to  up-
hold and  further  that  treaty.  In  August  he  announced  a  three-phase  formula  to
implement  it.  Economic,  administrative  and  financial  ties  with  the  Associated
States  would  be  terminated  as  fast  as  possible.  By  December  1954,  the  last  ves-
tiges of  the  French  colonial  apparatus  had  been  eliminated.  However,  Mendes-
France's  formula  viewed  membership  in  the  French  Union  as  compulsory — in-
dicative of  French  desire  to  stay  in  Vietnam  but  inimical  to  demands  lodged  by
Diem  and  the  United  States  for  independence  which  included  the  right  to  with-
draw from  the  French  Union.

Also  in  August,  General  Paul  Ely,  French  High  Commissioner  in  Vietnam,
reaffirmed  French  support  of  Vietnamese  independence  and  French  readiness  to
further  Vietnamese  development.  That  the  French  had  a  role  to  play  was  clear:
French  economic  investment,  cultural  institutions,  military,  political  and  admin-
istrative operations  were  already  part  of  South  Vietnamese  life.  That  France  must
play  a  role  was  also  clear.  Under  the  Geneva  Accords,  France  had  pledged  to
guarantee  all- Vietnam  elections  in  1956,  guarantee  execution  of  the  armistice
agreement,  guarantee  Vietnamese  sovereignty,  unity  and  territorial  integrity,
pledged  to  maintain  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  until  Vietnam  requested  its
removal.  General  Ely  had  been  delegated  extensive  political  and  military  au-
thority to  enable  him  to  meet  these  obligations.  He  worked  sincerely  to  persuade
both  Vietnamese  and  French  that  mutual  cooperation  would  be  mutually  benefi-
cial, to  erase  the  colonialist  tinge  of  French  presence,  to  both  speed  and  smooth
the  French  transition  from  master  to  equal  partner  of  Vietnam.

2.  Diem:  France  Will  Leave  South  Vietnam

In  this  endeavor,  Ely  received  qualified  support  from  French  officials,  "colons"
and  military  officers  in  Vietnam.  He  received  sporadic  support  from  Paris.  He
received  almost  no  support  from  the  Vietnamese.  France  was  not  welcome  in
Vietnam  for  many  reasons,  a  major  one  being  Premier  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.  A  Fran-
cophobe  of  the  first  order.  Diem  wanted  full  independence  for  South  Vietnam
and  wanted  France  out  of  the  country  as  soon  as  possible.  Many  shared  Diem's


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950—1956  211

sentiments.  France  had  just  lost  a  long,  devastating  and  demoralizing  war  against
Vietnamese  communists  as  well  as  Vietnamese  nationalists.  French  colonial  rule
had  been  tight,  previous  French  promises  of  independence  had  been  broken.  Why
believe  professions  of  French  good  intentions  in  1954  were  any  different  from
those  of  the  past?  Added  to  this  was  the  problematical  relationship  of  France
vis-a-vis  South  Vietnam  and  the  Democratic  Republic  of  North  Vietnam.  Some
South  Vietnamese  expected  France  to  actively  work  toward  accommodation  with
the  Viet  Minh  and  reunification  of  North  and  South  under  Viet  Minh  direction.
Many  more  felt  the  fact  of  continued  French  presence  alone  compromised  South
Vietnamese  independence.  "To  convince  the  people  of  Vietnam  that  the  adminis-
tration was  independent,  it  became  a  political  necessity  to  be  anti-colonial  and
specifically  anti-French."

3. The  U.S.  Will  "Join"  France  in  South  Vietnam

Finally,  France  was  not  alone  in  Vietnam.  More  than  Diem,  more  than  the
psychological  damage  done  by  colonial  years,  the  United  States  made  life  in
Vietnam  difficult  for  France.  The  U.S.  was  eager  to  strengthen  Vietnam,  needed
and  demanded  French  cooperation,  but  offered  little  in  return.  U.S.  policy  in-
sisted upon  an  immediate  and  dramatic  transformation  of  French  policy.  But
the  U.S.  little  understood  what  this  meant  to  France,  what  problems  it  created
for  French  domestic  and  foreign  policy  or  what  U.S.  concessions  might  help
effect  the  transformation.

Although  remnants  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  remained  until  1956,
France  was  out  of  Vietnam  to  all  intents  and  purposes  by  May  1955,  ten  months
after  Geneva.  These  months  are  characterized  by  professions  of  Franco— Ameri-
can cooperation  but  demonstrations  of  Franco-American  division,  characterized
by  conflict  of  word  and  action  on  several  levels.  Paris  said  one  thing  but  did
another,  Paris  said  one  thing  and  French  officials  in  Saigon  did  the  opposite;
Washington  activities  were  not  always  in  line  with  Washington  pronouncements
and  the  gulf  between  the  thought  and  deed  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  only  compounded
an  already  sensitive  situation.  It  is  during  this  period  that  Diem  established  his
rule,  against  French  advice  and  best  interests  but  with  almost  unwavering  support
from  Secretary  of  State  John  Foster  Dulles.  And  it  is  the  period  during  which
the  anti-communist  moralism  of  Dulles  and  Diem  rejected  any  rapprochement
with  the  North,  ultimately  ensuring  that  the  temporary  military  demarkation
line  would  become  a  permanent  division  of  Vietnam.

B. INITIAL  U.S.  POLICY  TOWARD  INDOCHINA

The  U.S.  began  revising  policy  toward  Indochina  as  the  Geneva  Conference
closed.  The  exercise  was  marked  by  urgency  dictated  by  the  belief  that  Geneva
had  been  a  disaster  for  the  free  world.  Geneva  gave  Communist  China  and  North
Vietnam  a  new  base  for  exploitation  of  Southeast  Asia;  it  enhanced  Peking's  pres-
tige to  Washington's  dismay  and  detriment;  it  restricted  free  world  room  to  ma-
neuver in  Southeast  Asia.  And  its  grant  of  Vietnamese  territory  above  the  seven-
teenth parallel  to  the  communist  Ho  Chi  Minh  was  a  painful  reminder  of  the
scarifying  French  defeat  by  the  Viet  Minh,  the  first  defeat  of  a  European  power
oy  Asians  (Asian  communists  at  that),  a  defeat  shared  by  the  United  States  to
the  tune  of  more  than  $1.5  billion  in  economic  and  military  assistance  granted
France  and  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina.


212 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

1.  SEATO:  The  New  Initiative?

The  first  step  toward  countering  this  disaster  had  been  discussed  with  Britain
and  France  since  the  spring  of  1954,  and  Walter  Bedell  Smith's  comment  as
Geneva  closed,  "We  must  get  that  pact!,"  heralded  its  inauguration.  The  South-
east Asian  Collective  Defense  Treaty  was  to  be  a  "new  initiative  in  Southeast
Asia"  to  protect  the  U.S.  position  in  the  Far  East  and  stabilize  "the  present
chaotic  situation  ...  to  prevent  further  losses  to  communism"  through  sub-
version or  overt  aggression.  But  the  Manila  Pact,  signed  on  September  8,  1954,
proved  to  be  neither  the  new  initiative  nor  the  strong  anti-communist  shield  called
for  by  Secretary  Dulles.  Vice  Admiral  A.  C.  Davis,  deputy  assistant  secretary
and  Defense  Department  representative  at  Manila,  reported  the  Pact  left  South-
east Asia  "no  better  prepared  than  before  to  cope  with  Communist  aggression."
The  failure  was  largely  of  American  making.  While  Dulles  wanted  to  put  the
communists  on  notice  that  aggression  would  be  opposed,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
insisted  the  United  States  must  not  be  committed  financially,  militarily  or  eco-
nomically to  unilateral  action  in  the  Far  East  and  that  U.S.  freedom  of  action
must  not  be  restricted.  The  two  objectives  conflicted  and  one  cancelled  out  the
other.  Thus,  Article  IV  of  the  treaty,  the  mechanism  for  collective  action  in  case
of  enemy  threat,  did  not  pledge  automatic  response  with  force  to  force.  Instead,
each  signatory  promised  to  "act  to  meet  the  common  danger  in  accordance  with
its  constitutional  processes."  The  United  States,  particularly  Mr.  Dulles,  tried  to
put  teeth  into  SEATO  through  unilateral  declarations  of  U.S.  readiness  to  act.
Dulles  defined  the  obligations  under  Article  IV  as  "a  clear  and  definite  agreement
on  the  part  of  the  signatories,  including  the  United  States,  to  come  to  the  aid  of
any  member  of  the  Pact  who  under  the  terms  of  this  treaty  is  subjected  to  aggres-
sion." However,  Dulles  failed  to  instill  the  same  dedication  to  instant  intervention
in  the  other  SEATO  members.

The  obligation  assumed  at  Manila  emphasized  the  importance  attached  to
Southeast  Asia  by  the  U.S.  Government.  U.S.  refusal  to  pledge  unqualified  sup-
port to  Indochina  emphasized  the  need  for  indigenous  strength  and  stability  in
the  area  to  counter  communist  power,  to  make  infiltration  and  aggression  less
appetizing  to  the  enemy.  Of  the  three  Indochina  states,  most  important  yet  least
stable  and  least  strong  was  South  Vietnam.  Thus,  the  second  step  in  policy  devel-
opment was  to  decide  what  the  U.S.  could  do  to  change  the  situation,  a  decision
which  turned  on  what  France  could  or  would  do  in  South  Vietnam.

2.  Alternative  French  Policies

That  France  and  the  United  States  would  eventually  part  company  over  Viet-
nam might  have  been  predicted  in  August  1954,  when  U.S.  policy  toward  Viet-
nam was  drawn.  Formulae  for  economic,  military  and  especially  political  courses
of  action  were  different  from — often  antithetical  to — French  objectives  and  in-
terests.

The  U.S.  intelligence  community  felt  if  France  "acted  swiftly  to  insure  Viet-
nam full  independence  and  to  encourage  strong  nationalist  leadership  .  .  .  anti-
French  nationalist  activity  might  be  lessened  (and)  with  French  military  and
economic  assistance — backed  by  U.S.  aid — the  Vietnamese  could  proceed  to  de-
velop gradually  an  effective  security  force,  local  government  organization  and  a
long  range  program  for  economic  and  social  reform."  But  there  were  three  other
routes  or  combinations  of  routes  open  to  France  in  post-Geneva  Vietnam.  France


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  213


could  work  to  maintain  French  Union  ties,  indirect  French  political  control  and
economic  domination  rather  than  grant  full  independence  to  Vietnam.  Or,  France
could  try  to  reach  an  agreement  with  the  Viet  Minh,  expedite  elections  and
achieve  a  unified  country  in  which  French  cultural,  economic  and  political  inter-
ests could  be  maintained.  A  fourth  possibility,  thought  likely  only  if  the  situation
deteriorated  to  the  point  of  hopelessness,  was  a  French  decision  to  withdraw  all
military,  economic  and  administrative  support  from  Indochina.

Of  the  four  courses  of  action  open  to  France,  three  were  rejected  by  the  Eisen-
hower Administration.  Continuation  of  French  Union  ties  plus  indirect  French
controls  would  be  impossible  under  Diem,  whose  anti-French  feeling  ran  deep,
who  had  not  in  the  past  and  would  not  now  accept  anything  less  than  complete
freedom  from  France.  And  Diem  had  American  backing.  Dulles  believed  "the
kind  of  thing  he  stands  for"  is  the  "necessary  ingredient  of  success"  and  called
the  Diem  government  the  "nucleus  for  future  efforts."  Accommodation  with  the
Viet  Minh  was  anathema  to  both  Diem  and  the  U.S.  Although  American  policy
spoke  of  taking  steps  to  prevent  the  complete  absorption  of  the  DRV  into  the

,  Soviet  bloc,  those  steps  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  maintenance  of  a  U.S.
consulate  in  Hanoi.  Dulles  in  particular  could  not  see  Ho  Chi  Minh  as  Asia's
Tito  and  refused  to  deal  with  him,  thereby  crushing  Mendes-France's  hope  that
Vietnam  could  become  an  experiment  in  peaceful  coexistence.  The  U.S.  was

I  equally  determined  to  prevent  the  quick  withdrawal  of  the  French  Expeditionary

j  Corps  from  Vietnam.  It  was  believed:

in  the  last  analysis,  Vietnamese  security  will  be  determined  by  the  degree  of
French  protection  and  assistance  in  the  development  of  a  national  army,

plus  Vietnamese  energies  and  the  will  of  other  powers  to  guarantee  Vietnamese
j  security.

Thus,  United  States  policy  required  France  to  grant  full  Vietnamese  independ-
ence quickly  and  to  support  a  strong  indigenous  political  regime,  to  maintain
French  military  presence  but  reduce  military,  economic  and  political  controls.
Basic  guidance  determined  at  National  Security  Council  meetings  on  August  8
and  12  became  NSC  5429/2,  issued  on  August  20.

3. U.S.  Objectives  in  Vietnam:  Political,  Economic,  Military

The  American  formula  for  government  in  free  Vietnam  rested  on  three  legs,
i  Independence  was  first  and  more  important.  France  must  treat  South  Vietnam
i  as  an  independent  sovereign  nation  and  the  U.S.  would  deal  with  it  on  that  basis.
Full  independence  was  the  only  way  to  win  nationalist  support  away  from  the
Viet  Minh,  and  nationalist  support  was  thought  to  be  essential  to  successful  gov-
ernment in  South  Vietnam.  Secondly,  the  U.S.  would  urge  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  to
establish  a  government  of  national  union  representative  of  dominant  elements  on
the  political  scene.  After  bringing  some  stability  to  the  nation,  a  Constituent
Assembly  would  be  called  and  a  constitution  drafted  to  herald  the  legal  de-
i  throning  of  Emperor  Bao  Dai  and  inauguration  of  democracy.  Finally,  the  for-
mula demanded  firm  French  and  U.S.  support  for  Diem.  Despite  his  rigidity,  his
penchant  for  a  one-man  show  and  his  inability  to  communicate  or  deal  with
people.  Diem  was  a  nationalist  untainted  by  past  association  with  either  Viet
Minh  or  French.  This  quality,  plus  full  independence,  plus  Franco-American
backing  and  encouragement  for  broad  reform  ultimately  would  result  in  a  strong
anti-communist  South  Vietnam.  Or  so  the  U.S.  thought.


214 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

U.S.  determination  to  back  Diem  was  made  with  the  knowledge  that  French
support  for  him  was  hardly  enthusiastic.  Guy  La  Chambre,  Minister  for  the
Associated  States,  faulted  Diem  on  three  essential  points:  Diem  would  oppose
a  representative  government,  oppose  agrarian  reform  and  refuse  to  depose  Bao
Dai  and  create  a  republic.  La  Chambre  expected  a  new  government  would  be
necessary  to  give  South  Vietnam  a  chance  of  winning  the  1956  elections.

American's  economic  policy  for  South  Vietnam  was  designed  to  yield  imme-
diate political  advantage,  cope  with  the  staggering  distortion  of  Vietnamese  eco-
nomic life  and  ease  France  out  of  economic  affairs.  U.S.  planners  believed  inte-
gration of  land  reform  measures  with  refugee  resettlement  would  fill  a  triple  bill:
surplus  land  distributed  among  the  thousands  of  refugees  would  invite  their  politi-
cal support,  facilitate  assimilation  of  Tonkinese  with  Cochin-Chinese  and  bring
the  land  to  full  productivity.  Aid  would  be  given  directly  to  Vietnam  as  befitting
its  independence  and  as  a  means  to  accelerate  the  "disassociation  of  France  from
(economic)  levers  of  command."  French  domination  in  this  area,  it  was  thought,
stifled  Vietnamese  efforts  and  contradicted  Vietnamese  independence.  It  also
inhibited  American  economic  interests.  Militarily,  the  U.S.  would  build  up  "in-
digenous military  forces  necessary  for  internal  security  .  .  .  working  through
the  French  only  insofar  as  necessary."  Exactly  how  indigenous  forces  would  be
developed  was  not  decided  until  December  1954,  because  France  had  some  ideas
about  what  to  do  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  differed  with  State  Department
opinions  as  to  the  kind  of  U.S.  involvement  required.


4. The  U.S.  "Chooses"  Policy  for  France

In  effect,  these  policy  decisions  of  August  1954  asked  Mendes-France  to  over-
come "French  traditional  interests  and  emotions  which  have  in  the  past  governed
the  implementation  of  policy  in  Indochina."  They  asked  for — or  demanded — a
"dramatic  transformation  in  French  policy"  because  policy  makers  believed  this
was  necessary  to  "win  the  active  loyalty  and  support  of  the  population  for  a
South  Vietnamese  Government."  The  U.S.  asked  France  to  stay  in  Vietnam
militarily,  to  get  out  of  Vietnamese  economic  and  political  life,  but  at  the  same
time  Washington  asked  for  French  support  and  cooperation  in  implementing  U.S.
programs.  This  was  probably  asking  too  much.

By  December,  the  U.S.  no  longer  asked  for  French  support  but  demanded  it.
By  December,  the  qualified  U.S.  commitment  to  Diem  had  hardened,  U.S.  in-
volvement in  Vietnam  had  deepened  and  U.S.  activities  there  either  dominated
or  simply  excluded  the  French.  Several  forces  converged  to  produce  this  change
in  U.S.  policy.  Resolution  of  differences  within  the  Eisenhower  Administration
on  military  issues  opened  the  way  for  U.S.  assumption  of  responsibilities  in  what
had  been  an  exclusively  French  preserve.  The  belief  that  Diem  for  all  his  failings
and  weaknesses  was  the  only  available  leader  for  South  Vietnam,  and  that  he
needed  stronger  U.S.  and  French  support  to  quell  opponents  and  speed  develop-
ment led  to  the  creation  of  programs  designed  to  provide  that  strong  support.

Finally,  the  U.S.  believed  France  had  not  done  enough  for  Diem,  believed  the
schizophrenic  French  policy  of  professing  support  while  acting  to  undermine
Diem's  regime  was  largely  to  blame  for  Vietnamese  difficulties.  This  resulted  in
demands  that  France  live  up  to  her  promises.  It  made  unilateral  American  efforts
more  attractive — French  assistance  might  not  be  available  in  any  case — and  it
inspired  a  feeling  that  Americans  had  to  do  more  because  the  French  were  doing
so  little.

(


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  215


C. TENTATIVE  U.S.  INVOLVEMENT
BECOMES  DEEPER,  FIRMER

1. Adoption  of  Military  Responsibilities

Authorization  for  General  John  (Iron  Mike)  O'Daniel,  Chief  of  the  Military
Assistance  and  Advisory  Group  (MAAG),  Indochina,  to  take  up  the  task  of
training  the  Vietnamese  National  Army  (VNA)  was  long  in  coming.  General
O'Daniel  and  French  General  Ely  had  discussed  U.S.  participation  in  training
in  June  1954;  O'Daniel  drew  up  a  comprehensive  plan  for  advisory  assistance  at
all  levels  of  the  military  establishment  and  in  July  begged  the  U.S.  to  beef  up
the  MAAG  staff  before  August  11,  when  the  Geneva  prohibition  against  intro-
duction of  new  military  personnel  went  into  effect.  But  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
objected.

a.  The  JCS  Arguments  Against  U.S.  Training  the  VNA

Early  in  August,  the  JCS  listed  four  preconditions  essential  to  the  success  of
a  U.S.  training  effort  in  Indochina,  preconditions  which  should  be  met  before
training  obligations  were  assumed.  First:

It  is  absolutely  essential  that  there  be  a  reasonably  strong,  stable  civil
government  in  control.  It  is  hopeless  to  expect  a  US  military  training  mission
to  achieve  success  unless  the  nation  concerned  is  able  effectively  to  perform
those  governmental  functions  essential  to  the  successful  raising  and  main-
tenance of  armed  forces.

Secondly,  that  government  "should  formally  request  that  the  United  States
assume  responsibility  for  training  .  .  .  forces  and  providing  the  military  equip-
ment, financial  assistance  and  political  advice  necessary  to  insure  internal  sta-
bility." The  Chiefs  saw  no  role  in  training  for  the  French;  the  third  precondition
called  for  complete  French  withdrawal  from  the  country:

Arrangements  should  be  made  with  the  French  granting  full  independence
to  the  Associated  States  and  providing  for  the  phased,  orderly  withdrawal
of  French  forces,  French  officials  and  French  advisors  from  Indochina  in
order  to  provide  motivation  and  a  sound  basis  for  the  establishment  of
national  armed  forces.  The  United  States  from  the  beginning  should  insist
on  dealing  directly  with  the  governments  of  the  respective  Associated  States,
completely  independent  of  French  participation  or  control.

Finally,  both  "local  military  requirements  and  the  over-all  U.S.  interests  should
dictate  the  size  and  composition  of  indigenous  forces."

b.  Dulles'  Views

Of  the  four  preconditions,  only  the  second  presented  no  problem.  The  State
:  Department,  notably  Secretary  Dulles,  Walter  F.  Robertson,  Assistant  Secretary
;  of  State  for  the  Far  East,  and  Kenneth  T.  Young,  head  of  an  interdepartmental
Vietnam  Task  Force,  objected  to  the  other  three  stipulations.  Dulles  outlined
his  thinking  in  a  letter  of  August  1 8  to  Defense  Secretary  Charles  Wilson.  Agree-


216 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

ing  that  the  Diem  government  "is  far  from  strong  or  stable"  Dulles  pointed  out
that  reorganization  and  retraining  of  the  army  was  "one  of  the  most  efficient
means  of  enabling  the  Vietnamese  Government  to  become  strong."  Calling  this
"the  familiar  hen-and-egg  argument  as  to  which  comes  first,"  Dulles  made  his
preference  clear.  He  saw  two  courses  of  action  open  to  the  United  States:

one,  to  strengthen  the  government  by  means  of  a  political  and  economic
nature  and  the  other,  to  bolster  that  government  by  strengthening  the  army
which  supports  it.

Dulles  wished  to  adopt  both  courses.

As  for  the  question  of  French  presence  or  absence,  Dulles  said:

It  would  be  militarily  disastrous  to  demand  the  withdrawal  of  French
forces  from  Vietnam  before  the  creation  of  a  new  National  Army.  How-
ever .  .  .  there  would  seem  to  be  no  insuperable  objection  to  the  U.S.
undertaking  a  training  program  .  .  .  while  at  the  same  time  the  French
Forces  commence  a  gradual  phasing  out  from  that  theater.

c.  The  NSC  Backs  Dulles

Adoption  of  NSC  5429/2  indicates  the  U.S.  Government  found  Dulles'  views
more  persuasive  that  those  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  But  while  it  was  agreed
to  "work  through  the  French  only  insofar  as  necessary"  to  build  up  indigenous
forces,  the  program  for  bolstering  the  Vietnamese  army  was  not  developed  for
several  months.

d.  JCS-State  Split  on  Force  Level,  Mission  for  VNA

On  September  22,  in  a  memorandum  recommending  establishment  of  a
MA  AG,  Cambodia  (if  "all  French  advisors  ultimately"  are  withdrawn,  if  the
U.S.  deals  directly  with  Phnom  Penh  and  if  these  caveats  are  written  into  a
bilateral  agreement  with  Cambodia),  the  JCS  recommended  against  assignment
of  training  responsibilities  to  the  Saigon  MAAG  because  of  the  "unstable  political
situation"  in  South  Vietnam.  Instability  was  noted  "with  concern"  by  the  JCS
in  a  second  September  22  memorandum  dealing  with  development  of  forces  in
Indochina,  as  was  the  cease-fire  agreement  (called  "a  major  obstacle  to  the
introduction  of  adequate  U.S.  MAAG  personnel  and  of  additional  arms  and
equipment").  Because  of  these  factors,  the  Chiefs  considered  "this  is  not  a
propitious  time  to  further  indicate  United  States  intentions  with  respect  to  the
support  and  training  of  Vietnamese  forces."

But  the  JCS  had  been  directed  by  the  NSC  to  address  the  question  of  Vietna-
mese force  levels;  against  their  best  wishes,  one  supposes,  this  memorandum
forwarded  their  views.  A  234,00-man  army  was  proposed  for  Vietnam;  the
annual  cost  of  training  and  maintaining  this  force — assuming  France  turned  over
to  the  VNA  arms  and  equipment  furnished  under  the  U.S.  Military  Development
Assistance  Program  since  1950 — was  put  at  $420  million.  Another  $23.5
million  would  be  needed  to  train  and  equip  the  Navy  and  Air  Forces.  Further,
the  JCS  wanted  speedy  relinquishment  of  French  over-all  command  of  the  VNA
and  speedy  withdrawal  of  French  forces  as  the  Vietnamese  "are  capable  of
exercising  command  of  an  effective  force."  Finally,  the  JCS  requested  "a  definite


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  217


agreement  ...  be  obtained  from  the  French  Government  with  respect  to  the
timing  of  their  programmed  phased  withdrawal"  before  U.S.  assumption  of
training  responsibilities.

Dulles  objected  to  these  proposals:

It  seems  to  me  that  the  mission  of  the  Vietnamese  National  Armed  Forces
should  be  to  provide  internal  security.  The  manpower  and  cost  estimates
(of  the  ICS)  would  seem  to  be  excessive  in  the  above  context.

The  Secretary  called  a  French  request  of  $330  million  to  support  the  French
Expeditionary  Corps,  then  expected  to  number  150,000  men  through  1955,  and
the  Vietnamese  plan  to  keep  230,000  men  under  arms  ".  .  .  beyond  what  the
United  States  should  consider  feasible  to  support  for  maintaining  the  security
of  free  Indochina  at  this  time."  Instead,  he  called  it  "imperative"  that  the  U.S.
Government — e.g.,  the  ICS — "prepare  a  firm  position  on  the  size  of  the  forces  we
consider  a  minimum  level  to  assure  the  internal  security  of  Indochina."

A  week  later  the  Chiefs  in  turn  objected.  The  idea  of  training  the  VNA  for
internal  security  contradicted  NSC  162/2  which  "envisages  reliance  on  indigenous
ground  forces  to  the  maximum  extent  possible"  in  territorial  defense.  Citing  the
threat  from  "considerable  numbers  of  Viet  Minh  guerrillas  and  sympathizers
.  .  .  known  to  be  or  suspected  of  being  within  the  territory  of  free  Vietnam"
and  the  GVN  "intention  of  requesting  the  phased  withdrawal  of  the  French
forces  by  1956"  the  Chiefs  said:

This  would  result  in  a  complete  military  vacuum  unless  the  Vietnamese
are  adequately  prepared  to  take  over  progressively  as  the  French  withdraw.

The  force  levels  recommended  on  September  22  were  reaffirmed  as  "the  mini-
mum required  ultimately  to  carry  out  the  .  .  .  objectives"  of  the  VNA,  which
should  be  "to  attain  and  maintain  internal  security  and  to  deter  Viet  Minh
aggression  by  a  limited  defense  of  the  Geneva  Armistice  demarkation  line."  The
ICS  pointed  again  to  the  unstable  political  situation  in  Vietnam,  the  342-man
MAAG  ceiling  and  concluded:

Under  these  conditions,  U.S.  participation  in  training  not  only  would
probably  have  but  limited  beneficial  efi'ect  but  also  would  assume  responsi-
bility for  any  failure  of  the  program.  In  light  of  the  foregoing  and  from  a
military  point  of  view,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  the  United
States  should  not  participate  in  the  training  of  Vietnamese  forces  in  Indo-
china. However,  if  it  is  considered  that  political  considerations  are  over-
riding, the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  would  agree  to  the  assignment  of  a  training
mission  to  MAAG,  Saigon,  with  safeguards  against  French  interference
with  the  U.S.  training  effort.

e. Again,  the  NSC  Backs  Dulles,  Recommends  a  U.S.  Military  Program
in  South  Vietnam

Political  considerations  were  overriding.  The  JCS  concession  to  consider
I'training  the  Vietnamese  for  internal  security  alone  coincided  with  deliberations
in  the  Operations  Coordinating  Board  over  possible  ways  in  which  to  strengthen
ihe  Diem  regime.  A  crash  program  had  been  outlined  by  State,  part  of  which
was  a  limited  interim  training  program  recommended  by  the  OCB.  Admiral


218 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Radford,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  believed  this  would  set  in
motion  the  long-range  training  program  proposed  by  General  O'Daniel  in  June;
he  still  believed  that  program  should  not  be  adopted.  But  before  the  JCS  could
consider  or  suggest  revisions  to  the  OCB  proposal,  the  National  Security  Council
met  on  October  22  and  approved  a  joint  State-Defense  message  to  Saigon
authorizing  Ambassador  Donald  Heath  and  O'Daniel  to  "collaborate  in  setting
in  motion  a  crash  program  designed  to  bring  about  an  improvement  in  the
loyalty  and  effectiveness  of  the  Free  Vietnamese  Forces."  The  JCS  were  directed
to  recommend  force  levels  necessary  to  "accomplish  the  military  objective
merely  of  the  maintenance  of  internal  security."

Responding  on  November  17,  the  JCS  proposed  a  force  of  89,085  at  an  esti-
mated cost  of  $193.1  million  for  Fiscal  Year  1956  and  approximately  $100
million  for  the  remainder  of  FY  1955.  To  provide  internal  security  and  "in  an
attempt  to  stabilize  the  Diem  government"  the  JCS  suggested  prompt  reduction
in  force  and  prompt  reassigment  of  selected  personnel  and  units  to  maintain
"the  security  of  the  legal  government  in  Saigon  and  other  major  population
centers,"  execute  "regional  security  operations  in  each  province"  and  perform
"territorial  pacification  missions."  Later,  military  centers .  would  be  established
for  reorganization  and  training  of  the  military.

The  Chiefs  expressed  serious  reservations  about  the  probability  of  Vietnamese
— and  American — success.  First,

the  chaotic  internal  political  situation  within  Vietnam  is  such  that  there  is
no  assurance  that  the  security  forces  visualized  herein  can  be  developed
into  loyal  and  effective  support  for  the  Diem  Government,  or,  if  developed,
that  these  forces  will  result  in  political  and  military  stability  within  South
Vietnam.  Unless  the  Vietnamese  themselves  show  an  inclination  to  make
individual  and  collective  sacrifices  required  to  resist  communism,  which
they  have  not  done  to  date,  no  amount  of  external  pressure  and  assistance
can  long  delay  complete  Communist  victory  in  South  Vietnam.

Secondly,  "the  cooperation  and  collaboration  of  the  French  MAAG"  is  vital
to  effective  execution  of  the  program — and  the  JCS  doubted  that  support  would
be  readily  offered.  Finally,  the  Chiefs  cautioned,

the  above  program  does  not  provide  adequate  security  for  the  Associated
States  against  external  aggression  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  forces.
With  the  Viet  Minh  increasing  the  size  and  effectiveness  of  their  forces  and
with  no  forces  in  being  committed  to  mutual  defense  under  the  Southeast
Asia  Collective  Defense  Treaty,  the  above  long-range  program  would  be
insufficient  to  provide  more  than  limited  initial  resistance  to  an  organized
military  assault  by  the  Viet  Minh.

f. Collins  Agrees  with  the  NSC

Another  memorandum  of  November  17  indicated  how  quickly  the  United
States  had  moved  to  inaugurate  the  crash  program  approved  at  the  October  22
NSC  meeting.  Secretary  Dulles  outlined  for  President  Eisenhower  the  recom-
mendations of  General  J.  Lawton  Collins,  special  envoy  sent  to  Vietnam  to
over-see  all  U.S.  operations,  coordinate  them  with  French  programs  and  get
things  moving.  Collins  recommended  the  "Vietnamese  National  Army  ...  be
reduced  by  July  1955  to  77,000.  It  should  be  placed  under  Vietnamese  com-


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  219


mand  and  control  by  that  date.  .  .  .  The  cost  to  the  U.S.  would  be  two  hundred
million  dollars  annually.  .  .  .  The  United  States  should  assume  training  responsi-
bility ...  by  January  1,  1955,  with  French  cooperation  and  utilizing  French
trainers."

Collins  insisted  that  French  forces  be  retained  in  Vietnam:

It  would  be  disastrous  if  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  were  with-
drawn prematurely  since  otherwise  Vietnam  would  be  overrun  by  an  enemy
attack  before  the  Manila  Pact  Powers  could  act.

To  "encourage  the  French  to  retain  sufficient  forces,"  Collins  urged  U.S.  financial
support  of  at  least  $100  million  through  December  1955.  General  Ely  con-
curred.

2. Conditions  in  Vietnam  Invite  Firmer  Action

The  situation  in  Vietnam  during  the  autumn  of  1954  invited  an  action  pro-
gram of  some  kind — any  kind.  Premier  Diem  barely  controlled  Saigon;  he  was
opposed  by  his  army's  chief  of  staff,  by  powerful  sect  politicians  guarding
significant  special  interests  with  powerful  sect  armies;  he  was  at  least  tacitly
opposed  by  many  French  in  Vietnam.  The  countryside  had  been  devastated  by
the  war;  communications,  administration  and  financial  operations  were  stalled;
an  already  prostrate  economy  was  threatened  by  the  deluge  of  some  860,000
refugees  from  the  north.  Over  all  hung  "an  atmosphere  of  frustration  and  dis-
illusionment" created  by  the  Geneva  Accords  and  imposed  partition,  "com-
pounded by  widespread  uncertainty  as  to  French  and  U.S.  intentions."  U.S.  policy
in  August  set  out  to  correct  the  uncertainty.

a. The  Military  Threatens  Diem

General  Nguyen  Van  Hinh,  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Vietnamese  National  Army,
was  the  first  coup-plotter  to  rise  and  first  to  fall.  September  threats  of  a  military
revolt  were  first  staved  off  by  the  mediation  of  U.S.  Ambassador  Donald  Heath
and  General  Ely  (who  doubted  Diem's  capacity  to  lead  but  worked  to  prevent  his
violent  downfall.)  Then  Diem  uncovered  a  coup  plot,  arrested  some  Hinh  sup-
porters, removed  the  general  from  command  and  ordered  him  out  of  the
country.  Hinh  refused  to  leave  and  continued  his  machinations  against  the
government.  Plans  for  one  coup  in  October  were  dropped  when  Hinh  was  told
revolt  would  mean  automatic  termination  of  U.S.  aid.  Another  scheduled  for
October  26  was  foiled  when  Colonel  E.  G.  Lansdale,  head  of  the  Saigon  Military
Mission  and  chief  CIA  man  on  the  scene,  lured  two  key  subordinates  out  of  the
country.  Lansdale  invited  Hinh  and  staff  to  visit  the  Philippines.  Hinh  un-
happily declined  but  his  supporters — one  of  whom  allegedly  was  a  French  agent
— could  not  resist  the  chance  to  see  the  inner  workings  of  the  Magsaysay-led,
U.S.-supported  operation  against  Huk  insurgents.  Finally,  in  November,  Bao
Dai  was  persuaded  by  America  and  France  to  intervene  on  Diem's  behalf.  He
did,  ordered  Hinh  to  report  to  Cannes,  and  on  November  19,  the  general  left  the
country.  General  Hinh  enjoyed  some  French  support  in  his  anti-Diem  activity.
Ambassador  Heath  reported  he  received  "quiet  encouragement  if  not  unofficial
support"  from  many  French  officers  and  officials  in  Saigon  and  "at  the  working
level  in  Paris."  Hinh  was  also  aided  initially  by  the  sects,  later  by  the  Binh
Xuyen.


220 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


b.  The  Sects  Threaten  Diem

The  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sects,  basically  religious  groups  with  important  po-
litical controls  and  interests  as  well  as  private,  French-subsidized  armies,  worked
with  Hinh  through  early  September.  Then,  spurred  by  the  knowledge  that  precipi-
tate action  would  jeopardize  American  aid,  the  sects  agreed  to  work  with  Diem.
Last  minute  threats  and  "heavy  pressure"  from  French  officials  against  coalition
left  sect  leaders  "dizzy"  but  they  recovered  sufficiently  to  accept  cabinet  positions
on  September  24.  Shaky  to  begin  with,  the  coalition  never  worked:  Diem  re-
fused to  delegate  responsibility  to  his  eight  new  ministers  and  they  soon  tired
of  trying  to  work  through  the  government.

c.  And  the  Binh  Xuyen  Oppose  Diem

The  Binh  Xuyen,  too,  considered  joining  the  coalition  but  pulled  out  when
Diem  refused  to  name  Binh  Xuyen  leader,  "a  colorful  brigand  named  Le  Van
(Bay)  Vien"  Minister  of  the  Interior.  Bay  Vien  had  forged  a  motley  group  of
small-time  gangsters  into  a  fairly  sophisticated  organization  of  6000  big-time
gangsters  and  river  pirates,  and  had  been  helped  in  this  endeavor  by  Bao  Dai  and
French  colonial  administrators.  The  Binh  Xuyen  controlled  prostitution  and
gambling  in  Cholon  and  the  Saigon-Cholon  police  force — reportedly  because
Bay  Vien  paid  Bao  Dai  some  40  million  piasters  for  these  privileges.  Still-
dissident  sect  leaders  such  as  Ba  Cut,  whose  5000  Hoa  Hao  adherents  denounced
Geneva  and  refused  cooperation  with  Diem,  and  Frenchmen  opposed  to  Diem
abetted  Binh  Xuyen  intrigues  against  the  government.

3. French  Laxity  Demands  Strong  U.S.  Programs

More  than  the  Vietnamese  power  struggles  and  Diem's  inability  to  consolidate
his  rule,  French  activities  during  the  autumn  of  1954  galvanized  the  United
States.  From  acquiescence  to  U.S.  demands  in  September,  American  policy
makers  felt  France  had  moved  toward  opposition  to  U.S.  demands  by  November.
That  this  assessment  of  French  actions  was  either  objective  or  fair  is  questionable.

a. The  Washington  Conference,  September,  1954

After  Franco-American  discussions  in  Washington  in  late  September — the  first
in  a  progression  of  monthly  meetings  on  Vietnam — the  United  States  seemed
to  have  scored  highest.  France  promised  to  support  Diern,  to  grant  independence
to  Vietnam  quickly.  The  transfer  of  financial,  administrative,  economic  and  other
functions  to  the  Vietnamese  had  begun  and  would  be  completed  by  December
1954.  That  France  balked  at  U.S.  demands  for  an  immediate  grant  of  independ-
ence outside  of  the  French  Union  is  not  surprising:  French  cultural,  economic
and  political  interests  in  Vietnam  were  still  strong;  the  Frenchman's  belief  in
the  validity  of  the  French  Union  was  deep.  No  French  government  dared  defy
public  opinion  by  seeming  to  hasten  the  end  of  the  French  Union.  France  felt
the  U.S.  had  an  "almost  psychological  attachment  to  'independence'  without
giving  sufficient  thought  and  attention  to  the  practical  problems  and  risks  in-
volved."

Secondly,  the  U.S.  had  been  able  to  defer  a  commitment  to  finance  the  French
Expeditionary  Corps  in  Vietnam  although  an  indication  that  aid  would  be  re-
sumed, if  not  resumption  itself,  had  been  the  first  order  of  French  business  at


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  221


the  Washington  Conference.  France  agreed  to  maintain  the  Corps  in  Vietnam
but  was  told  no  aid  figures  would  be  available  until  December.

Both  France  and  the  U.S.  thought  their  respective  economic  aims  had  been
won.  France  objected  strongly  to  the  idea  of  direct  American  aid  to  Vietnam  on
the  grounds  that  it  violated  the  Geneva  Accords,  would  needlessly  provoke
Communist  China,  promote  graft  and  corruption  in  Vietnam,  and  intensify  the
political  struggle.  Plus,  "past  (French)  sacrifices  on  behalf  of  Vietnam  and  their
obligation  as  a  member  of  the  French  Union"  made  French  supervision  of  aid
essential.  To  France,  a  compromise  agreement  drafted  by  Walter  Bedell  Smith
meant  the  U.S.  accepted  these  arguments  and  was  willing  to  give  France  a  hand
in  disbursing  aid  to  the  Associated  States.  The  U.S.  chose  not  to  interpret  the
agreement  this  way.  The  State  Department  said  the  U.S.  merely  indicated  willing-
mess  to  consult  on  such  matters.  On  29  October,  Dulles  told  Mendes-France  that
the  U.S.  alone  would  disperse  aid;  by  late  November  Mendes-France  finally
tired  of  arguing  an  obviously  lost  cause  and  dropped  the  matter.

b.  The  U.S.  Fauhs  French  Support  for  Diem

Despite  apparent  agreement  at  Washington  to  back  Diem,  Secretary  Dulles
met  with  Mendes-France  three  weeks  later  in  Paris  about  the  same  subject.
"For  .  .  .  ready  reference"  Acting  Secretary  of  State  Herbert  Hoover  quoted
for  Dulles  part  of  the  29  September  Minute  of  Understanding  in  which  the

.  .  .  representatives  of  France  and  the  United  States  agree  that  their  respec-
tive governments  support  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  in  the  establishment  and  main-
tenance of  a  strong,  anti-Communist  and  nationalist  government.  To  this
end  France  and  the  United  States  will  urge  all  anti-Communist  elements  in
Vietnam  to  cooperate  fully  with  the  Government  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  in
order  to  counter  vigorously  the  Viet  Minh  and  build  a  strong  free  Vietnam.
.  .  .  While  Ely  seems  to  have  attempted  honestly  to  carry  out  this  agree-
ment, the  fact  that  many  French  elements  have  never  accepted  Diem  solu-
tion must  have  weakened  Ely's  efforts  and  encouraged  Hinh  camarilla  in
its  recalcitrance.  .  .  .  Unless  Diem  receives  unreserved  U.S.  and  French
support,  his  chances  of  success  appear  slight.  With  such  support,  his  chances
are  probably  better  than  even,  repeat  even.

c.  Accommodation  Between  Paris  and  Hanoi?

Apart  from  the  quiet  backing  given  Diem's  opponents  by  French  officers  and
officials  in  Saigon  and  persistent  Paris  proposals  for  a  change  in  government
(Prince  Buu  Hoi,  whose  "political  ideologies"  were  repugnant  to  Dulles,  was  a
French  favorite  at  this  time),  the  U.S.  found  in  French  accommodative  gestures
toward  Hanoi  ample  proof  that  French  backing  for  Diem  was  reserved  at  best.
Ambassador  Dillon  felt  Mendes-France  found  in  Vietnam  a  "situation  ideally
designed  to  test  (the)  bases  of  his  fundamental  political  philosophy  of  'peaceful
coexistence'  "  and  that  his  government  grew  more  and  more  "disposed  to  ex-
plore and  consider  a  policy  looking  toward  an  eventual  peaceful  North-South
rapprochement."  French  insistence  on  strict  legal  interpretation  of  the  Geneva
Accords  was  one  example  of  accommodation  thinking.  France  objected  to  any-
thing which  could  possibly  delay  or  destroy  elections  in  1956;  Dillon  predicted
Paris  would  accept  the  results  of  elections  "however  academic  that  exercise  may
eventually  prove  to  be."  But  the  most  worrisome  example  to  those  at  the  State


222 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Department  who  lined  up  against  any  kind  of  accommodation  was  the  Sainteny
Mission  to  Hanoi.

d.  Sainteny  or  Ely?

Jean  Sainteny,  credited  with  reaching  short-lived  independence  accords  with
Ho  Chi  Minh  in  March  1946,  was  sent  back  to  Hanoi  in  August  1954  to  find
ways  to  protect  French  business  and  cultural  interests  in  Tonkin.  Sainteny's  past
success  at  rapprochement  gave  the  mission  definite  political  overtones.  General
Ely  wished  Paris  had  sent  a  "stupid  type  of  consular  official"  not  a  man  of
Sainteny's  "active  stripe";  he  was  disturbed  enough  to  fly  to  Paris  to  tell  Mendes-
France  he  would  resign  if  French  policy  was  to  play  a  "double  game"  in  North
and  South  Vietnam  aimed  at  backing  whichever  side  ultimately  won.  Mendes-
France  assured  Ely  that  French  policy  was  to  give  maximum  support  to  the  anti-
Communist  elements  in  South  Vietnam  and  do  everything  possible  to  assure  their
victory  in  1956.  Ely  was  placated  and  returned  to  Saigon.  But  Sainteny  re-
mained in  Hanoi  and  maximum  support  for  Diem  did  not  materialize.

From  another  source  came  word  that  Ely  was  not  "au  courant"  with  French
policy.  French  Union  Counsellor  Jacque  Raphael-Leygues,  reportedly  a  member
of  the  Mendes-France  "brain  trust"  on  Indochina,  told  Ambassador  Dillon  that
Sainteny  had  convinced  Paris  that  South  Vietnam  was  doomed  and  the  "only
possible  means  of  salvaging  anything  was  to  play  the  Viet  Minh  game  and  woo
the  Viet  Minh  away  from  Communist  ties  in  the  hope  of  creating  a  Titoist
Vietnam  which  would  cooperate  with  France  and  might  even  adhere  to  the
French  Union."  Raphael-Leygues  said  France  deferred  to  U.S.  wishes  over  which
government  to  support  in  Saigon  to  get  money  for  the  French  Expeditionary
Corps  and  to  fix  responsibility  for  the  eventual  loss  of  South  Vietnam  on  the
U.S.

In  December  1954,  Sainteny  won  Ho  Chi  Minh's  agreement  to  permit  French
enterprises  to  carry  on  without  discrimination.  But  if  the  contract  pleased  Paris
it  did  not  assure  French  businessmen  in  Tonkin.  Viet  Minh  legislation  would
regulate  their  operations;  profits  could  not  be  transferred  outside  the  Communist
orbit.  Most  French  concerns  decided  potential  benefit  was  not  worth  the  risk
of  doing  business  with  the  DRV  and  despite  Sainteny's  efforts  to  establish  mixed
government-private  corporations,  most  withdrew  from  the  North.  Sainteny  re-
mained as  a  "general  delegate"  to  the  DRV.

e.  The  Mansfield  Report

A  final  spur  to  U.S.  action  was  the  Mansfield  Report.  After  a  fact-finding  trip
to  South  Vietnam,  Senator  Mansfield  concluded  his  old  acquaintance  Diem  was
the  only  man  for  the  job  in  Saigon.  He  said  the  issue  "is  not  Diem  as  an  indi-
vidual but  rather  the  program  for  which  he  stands."  That  program  "represents
genuine  nationalism,  ...  is  prepared  to  deal  effectively  with  corruption  and
.  .  .  demonstrates  a  concern  in  advancing  the  welfare  of  the  Vietnamese  people."
The  Senator  felt  it  "improbable"  that  any  other  leadership  "dedicated  to  these
principles"  could  be  found  and  recommended  the  Government  "consider  an
immediate  suspension  of  all  aid  to  Vietnam  and  the  French  Union  Forces  there,
except  that  of  a  humanitarian  nature,  preliminary  to  a  complete  reappraisal  of
our  present  policies  in  Free  Vietnam"  if  Diem  fell.

The  Mansfield  Report  elated  Diem  (who  proceeded  to  react  with  even  more
intransigent  self-righteousness  to  suggestions  of  change),  subdued  the  French  and


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  223


annoyed  Paris.  For  those  Frenchmen  who  favored  conciliation  with  the  Viet
Minh,  Mansfield's  analysis  proved  the  validity  of  their  policy.  Obviously,  they
said,  if  Diem  falls  the  U.S.  will  heed  Mansfield  and  withdraw  from  Vietnam.
Equally  obviously,  they  said,  Diem  will  fall.  Ergo,  France  should  start  "betting
on  Viet  Minh  to  win  war."  To  French  officials  willing  to  back  Diem  the  Report
and  Washington's  endorsement  of  it  was  a  violation  of  the  Franco-American
agreement  to  support  another  government  if  Diem  fell.  When  Mendes-France
reminded  Dulles  of  this  and  spoke  of  the  need  to  lay  plans  for  "another  struc-
ture of  government"  which  both  France  and  the  U.S.  could  support,  Dulles  was
noncommittal.

4.  NSC  Action  Program  of  October  and  Eisenhower  Letter  to  Diem

President  Eisenhower's  letter  to  Diem  of  24  October  (written  August  and
shown  to  the  French  at  that  time;  held  up  until  the  political  situation  in  South
Vietnam  setled  somewhat;  finally  approved  for  transmission  at  the  October  22
NSC  meeting)  was  called  a  direct  violation  of  the  principle  of  cooperative  action
agreed  upon  in  September  by  Minister  La  Chambre.  French  Ambassador  Bonnet  ^
told  Secretary  Dulles  that  "it  was  felt  (the  letter)  had  given  Diem  full  rein  with-  /
out  requiring  of  him  as  a  preliminary  condition  that  he  should  first  succeed  in  .
forming  a  strong  and  stable  government,  even  though  this  preliminary  con-  j
dition  had  been  a  part  of  the  basis  of  the  Washington  agreements."  Bonnet  added
that  the  letter  might  be  a  violation  of  the  armistice  and  the  Viet  Minh  might  take
advantage  of  it.  Then,  when  Ambassador  Dillon  suggested  to  the  Quai  d'Orsay
that  French  support  for  Diem  had  not  been  all  that  it  might  have  been.  La
Chambre  was  inflamed.  Not  only  was  this  a  false  allegation,  it  was  a  direct  slur
on  General  Ely,  the  government  in  Paris  and  the  glory  of  France.  M.  La  Chambre
said  he  was  personally  convinced  Diem  was  leading  South  Vietnam  to  disaster  but
would  still  support  him:

We  prefer  to  lose  in  Vietnam  with  the  U.S.  rather  than  to  win  without
them  ...  we  would  rather  support  Diem  knowing  he  is  going  to  lose  and
thus  keep  Franco-U.S.  solidarity  than  to  pick  someone  who  could  retain
Vietnam  for  the  free  world  if  this  meant  breaking  Franco-U.S.  solidarity.

In  response,  Secretary  Dulles  formally  told  Mendes-France  that  both  the
Eisenhower  letter  and  the  stronger  U.S.  action  were  "in  furtherance  of  the  under-
standings reached  at  Washington."  The  U.S.  had  not  "the  slightest  idea  of
questioning  the  good  faith  of  the  French  government"  but  "many  French  officials
have  not  concealed  their  belief  that  Diem  has  failed  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  should  be
replaced."  This  attitude  produced  an  "impasse  in  Saigon"  necessitating  firmer
action.  La  Chambre  received  this  with  "little  comment"  other  than  to  suggest
appointment  of  Nguyen  Van  Tam  (General  Hinh's  father.  Premier  during  1952-
1953  and  a  strong-even  oppressive-administrator)  to  the  Interior  Ministry.  La
Chambre  called  this  a  "way  out  of  the  mess  .  .  .  (for)  here  is  a  man  who  knows
how  to  fight  Communists."  As  in  the  past,  the  U.S.  rejected  the  proposal.

5.  More  Action:  The  Collins  Mission

The  initial  U.S.  action  program  rested  on  three  assumptions:  that  Diem  could
be  persuaded  to  accept  U.S.  proposals,  that  Hinh  would  obey  the  government,
that  the  French  at  all  levels  would  cooperate.  None  proved  immediately  valid.


224 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

So  the  U.S.  adopted  yet  another  tactic.  General  J.  Lawton  Collins,  U.S.  Repre-
sentative to  the  NATO  Military  Committee,  was  dispatched  to  Vietnam  on
November  8  with  the  personal  rank  of  Ambassador  (Heath  returned  to  the  State
Department).  As  President  Eisenhower  described  it,  Collins'  mission  was:

to  coordinate  and  direct  a  program  in  support  of  (Diem's)  government  to
enable  it  to:  (a)  promote  internal  security  and  political  and  economic
stability;  (b)  establish  and  maintain  control  throughout  the  territory;  and
(c)  effectively  counteract  Viet  Minh  infiltration  and  paramilitary  activities
south  of  the  demarkation  line.

After  initial  resistance  to  the  Collins  mission  (seen  as  a  precursor  to  complete
U.S.  take-over  of  Indochina),  General  Ely  established  a  close  working  relation-
ship with  Collins.  A  seven-point  program  for  political,  military  and  economic
action  was  quickly  designed.  On  December  13,  Ely  and  Collins  signed  a  Minute
of  Understanding  agreeing  that  France  would  grant  full  autonomy  to  the  VNA
by  July  1,  1955  and  that  the  U.S.  would  assume  training  duties  in  January.  They
agreed  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  must  remain  in  Vietnam  and  the  level
of  financial  assistance  suggested  by  Collins  ($100  million  through  December
1955  after  which  assistance  was  not  contemplated)  was  adopted  by  the  Foreign
Operations  Administration  and  subsequently  announced  to  Paris.  Aid  was  con-
tingent upon  consultation  with  Congress  and  "subject  to  Ely  and  Collins  and  the
two  governments  mutually  agreeing  on  what  is  to  be  done  in  Indochina."

6. France  Objects  to  Collins-Ely  Agreements

Paris  was  unhappy  about  the  aid  figure — a  third  of  what  France  requested.
Consequently,  withdrawal  of  French  forces  was  speeded:  of  the  150,000  troops
scheduled  to  remain  in  Vietnam  through  1955  all  but  35,000  were  phased  out.
Monetary  reasons  were  said  to  be  paramount  but  political  and  psychological  pres-
sures for  the  pull-out  were  probably  more  important.  There  was  strong  senti-
ment in  France  for  sending  the  EEC  to  North  Africa  where  it  could  serve  the
interests  of  France  and  the  French  Union.  In  Vietnam,  French  soldiers  served
the  free  world  but  were  hated  by  the  Vietnamese  and  ignored  by  the  very
powers  they  aided,  powers  which  did  not  care  enough  to  properly  defray  French
expenses. .

Paris  was  more  upset  by  the  Minute  of  Understanding.  During  November  dis-
cussion with  Dulles,  Mendes-France  had  said  he  doubted  full  autonomy  could  be
assumed  by  the  Vietnamese  by  July  1955  and  believed  a  readjustment  of  MAAG
personnel  for  the  new  training  mission  might  violate  the  Geneva  Accords.  These
arguments  were  reiterated  at  December  Trilateral  meetings.  But  Mendes-France's
real  trouble  was  agreeing  to  phase  out  French  instructors.  Neither  the  French
people  nor  French  soldiers  would  understand  why  France  was  denied  influence
while  required  to  support  such  a  heavy  burden  in  Vietnam.  Mendes-France  and
General  Ely  insisted  that  if  French  instructors  were  eliminated  the  U.S.  auto-
matically would  have  assumed  primary  responsibility  for  free  world  policy
toward  Indochina.  (Dulles  and  General  Collins  rejected  that  line  of  reasoning
but  convinced  neither  the  French  nor  others  that  it  was  fallacious.)

Collins  compromised  in  the  Minute  of  Understanding  by  agreeing  to  softer
language  (both  French  and  American  instructors  would  be  removed  as  Viet-
namese efficiency  increased),  hoping  to  assuage  Paris.  He  failed.  When  the


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  225


Minute  was  forwarded  for  final  approval  Mendes-France  stalled.  First  he  had  to
study  it  closely  to  ensure  no  conflict  with  Geneva  was  involved.  Then  on
January  7,  the  French  submitted  a  redraft  of  the  Minute  which  omitted  refer-
ence to  General  O'Daniel's  authority  over  French  personnel.

Collins  was  already  annoyed  by  hedging  in  December,  tantamount  to  a
slap  in  the  face  of  Ely  to  whom  full  authority  to  negotiate  the  agreement  had
been  delegated.  He  refused  to  "agree  to  (the  redraft)  unless  specifically  in-
structed by  higher  authority"  because  lines  of  authority  were  not  spelled  out.
Yet  Ely  thought  Paris  had  approved  the  original  agreement.  He  urged  Collins
to  continue  negotiations  with  the  Vietnamese  on  the  basis  of  the  first  Minute,
advice  Collins  followed  despite  the  Paris-Washington  snafu.  On  January  19
and  20  a  formal  exchange  of  letters  finalized  the  agreement  for  U.S.  assumption
of  training  duties  and  financial  support  ($214.5  million)  for  the  Vietnamese
forces.  The  forces  would  be  scaled  down  to  100,00  by  December  1955.  Both  cost
and  force  levels  were  raised  from  Collins'  November  recommendations  in  defer-
ence to  Vietnamese  arguments.  The  U.S.  and  France  remained  deadlocked  until
February  1 1,  1955,  when  the  terms — but  not  the  form — of  the  original  agreement
were  finally  accepted.  The  next  day,  General  O'Daniel  assumed  responsibility  for
training  Vietnamese  forces  and  the  Training  Relations  and  Instruction  Mission
(TRIM)  went  into  operation.


D. FRANCO-AMERICAN  IMPASSE  OVER  DIEM

Resolution  of  military  problems  within  the  U.S.  Government  and  between  the
U.S.  and  France  was  a  fairly  major  accomplishment.  Political  differences  were
not  similarly  resolved.  To  support  or  not  to  support  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  was  the
issue  over  which  France  and  America  split.

1. Paris:  Diem  Is  Ill-Suited  for  Rule

As  noted  above,  France  acquiesced  in  the  retention  of  Diem  as  Prime  Minister
in  deference  to  U.S.  insistence  and  French  concern  for  U.S.  financial  assistance
for  the  FEC  during  the  September  Washington  conference.  In  mid-November,
Mendes-France  reaffirmed  the  29  September  agreement  but  said  an  alternative
form  of  government  had  to  be  considered  unless  Diem  implemented  an  energetic
program  within  the  next  two  months.  By  December,  when  Mendes-France
Dulles  and  Eden  met  in  Paris,  the  French  Premier  made  it  clear  he  thought  the
time  had  come  for  a  change.  Two  ways  to  accomplish  change  were  suggested.
Bao  Dai  could  name  a  Viceroy  and  give  him  full  authority  to  use  the  powers  of
Chief  of  State  to  unify  the  warring  political  factions.  Tran  Van  Huu,  Nguyen
Van  Tarn  or  Dr.  Phan  Huy  Quat  were  possible  candidates  for  this  job.  Or,  Bao
Dai  himself  could  return  to  Saigon  and  form  a  government  with  Huu  as
Premier,  Tam  as  Interior  Minister,  Quat  in  Defense.

France  wanted  Diem  out  of  power  for  several  reasons.  U.S.  policymakers  did
not  seem  to  fully  appreciate  how  gaffing  Diem's  Franco-phobia  must  have  been,
nor  did  the  U.S.  seem  to  understand — or  allow  for — the  divisive  effect  Diem's
militant  anti-communist  stance  had  within  the  French  Government.  Little  con-
sideration was  given  to  charges  that  the  U.S.  was  undermining  France  by
portraying  itself  as  the  only  friend  of  Vietnamese  nationalism.  But  the  U.S.
could  appreciate  the  validity  of  French  arguments  that  Diem  had  not  been  and
perhaps  would  not  be  able  to  unify  and  stabilize  South  Vietnam.


226 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

2.  Collins:  Diem  Cannot  Lead  South  Vietnam

General  Collins  had  been  skeptical  about  Diem  from  the  outset;  by  December
he  was  convinced  an  alternative  to  his  government  should  be  urgently  con-
sidered. Diem's  refusal  to  name  Dr.  Quat  as  Defense  Minister  triggered  Collins'
recommendation.  Both  Collins  and  Colonel  Lansdale  had  urged  Diem  to  accept
Quat,  agreeing  Quat  alone  was  strong  enough  to  unify  the  Vietnamese  armed
forces  behind  the  Saigon  government.  On  December  13,  Collins  suggested  five
reasons  for  Diem's  adverse  decision:

(1)  unwillingness  to  delegate  control  of  Vietnam  armed  forces  to  any
strong  man;  (2)  fear  of  Quat  as  potential  successor;  (3)  opposition  of  sects
(who  also  feared  a  strong  man  in  the  defense  post);  (4)  influence  of
brothers  Luyen  and  Nhu  (anxious  to  neutralize  the  power  of  any  potential
successor);  (5)  desire  [material  missing]

According  to  Collins,

Whatever  the  reasons,  the  failure  to  utilize  Quat  epitomizes  lack  of  unity
among  Vietnamese  and  lack  of  decisive  leadership  on  part  of  Diem.  .  .  .
Acceptance  of  status  quo  with  Minh  elevated  to  Defense  Ministry  and  sects
reinforced  in  veto  power  over  government  is  simply  postponing  evil  day  of
reckoning  as  to  when,  if  ever.  Diem  will  assert  type  of  leadership  that  can
unify  this  country  and  give  it  chance  of  competing  with  hard,  effective,
unified  control  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.

Three  days  later,  General  Collins  communicated  his  "final  judgment"  on  the
situation.  He  made  four  recommendations:

A.  Continue  to  support  Diem  along  present  lines  for  short  while  longer  but
without  committing  U.S.  to  specific  aid  programs;

B.  Consider  urgently,  as  possible  alternative,  the  early  return  of  Bao  Dai;

C.  If  after  short  period  of  further  test  Diem  Government  fails  to  achieve
substantial  progressive  action  and  if  return  to  Bao  Dai  is  acceptable  to  U.S.
Government,  to  support  his  prompt  return;

D.  If  return  of  Bao  Dai  is  not  acceptable  to  U.S.  Government,  assuming
Diem  Government  continues  to  demonstrate  inability  to  unite  free  Vietnam
behind  an  aggressive  program,  I  recommend  re-evaluation  of  our  plans  for
assisting  Southeast  Asia  with  special  attention  (to  an)  earlier  proposal.

The  earlier  proposal,  made  by  General  Collins  on  December  13,  was  that  the
U.S.  gradually  withdraw  from  Vietnam.  Collins  said  this  was  the  "least  desirable
(but)  in  all  honesty  and  in  view  of  what  I  have  observed  here  to  date  this  may
be  the  only  sound  solution."

3.  State  Department:  Diem  Is  the  Only  Available  Leader

The  State  Department  went  along  with  Collins'  suggestion  to  avoid  specific
assistance  commitments  at  the  present  time  but  could  not  see  salvation  in  Bao
Dai.  A  memorandum  from  Ambassador  Heath,  then  working  in  the  Far  East
Bureau  is  indicative  of  State  Department  thinking.  Heath  first  called  attention  to
"massive  opposition"  faced  by  Diem  and  French  unwillingness  to  firmly  support


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  227


him — implying  that  all  Diem's  problems  were  not  Diem's  fault.  He  then  spoke  of
General  Collins'  "attempt  to  achieve  a  rapid  solution,"  said  Collins'  "recom-
mendations are  now  based  on  the  circumstances  of  a  satisfactory  settlement
prior  to  January  1" — thereby  suggesting  that  one  not  looking  for  a  rapid  solution
might  not  arrive  at  similar  conclusions.

The  memorandum  closed  with  Heath's  interpretation  of  Secretary  Dulles'
policy  and  his  own  thoughts  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done:

In  our  view,  General  Collins'  recommendations  ignore  the  basic  factor
that  we  would  assist  a  Communist  takeover  by  a  withholding  of  our  aid,
even  if  it  must  necessarily  be  given  to  a  government  which  is  less  than
perfect.  The  Secretary  has  analyzed  the  situation  as  one  in  which  we  are
conducting  a  time  buying  operation.  If  we  withhold  our  support  to  Vietnam,
it  will  be  taken  over  sooner  than  if  we  extend  smaller  aid,  at  a  figure  of
about  a  third  of  last  year.  In  the  meantime,  we  will  proceed  to  do  what  we
can  to  strengthen  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Thailand.  This  is  my  understanding
of  the  Secretary's  policy.

I  recommend  we  inform  the  Secretary  and  General  Collins  that  we
recognize  the  dangers  posed  by  the  above  policy,  but  that  in  the  lack  of
more  useful  alternatives  that  we  will  continue  to  support  Diem,  because
there  is  no  one  to  take  his  place  who  would  serve  U.S.  objectives  any  better.
This  includes  the  Bao  Dai  solution  which  is  opposed  by  the  facts  of  Bao
Dai's  lack  of  support  in  Vietnam  and  his  past  demonstrations  of  inability
to  govern.  The  fear  that  a  fiscal  commitment  of  over  $300  million  plus  our
national  prestige  would  be  lost  in  a  gamble  on  the  retention  of  Free  Vietnam
is  a  legitimate  one,  but  the  withholding  of  our  support  at  this  juncture
would  almost  inevitably  have  a  far  worse  etTect."

The  substance  of  the  memorandum  was  cabled  to  Secretary  Dulles,  then  in  Paris
for  the  Tripartite  French,  U.S.  and  British  discussions.

4. December  Tripartite  Talks

a. France  Proposes  Alternative  to  Diem,  Dulles  Seems  to  Acquiesce

On  19  December,  Mendes-France  opened  the  Indochina  talks  by  calling
Diem's  approach  "wholly  negative,"  said  "not  a  single  reform  suggested  (by
Franco-American  working  groups  advising  the  government  on  all  matters)  had
been  accepted  by  Diem,"  that  the  "French  Government  now  considered  ...  a
strong  approach  would  have  to  be  made  to  Diem."  Reaffirming  his  past  agree-
ment with  Dulles'  "thesis  that  we  must  do  our  maximum  to  permit  Diem  Govern-
ment to  succeed"  Mendes-France  added:

now  ...  he  was  no  longer  sure  that  even  maximum  would  help.  He  said
we  must  now  have  alternate  formula  in  mind.  Without  varying  from  our
stated  purpose  of  supporting  Diem  Government  as  long  as  it  exists  we  must
now  prepare  in  our  minds  [material  missing]

Dulles  agreed  the

task  in  South  Vietnam  was  difficult  (but)  regarded  basic  factors  as  favor-
able. People  were  opposed  to  communism  and  had  great  natural  resources


228 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

.  .  .  they  received  greater  aid  from  abroad  than  North  .  .  .  situation  was
much  improved  now  that  there  was  full  cooperation  between  French  and
American  authorities.  The  problem  must  not  be  approached  in  spirit  of
defeatism.  Only  serious  problem  we  have  not  yet  solved  is  that  of  indigenous
leadership.  We  cannot  expect  it  to  be  solved  ideally  because  there  is  no
tradition  among  indigenous  people  for  self-government.  We  must  get  along
with  something  less  good  than  best.  .  .  .  (The  U.S.  was)  not  repeat  not
committed  to  Diem  in  any  irrevocable  sense.  We  have  accepted  him  because
we  knew  of  no  one  better.  Developments  have  confirmed  our  fears  as  to
his  limitations  but  no  substitute  for  him  has  yet  been  proposed.  Those
suggested  in  past  varied  from  month  to  month.  Now  it  is  claimed
that  only  Bao  Dai  can  save  situation.  If  that  is  case,  then  we  must  indeed  be
desperate.  .  .  .  We  should  continue  to  back  Diem  but  exert  more  pressure
on  him  to  make  changes  we  consider  necessary.

Mendes-France  suggested  the  U.S.  and  France  approach  Bao  Dai  and  men-
tioned the  French  Viceroy  plan  to  replace  Diem.  Dulles  countered  by  saying  the
U.S.  and  French  might  use  Bao  Dai  but  "we  must  go  to  him  prepared  with  our
own  ideas  and  not  .  .  .  simply  accept  his."  Dulles  did  not  expect  any  Viceroy
to  be  able  "to  decide  on  alternate  to  Diem  and  to  set  up  machinery  to  implement
our  ideas  .  .  .  our  job  (is)  to  create  this  machinery."  He  added,

We  must  exhaust  all  our  pressures  on  Diem  to  get  things  done  before
considering  alternate  solutions.  ...  He  asked  Mendes  not  to  think  we  had
obstinately  closed  our  minds  to  possible  alternate  solution.  We  had  not
repeat  not,  but  our  investigation  of  alternate  must  be  done  on  careful  basis
and  we  must  for  present  support  Diem.

Mendes-France  agreed.  He  summarized  his  position  as  follows:

First,  to  support  Diem;  second,  to  study  alternatives.  Collins  and  Ely
should  be  instructed  to  explore  further  possibilities  including  Bao  Dai  with
great  discretion  .  .  .  third  point  was  that  Ely  and  Collins  should  be  re-
quested to  investigate  matter  of  timing.  How  much  further  delay  can  be
tolerated?  .  .  .  We  must  set  deadline.  .  .  .

Then  Dulles  agreed — but  added  a  fourth  point:

If  the  US  should  decide  that  there  is  no  repeat  no  good  alternative  to
Diem  we  will  have  to  consider  how  much  more  investment  we  will  be
prepared  to  make  in  Indochina.  Our  policy  would  have  to  be  reappraised.
Congressional  committees  .  .  .  would  have  to  be  consulted.  Mansfield
believes  in  Diem.  .  .  .  Even  slight  chance  of  success  in  Vietnam  was  worth
considerable  investment.  US  had  also  to  think  of  what  happened  in  adjacent
countries — in  Cambodia,  Laos,  Thailand  and  Malaya.  US  situation  was
different  from  that  of  French.  French  had  an  investment  in  lives  and  prop-
erty in  Vietnam  while  ours  involved  effect  that  fate  of  Vietnam  would  have
on  rest  of  Southeast  Asia.

b. But  Dulles  Reports,  No  Other  Suitable  Leader  Can  Be  Seen

After  the  Tripartite  meetings,  Dulles  reported  his  assessment  of  their  outcome
to  Saigon.  He  said  he  had  agreed  with  Mendes-France  on  four  points  concerning


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  229

Diem  but  had  not  agreed  to  a  deadline  for  Diem's  replacement.  Rather,  "Collins
and  Ely  would  report  late  January  on  overall  situation."

Dulles  called  the  "investment  in  Vietnam  justified  even  if  only  to  buy  time  to
build  up  strength  elsewhere  in  area"  and  concluded:

We  are  going  to  have  to  maintain  flexible  policy  and  proceed  carefully  by
stages  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Under  present  circumstances  and  unless  situation
(in  Vietnam)  clearly  appears  hopeless  and  rapidly  disintegrating,  we  have
no  choice  but  continue  our  aid  Vietnam  and  support  of  Diem.  There  no
other  suitable  leader  known  to  us.

France  believed  Dulles  had  in  fact  committed  the  United  States  to  consider  a
change  with  which  Bao  Dai  would  be  associated  by  mid-January.  Washington
denied  it  and  Paris  protests  were  unable  to  budge  the  State  Department.  The
U.S.  and  France  did  agree  that  the  Tripartite  talks  had  given  Collins  and  Ely  a
mandate  to  study  alternatives,  however.

c. The  U.S.  Looks  at  Alternatives

Having  told  Paris  the  U.S.  was  not  committed  to  either  a  deadline  or  an
alternative  involving  Bao  Dai,  the  U.S.  proceeded  to  study  alternatives.  Secretary
of  Defense  Wilson  asked  the  Joint  Staff  to  assess  the  impact  on  military  commit-
ments to  Southeast  Asia  of  the  loss  of  South  Vietnam,  of  continued  but  reduced
assistance  to  that  nation  and  of  a  range  of  actions  in  between.  The  JCS
responded  by  calling  Wilson's  alternate  options  incomplete,  that  consideration  of
increased  aid,  and  institution  of  a  unilateral  program  of  direct  guidance  to  the
GVN  through  an  "advisory  system"  should  be  among  U.S.  considerations.

[material  missing]

As  a  result  of  Collins'  recommendations  the  NSC  endorsed  a  strong  policy  in
Vietnam:  the  U.S.  would  continue  to  support  the  Diem  government  and  continue
to  press  France  to  carry  out  its  commitments  under  the  Smith-LaChambre  agree-
ment. The  NSC  approved  in  principle  the  programs  of  military  and  economic  aid
to  implement  Collins'  recommendations  (about  $500  million)  and  determined  to
seek  reaffirmation  of  the  Manila  powers'  determination  to  react  under  the  SEATO
treaty  if  hostilities  were  resumed.  Dulles  decided  to  "take  the  plunge"  and  begin
direct  aid  to  Vietnam  on  January  1,  1955.  The  aid  program  was  to  be  ffexible
and  fluid,  adjusted  according  to  circumstances  and  subject  to  discontinuance  at
any  time,  as  at  present.

E. CRISIS  OF  THE  SPRING,  1955

With  strong  United  States  backing,  Diem  went  into  the  sect  crisis  of  the  spring,
1955.  Different  from  the  military  coup  crisis  of  Autumn  1954  and  the  Quat
cabinet  crisis  of  December,  the  sect  crisis  was  resolved  by  Diem's  taking  firm
action  and  was  not  followed  by  another.  It  was  followed  by  the  end  of  any  real
French  presence  in  Vietnam.

1. The  Problem  of  the  Sect  Armies

The  sects  had  been  quiescent  but  not  quiet  since  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  minis-
ters had  joined  the  cabinet  in  September  1954.  The  end  of  French  subsidies  for
sect  armies  in  February  shook  them  out  of  complacency.  Diem  agreed  to  pay  a
part  of  what  the  armies  had  received  from  the  French  to  ease  the  transition  of


230 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  I


some  40,000  soldiers  to  civilian  life.  But  transition  it  was  to  be:  he  would  not
tolerate  armed  bands  separate  from  VNA  command  and  separate  from  Saigon's
political  guidance.  Sect  leaders  had  different  objectives,  however.  They  wanted
to  preserve  their  military  forces  by  integrating,  intact,  as  many  units  as  possible
into  the  National  Army.  (With  a  VNA  force  level  of  100,000,  few  could  be
accommodated;  in  January  only  6,000  sect  troops  had  been  absorbed.)  Secondly,
the  sects  wanted  substantial  government  assistance  for  soldiers  forced  to  leave
the  military.  Most  important,  they  wanted  recognition  of  their  areas  of  influence
and  Diem's  assurance  that  he  would  not  encroach  on  their  territories.  Diem
would  countenance  no  part  of  this  third  request.

Since  December,  a  Franco-American  group  headed  by  Col.  Lansdale  and
directed  to  "come  up  with  a  peaceful  solution"  to  the  problem  had  worked
furiously,  found  a  solution  and  urged  its  prompt  adoption.  Generals  Collins  and
Ely  decided  to  give  the  matter  further  study.  Lansdale's  reaction:

We  warned  them  that  time  was  extremely  short,  that  the  sects  were  about
to  take  action  by  arms  and  that  a  peaceful  solution  would  have  to  be  intro-
duced immediately  or  the  opportunity  would  be  lost.  The  opportunity  was
lost.

2.  The  United  Front  Challenges  Diem

Lost  because  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sect  leaders  joined  with  Bay  Vien  in
February,  put  down  hostilities  among  themselves  and  joined  in  a  United  Front  of
Nationalist  Forces.  In  March,  the  United  Front  demanded  Diem  form  a  govern-
ment of  large  national  union.  The  eight  sect  cabinet  members  resigned  (al-
though Cao  Dai  Generals  The  and  Phuong  soon  changed  their  minds).  A  United
Front  delegate  tried  to  convince  Bao  Dai  to  withdraw  Diem's  powers  as  premier
but  the  timely  arrival  of  a  personal  letter  from  President  Eisenhower  outlining
US  objectives  and  progress  in  Vietnam  proved  more  persuasive.  The  letter  either
reassured  Bao  Dai  that  the  US  had  not  written  him  out  of  the  political  picture
or  made  him  think  twice  about  joining  with  the  sects  and  thereby  incurring  US
wrath.  Whatever  the  reason,  he  refused  to  intervene  on  behalf  of  the  Front.  Diem
called  the  Front  Program  an  ultimatum  and  would  not  budge.

France  wanted  Bao  Dai  to  mediate  between  Diem  and  the  United  Front.  The
US  wanted  to  issue  a  joint  declaration  telling  the  sects  both  America  and  France
opposed  violence  and  warning  them  that  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  would
block  any  movement  of  Hoa  Hao  troops  into  Saigon  to  reinforce  the  Binh  Xuyen.
Ely  and  Paris  refused  the  warning  clause:  French  troops  would  act  only  in  pro-
tection of  the  lives  and  property  of  French  and  foreign  nationals.

3.  Diem  Challenges  the  Binh  Xuyen

During  this  time,  Lansdale  was  meeting  almost  nightly  with  Diem.  He  reports
Diem

was  desperately  trying  to  get  French  and  US  help  to  remove  the  Surete
from  the  control  of  the  Binh  Xuyen.  French  and  US  reactions  to  the  prob-
lem were  in  the  form  of  advice  to  proceed  slowly,  to  act  with  caution.
Events  would  not  permit  this.

Before  dawn  on  the  28th  of  March,  a  paratrooper  company  loyal  to  Diem
attacked  and  overcame  the  Binh  Xuyen-controlled  central  police  headquarters.
The  next  day.  Diem  told  Defense  Minister  Minh  he  planned  to  oust  Binh  Xuyen


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  231


Police  Commissioner  Lai  Van  Sang  that  afternoon — March  29 — and  replace  him
with  someone  loyal  to  his  regime.  Minh  insisted  Diem  at  least  consult  the  cabinet
before  taking  action.  Diem  refused  and  Minh  resigned.  Representatives  of  Gen-
eral Ely  were  able  to  persuade  Diem  to  defer  any  move  against  the  Surete,  how-
ever.

On  the  night  of  March  29-30  the  Binh  Xuyen  struck  back.  Mortar  shells  fell
on  the  palace  grounds  and  Binh  Xuyen  trooys  tried  to  regain  the  prefecture.
They  were  repulsed  by  National  Army  troops.  The  VNA  then  moved  to  attack
the  Surete  itself  in  retaliation  but  French  officers  apparently  cut  off  their  gas
and  ammunition  supplies  temporarily  to  keep  the  National  Army  on  the  defen-
sive. Fighting  ended  by  3:30  in  the  morning  of  March  30.

General  Ely  opposed  a  VNA  offensive  against  the  Surete  headquarters,  not
because  it  might  fail  but  because  it  was  irrelevant.  Relevant  was  Diem's  inability
to  defeat  the  sects  rapidly  and  decisively  throughout  the  country.  If  force  were
used  to  prove  a  minor  point,  a  long,  bloody  and  major  civil  war  would  surely
ensue.  Ely  was  outraged  at  Diem's  attitude.  He  felt  the  premier  verged  on
megalomania  and  was  ready  to  "put  the  city  to  sword  and  flame  to  establish  his
authority.  Collins  sympathized  with  Ely,  but  also  felt  if  Diem  did  not  prove  he
could  control  Saigon  he  would  be  forced  to  accede  to  sect  demands.

4. Truce — But  No  Calm

On  March  31,  a  48-hour  cease-fire  was  won  by  General  Jean  Gambiez,  trusted
by  both  the  National  Army  and  the  Binh  Xuyen.  The  truce  was  extended  into
April  but  failed  to  cool  tempers  or  ease  tensions.  (Cao  Dai  forces  which  had
broken  with  the  United  Front  were  integrated  into  the  National  Army  on  March
31,  however — one  happy  note  for  Diem.)

a. Lansdale  Version

Lansdale,  whose  account  of  this  and  later  developments  is  not  at  all  flattering
to  the  French,  says  Ely  decided  to  impose  a  cease-fire  and  won  Collins'  concur-
rence. French  officers  then  moved  in  and  stopped  the  fighting.  Lansdale  "saw
Ambassador  Collins  .  .  .  explaining  that  only  the  Binh  Xuyen  would  gain  by
the  cease-fire."  But  it  continued:

Ambassador  Collins  was  sincerely  convinced  that  the  Binh  Xuyen  could  be
induced  by  French  negotiations  to  withdraw  from  the  Surete  and  police
control  of  the  metropolis.  .  .  .

Lansdale  reports  the  French  had  long  been  working  against  Diem  through  the
Vietnamese  National  Army  (they  used  its  G-6  as  an  arm  of  French  intelligence)
and  that  French  soldiers  under  his  command  in  the  National  Security  Division  of
TRIM  tried  to  sabotage  the  Diem  regime  and  US  programs  designed  to  strengthen
it.

The  French  had  daily  fed  us  the  latest  French  propaganda  line  (Diem  was
weak.  Diem  was  bloodthirsty,  the  VNA  had  low  morale  .  .  .  was  unable
to  fight,  Americans  didn't  understand  the  Vietnamese,  all  whites  must  en-
courage only  selected  Vietnamese  loyal  to  the  French  because  the  remainder
would  turn  against  all  whites  in  another  "night  of  the  long  knives"  similar
to  that  of  1946.)


232 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Now  the  French  had  been  insistent  that  the  National  Army  was  a  hollow
shell,  that  its  officers  would  refuse  to  fight  .  .  .  that  morale  was  so  bad
the  troops  would  desert  rather  than  follow  "bloody  Diem."

Lansdale  implies  Collins  fell  for  this  "propaganda"  but  he,  Lansdale,  did  not.
On  the  cease-fire,  Lansdale  reports:

The  French  told  Diem  that  if  he  tried  to  take  over  Surete  headquarters
which  was  now  included  in  the  French  zone,  French  troops  would  open
fire  on  the  Vietnamese  Army.  The  US  advised  Diem  to  be  patient,  that  the
French  were  really  being  helpful  by  negotiating  with  the  Binh  Xuyen.  The
cease-fire  limit  was  extended  .  .  .  Sizeable  sums  were  being  offered  (by
French)  to  Army  officers  and  to  sect  leaders  who  were  remaining  loyal  to
Diem  and  to  entice  them  into  being  at  least  neutral.  Those  who  refused  were
subjected  to  character  assassination  attacks  .  .  .

b.  Ely  and  Collins'  Decision:  Diem  Must  Go

On  April  7,  Collins  and  Ely  discussed  Diem.  Ely  said  Diem  could  be  main-
tained only  by  overcoming  enormous  difficulties.  After  a  full  day  of  "soul-
searching,"  Ely  had  been  forced  to  conclude  Diem  had  to  go  to  preserve  Vietnam
for  the  free  world.  He  would  accept  anyone  but  Diem  as  premier.  Collins  had
been  nearing  a  similar  conclusion.  On  March  31  he  told  the  State  Department  it
was  necessary  to  consider  alternatives  to  Diem.  A  week  later  Collins  cabled
Dulles  to  insist  Diem  be  removed.  He  recommended  Tran  Van  Do  (Diem's
foreign  minister  who  also  resigned  from  the  cabinet  in  March)  or  Dr.  Quat  as
replacements.

c.  Dulles'  Indecision

Dulles  replied  as  he  had  in  December:  he  could  not  see  how  Diem's  replace-
ment would  solve  the  sect  problem  for  any  successor  worthy  of  US  assistance
would  still  have  to  contend  with  them.  A  change  in  premiers  would  damage  US
prestige  throughout  the  Far  East:  the  US  would  be  charged  with  paying  lip
service  to  the  cause  of  Asian  nationalism,  then  abandoning  a  nationalist  leader
when  pressured  by  "colonial  interests."  Plus  pro-Diem  Congressional  sentiment
was  a  problem.  The  Mutual  Security  bill  was  under  debate  and  Mansfield  had
made  it  clear  that  Congress  would  be  reluctant  to  appropriate  funds  to  a  Vietnam
without  Diem.  Despite  these  difficulties,  Dulles  eventually  agreed  to  consider  a
change  if  Collins  would  personally  come  to  Washington  for  consultation.

d.  Paris:  Diem's  Time  Is  Up

At  the  same  time  Paris  was  fast  losing  patience.  The  time  has  come  to  form
a  government  responsive  to  dominant  political  forces  in  Vietnam,  to  abandon
the  unrealistic  U.S.  policy  of  maintaining  and  strengthening  Diem,  said  France.
Formation  of  a  Conseil  Superieur  was  proposed,  representative  of  Diem  and  his
supporters,  the  sects,  intellectuals,  politicians  and  the  army.  The  Conseil  would
decide  policy  and  a  cabinet  of  non-political  technicians  headed  by  Diem  would
implement  it.  But  the  U.S.  rejected  this  plan  saying  Diem  should  be  allowed  to
strike  back  at  the  Binh  Xuyen  with  force  and  France  and  America  should  sup-
port him — morally  and  logistically.


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  233


Then  Washington  asked  the  Quai  d'Orsay  to  answer  a  set  of  questions  de-
signed to  elicit  specific  French  plans  for  the  change  in  Vietnamese  government.
Paris'  rejoinder:  the  questions  should  be  answered  jointly  or  the  united  Franco-
American  effort  in  Vietnam  would  be  over  and  France  would  have  to  say  publicly
that  the  U.S.  had  assumed  sole  responsibility  for  developments  in  Vietnam.  But
in  mid-April,  France  filled-in  part  of  the  questionnaire — leaving  blank  a  succes-
sor to  Diem  (only  joint  consultation  could  decide  this).  Paris  proposed  Collins
and  Ely  draw  up  a  slate  of  acceptable  candidates  for  major  positions.  The  U.S.
and  French  governments  would  agree  on  a  final  list,  ask  Bao  Dai  to  summon
representatives  of  various  factions  to  Cannes  and  on  the  basis  of  French-U.S.
recommendations,  negotiate  a  solution  to  the  sect-Binh  Xuyen-Diem  impasse.
Sect  support  would  be  assured  by  their  membership  in  a  high  council  and  a
program  of  honors,  indemnification  and  integration  of  sect  troops  into  the  Na-
tional Army.

e.  Bao  Dai's  Plan

On  April  21,  Bao  Dai  announced  his  own  plan  for  resolving  the  crisis,  remark-
ably similar  to  that  submitted  by  Paris.  Bao  Dai  wanted  to  summon  various
representatives  to  Cannes,  name  Dr.  Quat  as  premier,  ask  him  to  form  a  cabinet
of  technicians  and  a  high  council  of  notables.  On  April  26,  Bao  Dai  said  he
would  implement  the  scheme  unilaterally  unless  the  U.S.  made  some  response
by  the  following  day.

Meanwhile,  Collins  had  left  Saigon  for  consultations  with  Dulles.  Lansdale
reports  a  meeting  held  just  before  his  departure:

He  (Collins)  told  Lansdale  not  to  be  worried  by  newspaper  rumors  that
the  US  would  stop  supporting  Diem.  Lansdale  asked  then  if  his  orders
were  to  continue  supporting  Diem;  Collins  said  yes.  Members  of  the  coun-
try team  privately  felt  that  Diem  should  be  supported  by  us,  that  the  Na-
tional Army  was  ready  to  support  him  and  had  the  capability  of  defeating
the  Binh  Xuyen.

f.  Dulles'  Decision:  U.S.  Will  Consider  a  Change  in  Regime

General  Collins  and  Secretary  Dulles  met  on  April  27.  Dulles  agreed  to  con-
sider shifting  support  to  either  Quat  or  Do  and  a  message  to  this  effect  was  sent
to  Saigon.  But  Dulles  determined  not  to  discuss  this  with  France  until  a  full  and
frank  statement  of  her  intentions  had  been  received.  That  statement  was  to
include  an  unequivocal  assurance  to  back  whole-heartedly  any  new  political  ar-
rangements in  Saigon  and  to  resolve  "certain  ambiguities"  in  French  policy
toward  North  Vietnam.  Until  this  declaration  appeared  the  US  would  reveal  no
change  of  heart  over  Diem.

5. Diem  Acts  Against  the  Binh  Xuyen

Then  the  truce  exploded.  On  28  April,  Diem  told  Lansdale:

The  Army  and  people  laid  the  blame  (for  the  crisis  between  the  govern-
ment and  the  Binh  Xuyen)  on  the  French  because  they  could  see  French
armored  vehicles  and  troops  in  the  streets  evidently  ready  for  action  against
the  Vietnamese.  We  (Lansdale  and  an  assistant)  told  him  that  it  looked  as
the  Vietnamese  still  needed  a  leader,  that  Diem  was  still  President,  that  the
US  was  still  supporting  him.


234 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

That  afternoon,  Diem's  private  secretary  called  Lansdale.  He  said  the  palace
was

under  heavy  mortar  fire,  that  the  President  was  on  another  line  talking  to
General  Ely,  that  Ely  stated  that  he  couldn't  hear  any  explosions  and  the
President  was  holding  the  mouthpiece  out  towards  the  explosions  so  Ely
could  hear  them.  Hai  (the  secretary)  started  to  ask  what  should  be  done,
interrupted  himself  to  say  that  the  President  had  just  ordered  the  National
Army  to  start  returning  the  fire  and  had  so  informed  Ely.  He  hung  up.

Against  the  advice  of  French,  US  and  most  cabinet  advisors,  Diem  had  issued
a  decree  charging  Police  Commissioner  Lai  Van  Sang  with  "very  grave  official
misconduct"  and  named  Col.  Nguyen  Ngoc  Le  to  replace  him.  Sang  refused  to
resign,  saying  only  Bao  Dai  had  authority  to  remove  him.  Binh  Xuyen  troops  in
Cholon  apparently  opened  fire  on  National  Army  units  and  Binh  Xuyen  shells
fell  again  on  the  palace.  But  within  nine  hours  after  Diem's  order  to  take  the
offensive,  the  National  Army  had  driven  the  Binh  Xuyen  back  into  Cholon.
Fires  raged  (set  by  the  Binh  Xuyen,  according  to  Lansdale);  hundreds  were
killed  or  wounded.

6.  Washington  Acts:  U.S.  Will  {Again)  Support  Diem

Washington  responded  with  alacrity  to  Diem's  success,  superficial  though  it
was.  Saigon  was  told  to  forget  Dulles'  earlier  message  about  US  willingness  to
see  a  change  in  government.  Policy  had  not  changed  after  all:  the  US  supported
Diem.  The  Saigon  Embassy  burned  the  first  message.

7.  Diem  and  Others  Defy  Bao  Dai

Buoyed  by  his  showing  against  Bay  Vien,  Diem  ignored  the  summons  from
Bao  Dai  which  appeared  on  April  28.  The  Emperor  ordered  Diem  and  General
Ty  to  Cannes,  placed  Binh  Xuyen  sympathizer  General  Vy  in  charge  of  the  army
and  dispatched  General  Hinh  to  Saigon  with  personal  instructions  from  Bao  Dai.
Diem  refused  to  leave  Saigon,  refused  to  allow  General  Vy  to  assume  command,
refused  to  allow  General  Hinh  into  the  country.

On  April  30  a  new  development  surfaced.  The  National  Revolutionary  Con-
gress of  the  Vietnamese  people  was  announced.  Backed  by  Cao  Dai  Generals
Phuong  and  The,  Hoa  Hao  General  Ngo,  other  attentiste  politicians,  it  claimed
to  represent  almost  all  political  parties  in  South  Vietnam.  The  Congress  decla-
ration repudiated  Bao  Dai,  dissolved  the  present  government  and  called  on  Diem
to  form  a  new  government  and  elect  a  national  assembly  to  draft  a  constitution.

Diem  was  receptive  to  the  program  of  the  Revolutionary  Congress,  particularly
since  his  brother  Nhu  had  a  hand  in  drafting  it.  He  was  probably  not  as  receptive
to  some  of  the  activist  members  of  the  Congress,  however,  most  of  whom  joined
in  a  Revolutionary  Committee.  Generals  Trinh  Minh  The  and  Phuong  confided
to  Lansdale:

The  Revolutionary  Committee  had  grown  out  of  the  Revolutionary  Congress
Front  organization  which  Diem's  brother  Nhu  had  tried  to  organize  some
days  earlier;  they  had  followed  (SMM's)  advice  and  had  joined  with  Nhu
in  the  Front  but  were  dissatisfied  with  some  of  the  weak  organizations  they
felt  Nhu  was  depending  on,  so  had  organized  something  more  dynamic  to


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  235


meet  the  threat  of  Vy  and  Bao  Dai  and  called  themselves  the  Revolutionary
Committee.  They  v^anted  Bao  Dai  dethroned  and  wanted  the  French  to  stop
interfering  in  Vietnamese  affairs.

Support,  backhanded  though  it  may  have  been,  helped  Diem  politically  in  Viet-
nam and  with  the  United  States.  Militarily  he  was  never  really  threatened  by  Bao
Dai  or  Generals  Vy  or  Hinh  (who  was  never  able  to  deliver  Bao  Dai's  special
orders).  The  National  Army  was  stronger  than  French  and  Americans  thought
and  it  refused  to  obey  General  Vy.  The  following  episode,  related  to  Lansdale
by  General  Ty  and  Colonel  Tran  Van  Don  after  their  temporary  arrest  by  Vy,
illustrates  this.  General  Vy  bragged  about  being  able  to  get  anything  he  wanted
from  the  French.  Ty  and  Don  asked  him  to  prove  it.  "(They)  .  .  .  asked  him  to
call  up  the  French  and  request  the  armored  vehicles  which  the  French  had  been
holding  at  Bien  Hoa  so  long  without  delivering  to  the  Vietnamese  Army.  The
French  rushed  these  vehicles  to  Hinh's  house  (Vy's  headquarters),  evidently  hav-
ing been  holding  them  just  outside  town  for  this  emergency,  where  Army  men
took  them  over  and  drove  them  into  the  fight  against  the  Binh  Xuyen.  Don  said
the  French  still  hadn't  caught  on,  still  thought  that  Vy  would  use  this  armor  to
bring  the  Army  into  line  to  stop  fighting  the  Binh  Xuyen  and  be  loyal  to  Bao  Dai.
Don  added  that  the  Army  felt  the  same  as  the  Revolutionary  Committee:  Bao
Dai  was  finished."  General  Vy  retreated  to  Dalat  (and  Bao  Dai's  Imperial
Guards),  then  lel».  the  country.

During  these  days.  General  Ely  had  grown  more  convinced  that  Diem  was  not
only  irresponsible,  he  was  quite  mad.  Ely  feared  fighting  would  spread  to  the
European  sector  but  was  unable  to  win  American  or  British  support  for  an  at-
tempt to  reimpose  the  cease-fire.  American  Charge  d' Affairs  Kidder  felt  Ely  him-
self was  approaching  hysteria  and  that  his  emotional  involvement  compromised
his  usefulness  to  either  France  or  the  United  States.  Ely's  premonitions  of  vio-
lence between  Vietnamese  and  French  forces  proved  unfounded.  But  violence
did  accompany  Diem's  final  offensive  against  the  Binh  Xuyen  which  opened  on
May  2  when  the  VNA  crossed  the  Chinese  Arroyo  and  attacked  Bay  Vien's  forces
in  Cholon.  By  the  following  day,  most  of  the  Binh  Xuyen  had  been  driven  out
into  the  Rung  Sat  swamps.

When  Collins  returned  to  Saigon  he  urged  Diem  to  hold  the  Revolutionary
Committee  in  check  (Collins,  most  of  the  French  and  French  intelligence  thought
Vietminh  had  infiltrated  the  front  organization;  they  feared  Diem  would  become
its  prisoner  if  he  backed  it  too  strongly).  Collins  wanted  Diem  to  reconstitute  the
government  and  get  on  with  reforms,  leaving  the  problem  of  Bao  Dai  to  an
elected  national  assembly.  Diem  followed  this  advice.  He  invited  some  700  elected
counselors  from  39  provinces  to  consider  Bao  Dai's  legality.  An  Estates  General
composed  of  50  counselors  drew  up  a  program  demanding  Bao  Dai  transfer  all
civilian  and  military  powers  to  Diem  who  would  exercise  them  until  the  assembly
met — within  six  months — to  draw  up  a  constitution.

8. May  Trilateral  Meetings

a. Dulles  Backs  Diem

At  this  same  time,  France,  the  United  States  and  Britain  met  once  again  in
Paris.  The  Tripartite  session  had  been  called  to  discuss  problems  of  European
Defense  but  Vietnam  was  the  real  subject.  The  positions  of  both  Secretary  Dulles


236 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  French  Prime  Minister  Edgar  Faure  (who  succeeded  Mendes-France  in
February  1955)  toward  Diem  had  hardened.  Dulles  insisted  he  be  upheld:

Diem  is  only  means  US  sees  to  save  South  Vietnam  and  counteract  (the)
revolutionary  movement  underway  in  Vietnam.  US  sees  no  one  else  who
can.  Whatever  US  view  has  been  in  past,  today  US  must  support  Diem
whole-heartedly.  US  must  not  permit  Diem  to  become  another  Karensky.

.  .  .  Bao  Dai  .  .  .  had  irretrievably  lost  capacity  to  be  anything  but  titular
head  of  government.  .  .  .  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  could  be  used  but  not
Binh  Xuyen.  .  .  .  With  support  (of  France  and  US)  Diem  could  sit  on  top
of  revolution.  Diem  is  only  force  of  moderation.  FEC  is  certain  stabilizing
influence.  US  was  giving  funds  to  support  Vietnamese  army  and  could  not
see  anyone  else  to  give  funds  to  but  Diem  for  that  purpose.

...  In  US  view  present  revolution  is  not  yet  dominated  or  influenced  by
Communists  to  any  appreciable  degree.  .  .  .  Support  of  Diem  did  not
indicate  US  non-recognition  of  his  weaknesses.  US  .  .  .  had  been  and  re-
mained ready  to  support  any  other  man  who  might  be  presented  by  orderly
process  of  law.  (Dulles)  remarked  that  just  before  outbreak  of  fighting  US
was  prepared  to  consider  alternatives  but  he  was  not  sure  now  that  it  would
have  been  practical.  ...  If  there  is  a  better  man  US  is  ready  to  consider
him  but  ...  no  one  has  been  suggested.  Although  Collins  had  reached
agreement  with  Ely  in  early  April  to  change  Diem  he  now  believes  we  must
support  him.

b. The  French  Position

French  Minister  La  Forest  had  opened  the  meeting  by  pointing  to  consultations
(scheduled  for  July)  between  North  and  South  Vietnam  about  elections.  He  said
France  felt  South  Vietnam  could  win  the  contest  if  a  "nationalist,  stable  and
broadly  based  government"  were  in  control  and  that  France  wanted  South  Viet-
nam to  win.

There  is  no  ambiguity  in  French  policy  between  North  and  South  Vietnam.
Presence  of  France  in  North  could  not  be  erased  by  stroke  of  pen.  It  is
French  duty  to  protect  her  cultural  and  economic  presence  there.  Sainteny
mission  is  designed  for  only  that  purpose.  France  had  given  up  thought  of
mixed  companies  as  result  (US)  objections  and  had  now  surrendered  coal
mines.  .  .

LaForest  presented  the  French  analysis  of  events  over  the  past  four  months.
While  the  US  could  not  argue  his  facts,  the  US  could  not  accept  LaForest's  inter-
pretation of  them.  Differences  between  the  two  nations  were  more  fundamental
than  at  any  time  in  the  past.

.  .  .  France  had  loyally  supported  government  of  Diem  from  beginning.
Any  allegation  to  contrary  is  untrue  .  .  .  France  reached  agreement  with
US  last  December  to  persuade  "or  compel"  Diem  to  enlarge  government.  It
was  agreed  to  give  him  until  January  at  which  time,  if  he  had  failed,  we
would  look  into  matter  of  alternate  discreetly.  This  was  not  done.  Last
March  present  government  broke  into  open  conflict  with  sects.  United  Front
of  sects  was  formed  against  Diem.  Both  December  agreement  and  common
sense  told  us  at  that  time  that  something  (had)  to  be  done  to  avoid  civil
war.  .  .  .  For  this  reason,  joint  Ely-Collins  approach  was  tried.  It  was


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  237


hoped  they  would  arrive  at  joint  plan  for  solution.  Washington  appeared
first  to  welcome  this  concept  then  changed  its  mind.  Collins  left  Saigon
when  civil  war  was  about  to  break  out.  Untenable  truces  were  declared.
When  they  were  about  to  expire  Bao  Dai  submitted  his  own  plan  ...  in
order  to  try  to  reconcile  US  and  French  failure  to  act.  US  failed  to  reply  to
Bao  Dai.  In  absence  of  Collins  from  Saigon,  Bao  Dai  acted.

La  Forest  continued

.  .  .  that  new  Revolutionary  Committee  appeared  to  have  control.  Com-
mittee is  strongly  under  Viet  Minh  influence.  .  .  .  There  is  violent  cam-
paign against  French  and  French  Expeditionary  Control.  Viet  Minh  agents
make  good  use  of  it  and  certain  Americans  do  not  seem  sufficiently  aware
of  this.  French  Government  does  not  wish  to  have  its  army  act  as  platform
for  Vietminh  propaganda.  Army  will  not  be  maintained  at  any  cost  .  .  .

c. Faure:  We  Will  Withdraw  to  Save  the  U.S. -France  Alliance

Then  M.  Faure  took  the  floor,  stating  France  was  not  in  agreement  with  the
United  States  and  that  it  was  time  to  speak  frankly.  He  said  Diem  is  "not  only
incapable  but  mad,"  he  took  advantage  of  Collins'  absence  to  effect  a  "coup  de
force  which  won  primary  victory  but  which  has  not  contributed  to  any  lasting
solution"  and  "France  can  no  longer  take  risks  with  him."  Diem  will  "bring  on  a
Viet  Minh  victory,  focus  the  hostility  of  everyone  on  French"  and  force  a  break
between  France  and  the  US.

Faure  concluded  with  this  significant  statement.

Diem  is  a  bad  choice,  impossible  solution,  with  no  chance  to  succeed  and  no
chance  to  improve  the  situation.  Without  him  some  solution  might  be  possi-
ble, but  with  him  there  is  none.  However,  I  cannot  guarantee  any  other  solu-
tion would  work  nor  is  it  possible  to  clarify  the  situation.  There  seems  to  be
fundamental  disagreement  between  us.  I  could  have  claimed  that  since
French  position  is  predominant  in  Vietnam,  you  should  accommodate  your
views  more  to  ours,  but  I  have  rejected  this.  What  should  be  done  under  the
circumstances?  What  would  you  say  if  we  were  to  retire  entirely  from  Indo-
china and  call  back  the  FEC  as  soon  as  possible.  I  fully  realize  this  would
be  a  grave  solution,  as  it  would  leave  French  civilians  and  French  interests
in  a  difficult  position.  ...  If  you  think  this  might  be  a  possible  solution,  I
think  I  might  be  able  to  orient  myself  towards  it  if  you  say  so.  It  would
have  advantage  of  avoiding  all  further  reproach  to  France  of  "colonialism"
while  at  same  time  giving  response  to  Diem's  request  that  France  should  go.
Since  it  contemplates  the  liquidation  of  the  situation  and  the  repatriation  of
the  FEC,  would  the  United  States  be  disposed  to  help  protect  French  ci-
vilians and  the  refugees?

Secretary  Dulles  repeated  his  awareness  of  Diem's  weaknesses  but  did  not
agree  with  Faure's  opinion.  Diem  "showed  so  much  ability  that  US  fails  to  see
how  he  can  be  got  rid  of  now  .  .  .  Diem  is  stronger  now  than  when  Bao  Dai
first  withdrew  his  powers."  Dulles  said  the  worst  aspect  of  the  problem  was  the
differences  between  France  and  the  US:  "Vietnam  is  not  worth  quarrel  with
France."  Then  he  matched  Faure's  offer  by  saying  the  US  would  withdraw  from
Vietnam  if  that  would  solve  the  problem.

Choice  open  to  us  is  to  have  Diem  supported  or  to  withdraw  .  .  .  US  inter-
est in  Vietnam  is  simply  to  withhold  area  from  communists.  US  will  give


238 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

consideration  to  any  suggestion  French  make  but  must  warn  that  US  finan-
cial support  may  not  be  expected  to  any  solution  which  (Dulles)  can  think
of  as  alternative  to  Diem.

Foreign  Secretary  MacMillan,  calling  British  interests  "more  indirect  but  none-
theless vital  because  (1)  interest  in  area  itself  and  (2)  interest  in  Communist
threat  from  any  area  in  world,"  made  the  obvious  statement  that  a  decision  on
Vietnam  was  too  grave  to  be  taken  that  evening.  Faure  and  Dulles  agreed.

d. Dulles:  Continue  with  Diem — but  Independently  of  France

By  May  1 1 ,  when  the  three  ministers  reconvened,  Dulles  had  received  counsel
from  the  JCS  and  General  Collins.  As  was  their  wont,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
offered  no  opinion  about  whether  Diem  should  or  should  not  be  continued  (a
matter  for  "resolution  at  the  governmental  level")  but  then  stated  his  government
showed  the  "greatest  promise  of  achieving  the  internal  stability  essential  for  the
future  security  of  Vietnam."  Addressing  the  military  aspects  of  the  problem,  the
Chiefs  found  neither  withdrawal  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  nor  with-
drawal of  US  military  support  acceptable.  The  Vietnamese  National  Army  was
considered  incapable  of  maintaining  internal  security,  even  less  able  to  resist  out-
side aggression  without  outside  military  assistance.  The  US  was  barred  by
Geneva  from  increasing  its  forces  either  to  defend  Vietnam  or  to  defend  French
civilians,  other  foreign  nationals  or  refugees.  Thus,  although  withdrawal  of  the
French  Expeditionary  Corps  is  "ultimately  to  be  desired,"  precipitate  withdrawal
at  this  time  was  not:  it  would  "result  in  an  increasingly  unstable  and  precarious
situation"  and  the  eventual  fall  of  South  Vietnam  to  communism.  The  Chiefs  felt
France  alone  would  be  unable  to  stabilize  the  situation,  that  the  VNA  would  fall
apart  without  "US  moral  and  materiel  support,"  and  that  the  "best  interest  of
France  as  well  as  the  United  States"  warranted  energetic  action  to  restore  internal
order  and  prevent  South  Vietnam's  loss  to  the  free  world.

General  Collins  also  opposed  French  withdrawal  for  three  reasons:  first,  the
EEC  was  responsible  under  the  Manila  Pact  for  the  defense  of  Indochina  and
neither  the  US  nor  Britain  were  prepared  to  take  over  that  responsibility.  Sec-
ondly, French  military  assistance  (logistical  support  and  training)  was  essential
to  the  development  of  the  Vietnamese  forces.  Third,  although  the  presence  of
French  troops  was  a  source  of  bitterness  to  the  Vietnamese,  General  Collins  be-
lieved the  EEC  was  a  stabilizing  influence  on  Vietnamese  politics.

Dulles'  proposal  to  Faure  on  May  11  reflected  these  judgments.  Emphasizing
that  Indochina,  for  all  its  importance,  must  not  be  allowed  to  damage  Franco-
American  relations,  that  US  support  for  Diem  must  not  be  allowed  to  split
the  alliance,  Dulles  proposed  that  France  continue  to  support  Diem  until  a
National  Assembly  could  be  elected  to  determine  the  ultimate  political  struc-
ture of  South  Vietnam,  a  structure  which  might  or  might  not  include  Diem.

Against  his  own  views,  against  French  public  opinion  and  on  certain  condi-
tions, Faure  accepted  the  proposal.  The  Prime  Minister  insisted  the  Diem  gov-
ernment be  enlarged,  elections  be  held  as  soon  as  possible,  the  sect  problem
be  resolved,  anti-French  propaganda  cease,  Bao  Dai  be  retained  as  chief  of
state,  French  and  American  officials  deemed  disturbing  to  Franco-US  harmony
be  removed  from  Vietnam  (Lansdale,  for  one)  and  that  the  US  assure  him
French  economic,  cultural  and  financial  relations  with  South  Vietnam  would
be  nurtured.  Agreeing  to  these  stipulations,  Dulles  added  Diem  was  not  a  US
puppet  and  he  could  not  guarantee  conditions  involving  Vietnamese  action
would  be  met.  Then,  saying  the  problem  in  Vietnam  did  not  lend  itself  to  a


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  239

contractual  agreement  between  France  and  the  United  States,  Dulles  suggested
each  should  state  its  policy  and  proceed  accordingly.  In  effect,  said  Dulles,  the
days  of  joint  policy  are  over;  the  US  will  act  (more)  independently  of  France
in  the  future.

F. THE  TWILIGHT  OF  FRENCH  PRESENCE  IN  VIETNAM

Back  in  Vietnam,  Diem  was  doing  well.  He  had  dealt  the  Binh  Xuyen  a
coup  de  grace;  the  Army  was  pleased  with  its  success  against  Bay  Vien,  sup-
ported Diem  and  rather  relished  the  chance  to  continue  the  fight  against  re-
maining sect  armies.  Diem  launched  a  campaign  against  the  sect  armies  on  May
8,  to  regain  control  of  wayward  provinces  and  solidify  Saigon's  control  through-
out the  country.  The  US,  again,  gave  Diem  unqualified  support  and  the  French,
again,  reluctantly  backed  him.  Bao  Dai  was  a  minor  threat;  trying  to  overthrow
Diem  had  been  a  blunder  and  his  popularity  was  very  low.  On  May  10,  a
relatively  unknown  group  of  "technicians"  was  named  as  Diem's  cabinet,  to
function  until  elections  for  a  national  assembly  (held  on  March  4,  1956).  General
Collins  left  Vietnam  on  May  14;  Ambassador  G.  Frederick  Reinhardt  replaced
him  later  in  the  month.  And  on  June  2,  General  Ely's  mission  terminated.
General  Jacquot  assumed  military  duties  as  Commissioner-General,  duties  which
consisted  primarily  of  supervising  the  increasingly  rapid  pace  of  the  French
military  pull-out.

1. All-Vietnam  Elections

Although  political  concessions  made  to  the  United  States  in  May  and  eco-
nomic and  military  actions  taken  before  and  after  that  time  had  reduced —
almost  eliminated — French  presence  and  influence  in  Vietnam  France  still  was
obligated  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords.  Under  increasing
pressure  from  French  public  opinion  to  give  Hanoi  no  pretext  for  renewing  hos-
tilities as  long  as  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  remained  in  South  Vietnam,  the
French  Government  urgently  sought  to  persuade  Diem  to  accept  consultations
about  the  elections  scheduled  to  begin  in  July  1955.  Britain  wanted  to  prevent
any  public  repudiation  of  the  Accords  and  joined  France  in  urging  Diem  to
talk  to  the  Vietminh.  But  Diem  had  not  changed  his  view  of  the  Accords:  he
had  refused  to  sign  them  and  continued  to  insist  he  was  not  bound  by  them.

The  United  States  stood  between  these  extremes.  A  draft  policy  toward  all-
Vietnam  elections — finally  produced  in  May  1955 — held  that  to  give  no  impres-
sion of  blocking  elections  while  avoiding  the  possibility  of  losing  them,  Diem
should  insist  on  free  elections  by  secret  ballot  with  strict  supervision.  Com-
munists in  Korea  and  Germany  had  rejected  these  conditions;  hopefully  the
Vietminh  would  follow  suit.

Diem  could  not  bring  himself  to  sit  down  with  the  Vietminh.  Consultations
would  give  the  appearance  of  having  accepted  the  Geneva  settlement;  consulta-
tion with  the  Vietminh  without  the  kind  of  Western  backing  given  Rhee  and
Adenauer  would  be  futile.  On  July  16,  Diem  said  South  Vietnam  could  "not
consider  any  proposal  from  the  Communists"  without  proof  that  they  had
mended  their  ways  and  were  prepared  to  hold  genuinely  free  elections.  But
another  reason  was  Diem's  belief  that  he  could  not  represent  a  sovereign  nation
— or  be  free  of  Vietminh  propaganda  charges  of  being  a  colonialist  puppet —
until  the  French  High  Command  and  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  were
gone.  Minister  Nguyen  Huu  Chau  was  dispatched  to  Paris  to  negotiate  the
withdrawal  of  the  EEC  from  Vietnam  (except  naval  and  air  forces  which  Diem


240 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

wanted  under  VNA  command)  and  revision  of  economic,  cultural  and  financial
accords.  Diem  also  wanted  Vietnamese  affairs  transferred  from  the  Ministry  of
Associated  States  to  the  French  Foreign  office;  he  insisted  the  post  of  High  Com-
missioner be  abolished  and  that  Ely's  successor  (Henri  Hoppenot)  be  credited
as  Ambassador.

2.  Franco-Vietnamese  Differences,  Autumn  1955

France  was  anxious  to  get  the  FEC  out  of  Vietnam  (and  into  North  Africa);
the  matter  of  turning  the  High  Command  over  to  the  VNA  was  not  a  problem.
Placing  French  units  under  Vietnamese  command  was  a  definite  problem,  how-
ever and  domestic  politics  would  not  allow  any  immediate  change  of  Vietnam's
status  within  the  French  Union.  Talks  stalled  until  July.  Diem  accepted  Am-
bassador Hoppenot  (whose  duties,  if  not  title,  were  that  of  High  Commissioner)
and  things  moved  a  bit,  then  stopped  when  Diem  arrested  two  French  officers
suspected  of  bombing  electric  power  stations  in  Saigon  and  said  they  would  be
tried  by  Vietnamese  courts.  In  October,  France  refused  to  talk  unless  the  officers
were  released.  The  deadlock  was  finally  broken  by  the  French  in  December.
Paris  agreed  the  Quai  d'Orsay  would  handle  Vietnamese  affairs,  refused  to  accept
the  assignment  of  a  diplomatic  representative  from  the  DRV  to  France  and
made  it  clear  the  Sainteny  mission  was  in  Hanoi  solely  for  economic  and  cul-
tural reasons.  France  had  already  recognized  Vietnam  as  a  Republic  after  Diem's
resounding — too  resounding — victory  of  98  percent  of  the  vote  in  an  October
popular  referendum.  Diem  finally  released  the  officers  into  French  custody.

But  these  concessions  produced  no  improvement  in  French-Vietnam  rela-
tions. In  December,  Diem  suddenly  terminated  the  economic  and  financial  ac-
cords worked  out  at  the  Paris  conference  of  1954;  mounting  US  activity  fast
drove  the  former  colony  from  franc  to  dollar  area  and  stringent  commerical
regulations  applied  to  French  businesses  in  South  Vietnam  forced  already  out-
raged entrepreneurs  out  of  the  country  in  increasing  numbers.  Diem  laid  down
these  conditions  on  which  he  would  consider  renewed  relations  with  France.
France  had  to

denounce  the  Geneva  Agreements,  to  renounce  to  speak  about  the  gen-
eral elections  in  1956;  to  approve  openly  and  without  reservation  the
policy  of  Mr.  Diem,  to  break  all  relations  with  the  Vietminh  and  of
course  to  call  home  the  Sainteny  Mission.

Soon  after  this.  Diem  withdrew  South  Vietnamese  representatives  from  the
French  Union  Assembly.

There  w^s  little  France  could  do.  Diem  spoke  for  a  government  no  longer
dependent  on  French  support,  no  longer  near  collapse.  By  February  1956,  only
15,000  French  troops  remained  in  Vietnam  and  10,000  of  these  were  to  be
evacuated  by  the  end  of  March.  The  High  Command  was  abolished  on  April
26,  1956.  The  next  month,  the  US  Temporary  Equipment  Recovery  Mission
(TERM)  entered  Vietnam  and  another  350  military  personnel  were  added  to
the  US  advisory  effort.  Few  French  instructors  remained  at  the  TRIM.

3.  What  of  French  Obligations  Under  the  Geneva  Accords?

But  an  important  question  remained.  Under  the  Geneva  agreements  France
was  responsible  for  protection  and  support  of  the  International  Control  Com-


U.S.  and  France  in  Indochina,  1950-1956  241


mission;  representatives  of  the  People's  Army  of  North  Vietnam  and  France
sat  on  the  Joint  Armistice  Commission  charged  with  ensuring  provisions  of  the
armistice  agreement  were  met.  France  could  not  lightly  cast  off  these  obliga-
tions nor  could  France  transfer  them  to  South  Vietnam:  Diem  denounced  the
Geneva  accords  and  refused  to  be  bound  by  them  in  any  way.

In  February,  French  Foreign  Minister  Pineau  described  the  difficult  French
position  as  a  result  of  certain  conditions:

These  are  the  independence  granted  to  South  Vietnam  and  the  Geneva
accords  some  provisions  of  which  have  up  to  date  demanded  and  justified
our  presence  in  this  country.

Particularly  difficult  was  the  question  of  ICC  support.  Diem  refused  to  asso-
ciate South  Vietnam  openly  with  the  ICC  but  did  agree  to  assume  responsibility
for  its  servicing  if  France  would  leave  a  small  mission  in  Vietnam  to  fulfill
French  obligations.  Dulles  liked  this  idea.  His  view  was:  "while  we  should
certainly  take  no  positive  step  to  speed  up  present  process  of  decay  of  Geneva
Accords,  neither  should  we  make  the  slightest  effort  to  infuse  life  into  them."

Eight  months  later.  Diem  finally  relaxed  his  uncompromising  stand  against
Geneva,  agreed  to  respect  the  armistice  and  provide  security  for  the  ICC.  In
July  1956,  Vietnam  promised  to  replace  the  French  liaison  mission  to  the  ICC.
France  maintained  membership  on  the  Joint  Armistice  Commission  and  con-
tinued to  bear  ICC  expenses.  But  France  was  never  able  to  meet  Geneva  obliga-
tions concerning  the  elections  of  1956,  for  Diem  matched  his  refusal  to  consult
with  the  Vietminh  about  elections  with  an  adamant  refusal  to  ever  hold  them.
Neither  Britain  nor  the  Soviet  Union  pressed  the  matter;  the  United  States  backed
Diem's  position.


242


5.  Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,
1954-1960


Summary

From  the  perspective  of  the  United  States,  the  origins  of  the  insurgency  in
South  Vietnam  raise  four  principal  questions:

1.  Was  the  breakdown  of  the  peace  of  1954  the  fault  of  the  U.S.,  or  of  the
ambiguities  and  loopholes  of  the  Geneva  Accords?

2.  Was  the  insurgency  in  essence  an  indigenous  rebellion  against  Ngo  Dinh
Diem's  oppressive  government,  transformed  by  the  intervention  of  first  the
U.S.,  and  then  the  DRV?

3.  Or  was  it,  rather,  instigated,  controlled,  and  supported  from  its  inception
by  Hanoi?

4.  When  did  the  U.S.  become  aware  of  the  Viet  Cong  threat  to  South  Viet-
nam's internal  security,  and  did  it  attempt  to  counter  it  with  its  aid?

The  analysis  which  follows  rests  on  study  of  three  corpora  of  evidence:

(a)  Intelligence  reports  and  analyses,  including  the  most  carefully  guarded
finished  intelligence,  and  pertinent  National  Intelligence  Estimates.

(b)  Unfinished  governmental  intelligence,  field  reports,  and  memoranda  such
as  interrogations  of  prisoners  and  translated  captured  documents,  as  well  as  con-
tract studies  based  on  similar  evidence.

(c)  Open  sources,  including  the  works  of  former  U.S.  officials,  Vietnam  cor-
respondents, and  the  like.

The  U.S.  has  attempted  to  amplify  (c)  by  publishing  White  Papers  in  1961  and
1965,  in  which  substantial  citations  were  made  from  (b)  and  interpretations
offered  consistent  with  (a).  This  study  has  benefited  from  further  effort  during
1967  and  early  1968  to  identify  in  (b)  evidence  which  could  be  publicly  released.
But,  based  on  the  survey  of  (a),  (b),  and  (c)  reported  on  below,  the  U.S.  can
now  present  no  conclusive  answers  to  the  questions  advanced  above.

Tentative  answers  are  possible,  and  form  a  continuum:  By  1956,  peace  in
Vietnam  was  plainly  less  dependent  upon  the  Geneva  Settlement  than  upon
power  relationships  in  Southeast  Asia — principally  upon  the  role  the  U.S.  elected
to  play  in  unfolding  events.  In  1957  and  1958,  a  structured  rebellion  against  the
government  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  began.  While  the  North  Vietnamese  played  an
ill-defined  part,  most  of  those  who  took  up  arms  were  South  Vietnamese,  and
the  causes  for  which  they  fought  were  by  no  means  contrived  in  North  Vietnam.
In  1959  and  1960,  Hanoi's  involvement  in  the  developing  strife  became  evident.
Not  until  1960,  however,  did  the  U.S.  perceive  that  Diem  was  in  serious  danger
of  being  overthrown  and  devise  a  Counterinsurgency  Plan.

It  can  be  established  that  there  was  endemic  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam
throughout  the  period  1954-1960.  It  can  also  be  established — but  less  surely —
that  the  Diem  regime  alienated  itself  from  one  after  another  of  those  elements
within  Vietnam  which  might  have  offered  it  political  support,  and  was  grievously
at  fault  in  its  rural  programs.  That  these  conditions  engendered  animosity  toward
the  GVN  seems  almost  certain,  and  they  could  have  underwritten  a  major  resist-
ance movement  even  without  North  Vietnamese  help.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  243

It  is  equally  clear  that  North  Vietnamese  communists  operated  some  form  of
subordinate  apparatus  in  the  South  in  the  years  1954-1960.  Nonetheless,  the
Viet  Minh  "stay-behinds"  were  not  directed  originally  to  structure  an  insurgency,
and  there  is  no  coherent  picture  of  the  extent  or  effectiveness  of  communist
activities  in  the  period  1956-1959.  From  all  indications,  this  was  a  period  of
reorganization  and  recruiting  by  the  communist  party.  No  direct  links  have  been
established  between  Hanoi  and  perpetrators  of  rural  violence.  Statements  have
been  found  in  captured  party  histories  that  the  communists  plotted  and  controlled
the  entire  insurgency,  but  these  are  difficult  to  take  at  face  value.  Bernard  Fall
ingeniously  correlated  DRV  complaints  to  the  ICC  of  incidents  in  South  Vietnam
in  1957  with  GVN  reports  of  the  same  incidents,  and  found  Hanoi  suspiciously
well  informed.  He  also  perceived  a  pattern  in  the  terrorism  of  1957-1959,  de-
ducing that  a  broad,  centrally  directed  strategy  was  being  implemented.  However,
there  is  little  other  corroborative  evidence  that  Hanoi  instigated  the  incidents,
much  less  orchestrated  them.

Three  interpretations  of  the  available  evidence  are  possible:

Option  A — That  the  DRV  intervened  in  the  South  in  reaction  to  U.S.  escala-
tion, particularly  that  of  President  Kennedy  in  early  1961.  Those  who  advance
this  argument  rest  their  case  principally  on  open  sources  to  establish  the  repre-
hensible character  of  the  Diem  regime,  on  examples  of  forceful  resistance  to
Diem  independent  of  Hanoi,  and  upon  the  formation  of  the  National  Liberation
Front  (NLF)  alleged  to  have  come  into  being  in  South  Vietnam  in  early  1960.
These  also  rely  heavily  upon  DRV  official  statements  of  1960-1961  indicating
that  the  DRV  only  then  proposed  to  support  the  NLF.

Option  B — The  DRV  manipulated  the  entire  war.  This  is  the  official  U.S.  posi-
tion, and  can  be  supported.  Nonetheless,  the  case  is  not  wholly  compelling,  es-
pecially for  the  years  1955-1959.

Option  C — The  DRV  seized  an  opportunity  to  enter  an  ongoing  internal  war
in  1959  prior  to,  and  independent  of,  U.S.  escalation.  This  interpretation  is  more
tenable  than  the  previous;  still,  much  of  the  evidence  is  circumstantial.

The  judgment  offered  here  is  that  the  truth  lies  somewhere  between  Option
B  and  C.  That  is,  there  was  some  form  of  DRV  apparatus  functioning  in  the
South  throughout  the  years,  but  it  can  only  be  inferred  that  this  apparatus  origi-
nated and  controlled  the  insurgency  which  by  1959  posed  a  serious  challenge  to
the  Diem  government.  Moreover,  up  until  1958,  neither  the  DRV  domestic  situa-
tion nor  its  international  support  was  conducive  to  foreign  adventure;  by  1959,
its  prospects  were  bright  in  both  respects,  and  it  is  possible  to  demonstrate  its
moving  forcefully  abroad  thereafter.  Given  the  paucity  of  evidence  now,  well
after  the  events,  U.S.  intelligence  served  policy  makers  of  the  day  surprisingly
well  in  warning  of  the  developments  described  below :

FAILURE  OF  THE  GENEVA  SETTLEMENT

The  Geneva  Settlement  of  1954  was  inherently  flawed  as  a  durable  peace  for
Indochina,  since  it  depended  upon  France,  and  since  both  the  U.S.  and  the  Re-
public of  South  Vietnam  excepted  themselves.  The  common  ground  from  which
the  nations  negotiated  at  the  Geneva  Conference  was  a  mutual  desire  to  halt  the
hostilities  between  France  and  the  Viet  Minh,  and  to  prevent  any  widening  of
the  war.  To  achieve  concord,  they  had  to  override  objections  of  the  Saigon  gov-
ernment, countenance  the  disassociation  of  the  U.S.  from  the  Settlement,  and
accept  France  as  one  executor.  Even  so,  Geneva  might  have  wrought  an  endur-
ing peace  for  Vietnam  //  France  had  remained  as  a  major  power  in  Indochina,  //


244 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Ngo  Dinh  Diem  had  cooperated  with  the  terms  of  the  settlement,  //  the  U.S.  had
abstained  from  further  influencing  the  outcome.  No  one  of  these  conditions  was
likely,  given  France's  travail  in  Algeria,  Diem's  implacable  anti-communism,  and
the  U.S.'  determination  to  block  further  expansion  of  the  DRV  in  Southeast
Asia.

Therefore,  the  tragedy  staged:  partition  of  Vietnam,  the  sole  negotiable  basis
found  at  Geneva  for  military  disengagement,  became  the  prime  casus  belli.  To
assuage  those  parties  to  Geneva  who  were  reluctant  to  condone  the  handing  over
of  territory  and  people  to  a  communist  government,  and  to  reassure  the  Viet
Minh  that  their  southern  followers  could  be  preserved  en  bloc,  the  Accords
provided  for  regrouping  forces  to  North  and  South  Vietnam  and  for  Vietnamese
freely  electing  residence  in  either  the  North  or  the  South;  the  transmigrations
severely  disrupted  the  polity  of  Vietnam,  heated  the  controversy  over  reunifica-
tion, and  made  it  possible  for  North  Vietnam  to  contemplate  subversive  ag-
gression. Both  sides  were  fearful  that  the  armistice  would  be  used  to  conceal
construction  of  military  bases  or  other  preparations  for  aggression;  but  these
provisions  depended  on  a  credible  international  supervision  which  never  ma-
terialized. Partition  and  regroupment  pitted  North  against  South  Vietnam,  and
arms  control  failed  patently  and  soon.  Geneva  traded  on  long-run  risks  to  achieve
short-run  disengagement.  France  withdrew  from  Vietnam,  leaving  the  Accords
in  the  hands  of  Saigon.  Lasting  peace  came  between  France  and  the  Viet  Minh,
but  the  deeper  struggle  for  an  independent,  united  Vietnam  remained,  its  inter-
national implications  more  grave,  its  dangers  heightened.

The  Southeast  Asia  policy  of  the  U.S.  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Geneva  Con-
ference was  conservative,  focused  on  organizing  collective  defense  against  fur-
ther inroads  of  communism,  not  on  altering  status  quo.  Status  quo  was  the  two
Vietnams  set  up  at  Geneva,  facing  each  other  across  a  demilitarized  zone.  Hanoi,
more  than  other  powers,  had  gambled:  hedged  by  the  remaining  Viet  Minh,  it
waited  for  either  Geneva's  general  elections  or  the  voracious  political  forces  in
the  South  to  topple  the  Saigon  government.  In  South  Vietnam,  Diem  had  begun
his  attempt  to  gain  control  over  his  people,  constantly  decried  DRV  subversion
and  handling  of  would-be  migrants  as  violations  of  the  Geneva  Accords,  and
pursued  an  international  and  domestic  policy  of  anti-communism.  Both  Vietnams
took  the  view  that  partition  was,  as  the  Conference  Final  Declaration  stated,  only
temporary.  But  statements  could  not  gainsay  the  practical  import  of  the  Accords.
The  separation  of  Vietnam  at  the  17th  parallel  facilitated  military  disengagement,
but  by  establishing  the  principle  that  two  regimes  were  separately  responsible  for
"civil  administration"  each  in  distinct  zones;  by  providing  for  the  regroupment  of
military  forces  to  the  two  zones,  and  for  the  movement  of  civilians  to  the  zone
of  their  choice;  and  by  postponing  national  elections  for  at  least  two  years,  per-
mitting the  regimes  in  Hanoi  and  Saigon  to  consolidate  power,  the  Geneva  con-
ferees in  fact  fostered  two  governments  under  inimical  political  philosophies,
foreign  policies,  and  socio-economic  systems.

The  Geneva  powers  were  imprecise — probably  deliberately  indefinite — con-
cerning who  was  to  carry  out  the  election  provisions.  France,  which  was  charged
with  civil  administration  in  the  "regrouping  zone"  of  South  Vietnam,  had  granted
the  State  of  Vietnam  its  independence  in  June  1954,  six  weeks  before  the  Accords
were  drawn  up.  Throughout  1954  and  the  first  half  of  1955,  France  further
divested  itself  of  authority  in  South  Vietnam:  police,  local  government,  and
then  the  Army  of  Vietnam  were  freed  of  French  control,  and  turned  over  to  the
Saigon  government.  Concurrently,  the  U.S.  began  to  channel  aid  directly  to  South
Vietnam,  rather  than  through  France.  The  convolution  of  French  policy  then


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  245

thrust  upon  the  U.S.  a  choice  between  supporting  Diem  or  the  French  presence
in  Indochina.  The  U.S.  opted  for  Diem.  By  the  time  the  deadlines  for  election
consultations  fell  due  in  July  1955,  South  Vietnam  was  sovereign  de  facto  as
well  as  de  jure,  waxing  strong  with  U.S.  aid,  and  France  was  no  longer  in  a
position  to  exert  strong  influence  on  Diem's  political  actions.

As  early  as  January  1955,  President  Diem  was  stating  publicly  that  he  was
unlikely  to  proceed  with  the  Geneva  elections:

Southern  Viet-Nam,  since  it  protested  the  Geneva  Agreement  when  it
was  made,  does  not  consider  itself  a  party  to  that  Agreement,  nor  bound
by  it.

In  any  event,  the  clauses  providing  for  the  1956  elections  are  extremely
vague.  But  at  one  point  they  are  clear — in  stipulating  that  the  elections  are
to  be  free.  Everything  will  now  depend  on  how  free  elections  are  defined.
The  President  said  he  would  wait  to  see  whether  the  conditions  of  freedom
would  exist  in  North  Viet-Nam  at  the  time  scheduled  for  the  elections.
He  asked  what  would  be  the  good  of  an  impartial  counting  of  votes  if  the
voting  has  been  preceded  in  North  Viet-Nam  by  a  campaign  of  ruthless
propaganda  and  terrorism  on  the  part  of  a  police  state.

As  the  deadline  for  consultations  approached  (20  July  1955),  Diem  was  in-
creasingly explicit  that  he  did  not  consider  free  elections  possible  in  North  Viet-
nam, and  had  no  intention  of  consulting  with  the  DRV  concerning  them.  The
U.S.  did  not — as  is  often  alleged — connive  with  Diem  to  ignore  the  elections.
U.S.  State  Department  records  indicate  that  Diem's  refusal  to  be  bound  by  the
Geneva  Accords  and  his  opposition  to  pre-election  consultations  were  at  his
own  initiative.  However,  the  U.S.,  which  had  expected  elections  to  be  held,  and
up  until  May  1955  had  fully  supported  them,  shifted  its  position  in  the  face  of
Diem's  opposition,  and  of  the  evidence  then  accumulated  about  the  oppressive
nature  of  the  regime  in  North  Vietnam.  "In  essence,"  a  State  Department  his-
torical study  found,  "our  position  would  be  that  the  whole  subject  of  consulta-
tions and  elections  in  Viet-Nam  should  be  left  up  to  the  Vietnamese  themselves
and  not  dictated  by  external  arrangements  which  one  of  the  parties  never  ac-
cepted and  still  rejects."  Secretary  of  State  Dulles  explained  publicly  that:

Neither  the  United  States  Government  nor  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam
is,  of  course,  a  party  to  the  Geneva  armistice  agreements.  We  did  not  sign
them,  and  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  did  not  sign  them  and,  indeed,
protested  against  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  United  States  believes,
broadly  speaking,  in  the  unification  of  countries  which  have  a  historic
unity,  where  the  people  are  akin.  We  also  believe  that,  if  there  are  condi-
tions of  really  free  elections,  there  is  no  serious  risk  that  the  Communists
would  win.  .  .  .

Thus,  backed  by  the  U.S.,  Diem  obdurately  refused  to  open  talks  with  the  Hanoi
government.  He  continued  to  maintain  that  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam
had  not  signed  the  Geneva  Agreements  and  thus  was  not  bound  by  them.

Our  policy  is  a  policy  for  peace.  But  nothing  will  lead  us  astray  of  our
goal,  the  unity  of  our  country,  a  unity  in  freedom  and  not  in  slavery.  Serving
the  cause  of  our  nation,  more  than  ever  we  will  struggle  for  the  reunification
of  our  homeland.


246 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

We  do  not  reject  the  principle  of  free  elections  as  peaceful  and  demo-
cratic means  to  achieve  that  unity.  However,  if  elections  constitute  one  of
the  bases  of  true  democracy,  they  will  be  meaningful  only  on  the  condition
that  they  be  absolutely  free.

Now,  faced  with  a  regime  of  oppression  as  practiced  by  the  Viet  Minh,
we  remain  skeptical  concerning  the  possibility  of  fulfilling  the  conditions
of  free  elections  in  the  North.

On  1  June  1956,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  Walter
Robertson,  stated:

President  Diem  and  the  Government  of  Free  Viet-Nam  reaffirmed  on
April  6  of  this  year  and  on  other  occasions  their  desire  to  seek  the  reunifica-
tion of  Viet-Nam  by  peaceful  means.  In  this  goal,  we  support  them  fully.
We  hope  and  pray  that  the  partition  of  Viet-Nam,  imposed  against  the
will  of  the  Vietnamese  people,  will  speedily  come  to  an  end.  For  our  part
we  believe  in  free  elections,  and  we  support  President  Diem  fully  in  his
position  that  if  elections  are  to  be  held,  there  first  must  be  conditions  which
preclude  intimidation  or  coercion  of  the  electorate.  Unless  such  conditions
exist  there  can  be  no  free  choice.

President  Eisenhower  is  widely  quoted  to  the  effect  that  in  1954  as  many  as
80%  of  the  Vietnamese  people  would  have  voted  for  Ho  Chi  Minh,  as  the
popular  hero  of  their  liberation,  in  an  election  against  Bao  Dai.  In  October  1955,
Diem  ran  against  Bao  Dai  in  a  referendum  and  won — by  a  dubiously  overwhelm-
ing vote,  but  he  plainly  won  nevertheless.  It  is  almost  certain  that  by  1956  the
proportion  which  might  have  voted  for  Ho — in  a  free  election  against  Diem —
would  have  been  much  smaller  than  80% .  Diem's  success  in  the  South  had  been
far  greater  than  anyone  could  have  foreseen,  while  the  North  Vietnamese  regime
had  been  suffering  from  food  scarcity,  and  low  public  morale  stemming  from
inept  imitation  of  Chinese  Communism — including  a  harsh  agrarian  program
that  reportedly  led  to  the  killing  of  over  50,000  small-scale  "landlords."  The
North  Vietnamese  themselves  furnished  damning  descriptions  of  conditions
within  the  DRV  in  1955  and  1956.  Vo  Nguyen  Giap,  in  a  public  statement  to
his  communist  party  colleagues,  admitted  in  autumn,  1956,  that:

We  made  too  many  deviations  and  executed  too  many  honest  people.
We  attacked  on  too  large  a  front  and,  seeing  enemies  everywhere,  resorted
to  terror,  which  became  far  too  widespread.  .  .  .  Whilst  carrying  out  our
land  reform  program  we  failed  to  respect  the  principles  of  freedom  of  faith
and  worship  in  many  areas  ...  in  regions  inhabited  by  minority  tribes
we  have  attacked  tribal  chiefs  too  strongly,  thus  injuring,  instead  of  re-
specting, local  customs  and  manners.  .  .  .  When  reorganizing  the  party,
we  paid  too  much  importance  to  the  notion  of  social  class  instead  of  ad-
hering firmly  to  political  qualifications  alone.  Instead  of  recognizing  edu-
cation to  be  the  first  essential,  we  resorted  exclusively  to  organizational
measures  such  as  disciplinary  punishments,  expulsion  from  the  party,  execu-
tions, dissolution  of  party  branches  and  calls.  Worse  still,  torture  came  to
be  regarded  as  a  normal  practice  during  party  reorganization.

That  circumstances  in  North  Vietnam  were  serious  enough  to  warrant  Giap's
confiteor  was  proved  by  insurrection  among  Catholic  peasants  in  November  1956,


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  ]  954-1960  247

within  two  weeks  of  his  speech,  in  which  thousands  more  lives  were  lost.  But
the  uprisings,  though  then  and  since  used  to  validate  the  U.S. -backed  GVN  stand,
were  not  foreseen  in  1955  or  1956;  the  basis  for  the  policy  of  both  nations  in
rejecting  the  Geneva  elections  was,  rather,  convictions  that  Hanoi  would  not
permit  "free  general  elections  by  secret  ballot,"  and  that  the  ICC  would  be  im-
potent in  supervising  the  elections  in  any  case.

The  deadlines  for  the  consultations  in  July  1955,  and  the  date  set  for  elections
in  July  1956,  passed  without  international  action.  The  DRV  repeatedly  tried  to
engage  the  Geneva  machinery,  forwarding  messages  to  the  Government  of  South
Vietnam  in  July  1955,  May  and  June  1956,  March  1958,  July  1959,  and  July
1960,  proposing  consultations  to  negotiate  "free  general  elections  by  secret  bal-
lot," and  to  liberalize  North-South  relations  in  general.  Each  time  the  GVN
replied  with  disdain,  or  with  silence.  The  17th  parallel,  with  its  demilitarized
zone  on  either  side,  became  de  facto  an  international  boundary,  and — since  Ngo
Dinh  Diem's  rigid  refusal  to  traffic  with  the  North  excluded  all  economic  ex-
changes and  even  an  interstate  postal  agreement — one  of  the  most  restricted
boundaries  in  the  world.  The  DRV  appealed  to  the  UK  and  the  USSR  as  co-
chairmen  of  the  Geneva  Conference  to  no  avail.  In  January  1956,  on  DRV
urging,  Communist  China  requested  another  Geneva  Conference  to  deal  with
the  situation.  But  the  Geneva  Co-Chairmen,  the  USSR  and  the  UK,  responded
only  by  extending  the  functions  of  the  International  Control  Commission  beyond
its  1956  expiration  date.  By  early  1957,  partitioned  Vietnam  was  a  generally
accepted  modus  vivendi  throughout  the  international  community.  For  instance,
in  January  1957,  the  Soviet  Union  proposed  the  admission  of  both  the  GVN  and
the  DRV  to  the  United  Nations,  the  USSR  delegate  to  the  Security  Council  de-
claring that  "in  Vietnam  two  separate  States  existed,  which  differed  from  one
another  in  political  and  economic  structure.  .  .  ."  Thus,  reunification  through
elections  became  as  remote  a  prospect  in  Vietnam  as  in  Korea  or  Germany.  If
the  political  mechanism  for  reunifying  Vietnam  in  1956  proved  impractical,  the
blame  lies  at  least  in  part  with  the  Geneva  conferees  themselves,  who  postulated
an  ideal  political  settlement  incompatible  with  the  physical  and  psychological  dis-
memberment of  Vietnam  they  themselves  undertook  in  July  1954.

But  partition  was  not,  as  the  examples  of  Korea  and  Germany  demonstrate,
necessarily  tantamount  to  renewed  hostilities.  The  difference  was  that  in  Korea
and  Germany  international  forces  guarded  the  boundaries.  In  Vietnam,  the
withdrawal  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  prior  to  the  date  set  for  elections
in  1956  left  South  Vietnam  defenseless  except  for  such  forces  as  it  could  train
and  equip  with  U.S.  assistance.  The  vague  extending  of  the  SEATO  aegis  over
Vietnam  did  not  exert  the  same  stabilizing  influence  as  did  NATO's  Central
Army  Group  in  Germany,  or  the  United  Nations  Command  in  Korea.  Moreover,
neither  East  Germany  nor  North  Korea  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  a  politico-
mihtary  substructure  within  the  object  of  its  irredentism,  as  the  Viet  Minh  residue
provided  North  Vietnam.  The  absence  of  deterrent  force  in  South  Vietnam  in-
vited forceful  reunification;  the  southern  Viet  Minh  regroupees  in  the  North  and
their  comrades  in  the  South  made  it  possible.

Pursuant  to  the  "regroupment"  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords,  some  190,-
000  troops  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps,  and  900,000  civilians  moved  from
North  Vietnam  to  South  Vietnam;  more  than  100,000  Viet  Minh  soldiers  and
civilians  moved  from  South  to  North.  Both  nations  thereby  acquired  minorities
with  vital  interests  in  the  outcome  of  the  Geneva  Settlement.  In  both  nations,
the  regroupees  exerted  an  influence  over  subsequent  events  well  out  of  proportion
to  their  numbers.


248 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

In  North  Vietnam,  the  DRV  treated  the  southern  regroupees  from  the  outset
as  strategic  assets — the  young  afforded  special  schooHng,  the  able  assigned  to
separate  military  units.

The  southerners  in  the  North,  and  their  relatives  in  the  South,  formed,  with
the  remnants  of  the  Viet  Minh's  covert  network  in  South  Vietnam,  a  means
through  which  the  DRV  might  "struggle"  toward  reunification  regardless  of
Diem's  obduracy  or  U.S.  aid  for  South  Vietnam.  These  people  kept  open  the
DRV's  option  to  launch  aggression  without  transcending  a  "civil  war"  of  south-
erners against  southerners — no  doubt  an  important  consideration  with  the  United
States  as  a  potential  antagonist.  The  evidence  indicates  that,  at  least  through
1956,  Hanoi  did  not  expect  to  have  to  resort  to  force;  thereafter,  the  regroupees
occupied  increasing  prominence  in  DRV  plans.

For  Diem's  government,  refugees  from  the  North  were  important  for  three
reasons:  firstly,  they  provided  the  world  the  earliest  convincing  evidence  of  the
undemocratic  and  oppressive  nature  of  North  Vietnam's  regime.  Though  no
doubt  many  migrants  tied  North  Vietnam  for  vague  or  spurious  reasons,  it  was
plain  that  Ho's  Viet  Minh  were  widely  and  genuinely  feared,  and  many  refugees
took  flight  in  understandable  terror.  There  were  indications  that  the  DRV  force-
fully obstructed  the  migration  of  other  thousands  who  might  also  have  left  the
North.  In  1955  and  1956,  the  refugees  were  the  most  convincing  support  for
Diem's  argument  that  free  elections  were  impossible  in  the  DRV.

Secondly,  the  refugees  engaged  the  sympathies  of  the  American  people  as
few  developments  in  Vietnam  have  before  or  since,  and  solidly  underwrote  the
U.S.  decision  for  unstinting  support  of  Diem.  The  poignancy  of  hundreds  of
thousands  of  people  fleeing  their  homes  and  fortunes  to  escape  communist  tyr-
anny, well  journalized,  evoked  an  outpouring  of  U.S.  aid,  governmental  and
private.  The  U.S.  Navy  was  committed  to  succor  the  migrants,  lifting  over  300,-
000  persons  in  "Operation  EXODUS"  (in  which  Dr.  Tom  Dooley — then  a  naval
officer — won  fame).  U.S.  government-to-government  aid,  amounting  to  $100
per  refugee,  more  than  South  Vietnam's  annual  income  per  capita,  enabled
Diem's  government  to  provide  homes  and  food  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the
destitute,  and  American  charities  provided  millions  of  dollars  more  for  their
relief.  U.S.  officials  defending  American  aid  programs  could  point  with  pride
to  the  refugee  episode  to  demonstrate  the  special  eligibility  of  the  Vietnamese  for
U.S.  help,  including  an  early,  convincing  demonstration  that  Diem's  government
could  mount  an  effective  program  with  U.S.  aid.

Thirdly,  the  predominantly  Catholic  Tonkinese  refugees  provided  Diem  with
a  claque:  a  politically  malleable,  culturally  distinct  group,  wholly  distrustful  of
Ho  Chi  Minh  and  the  DRV,  dependent  for  subsistence  on  Diem's  government,
and  attracted  to  Diem  as  a  co-religionist.  Under  Diem's  mandarinal  regime,  they
were  less  important  as  dependable  votes  than  as  a  source  of  reliable  political  and
military  cadres.  Most  were  kept  unassimilated  in  their  own  communities,  and
became  prime  subjects  for  Diem's  experiments  with  strategic  population  reloca-
tion. One  heritage  of  Geneva  is  the  present  dominance  of  South  Vietnam's  gov-
ernment and  army  by  northerners.  The  refugees  catalyzed  Diem's  domestic  po-
litical rigidity,  his  high-handedness  with  the  U.S.,  and  his  unyielding  rejection
of  the  DRV  and  the  Geneva  Accords.

The  Geneva  Settlement  was  further  penalized  by  the  early  failure  of  the  "Inter-
national Supervisory  Commission"  established  by  the  Agreement  (Article  34)
and  cited  in  the  Conference  Declaration  (Article  7).  While  a  Joint  Commission
of  French  and  Viet  Minh  military  officers  was  set  up  to  deal  with  the  cease-fire
and  force  regroupment,  the  International  Commission  for  Supervision  and  Con-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  249

trol  (ICC),  furnished  by  Poland,  India,  and  Canada,  was  to  oversee  the  Accords
in  general.  Its  inability  to  cope  with  violations  of  the  Armistice  in  the  handling
of  would-be  migrants,  vociferously  proclaimed  in  both  Saigon  and  Hanoi,  im-
pugned its  competence  to  overwatch  the  general  free  elections,  for  which  it  was
also  to  be  responsible.

Equally  serious  for  the  Settlement,  the  ICC  was  expected  to  control  arms  and
guarantee  against  aggression.  The  armistice  agreement  signed  by  the  French  and
the  Viet  Minh,  and  affirmed  in  the  several  declarations  of  the  Geneva  Confer-
ence, included  four  main  provisions  for  arms  control:  (1)  arms,  bases,  and
armed  forces  were  to  be  fixed  at  the  level  existing  in  Vietnam  in  July  1954,  with
allowance  for  replacement  of  worn  or  damaged  equipment,  and  rotation  of  per-
sonnel; (2)  further  foreign  influences  were  to  be  excluded,  either  in  the  form
of  aUiances,  or  foreign  military  bases  established  in  either  North  or  South  Viet-
nam; (3)  neither  party  was  to  allow  its  zone  to  be  used  for  the  renewal  of  ag-
gression; and,  (4)  all  the  foregoing  were  to  be  overseen  by  the  ICC.  As  was  the
case  of  the  regroupment  provisions,  these  arrangements  operated  in  practice  to
the  detriment  of  the  political  solution  embodied  in  the  Accords,  for  the  ICC,
the  election  guardian,  was  soon  demonstrated  to  be  impotent.

The  level  of  arms  in  Vietnam  in  1954  was  unascertainable.  The  Viet  Minh
had  been  surreptitiously  armed,  principally  by  the  Chinese,  from  1950  onward.
That  Viet  Minh  forces  were  acquiring  large  amount  of  relatively  advanced
weaponry  was  fully  evident  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  but  neither  the  DRV  nor  its  allies
owned  to  this  military  assistance.  After  the  1954  armistice,  French,  U.S.,  and
British  intelligence  indicated  that  the  flow  of  arms  into  North  Vietnam  from
China  continued  on  a  scale  far  in  excess  of  "replacement"  needs.  Similarly,  while
U.S.  military  materiel  had  been  provided  to  the  French  more  openly,  no  one —
neither  the  French,  the  Vietnamese,  the  U.S.,  nor  certainly  the  ICC — knew  how
much  of  this  equipment  was  on  hand  and  serviceable  after  1954.  The  issue  of
arms  levels  was  further  complicated  by  regroupment,  French  withdrawals,  and
the  revamping  of  the  national  army  in  South  Vietnam.  The  ICC  could  determine
to  no  one's  satisfaction  whether  the  DRV  was  within  its  rights  to  upgrade  the
armament  of  the  irregulars  it  brought  out  of  South  Vietnam.  Similarly,  though
the  DRV  charged  repeatedly  that  the  U.S.  had  no  right  to  be  in  South  Vietnam
at  ah,  the  ICC  had  to  face  the  fact  that  U.S.  military  advisors  and  trainers  had
been  present  in  Vietnam  since  1950  under  a  pentilateral  agreement  with  Laos,
Cambodia,  Vietnam,  and  France.  If  France  withdrew  its  cadres  in  Vietnamese
units,  could  they  not  be  "replaced"  by  Americans?  And  if  the  French  were
withdrawing  both  men  and  equipment  in  large  quantities,  did  not  Vietnam  have
a  right  under  the  Accords  to  replace  them  in  kind  with  its  own,  American-
equipped  formations?  To  DRV  charges  and  GVN  countercharges,  it  could  reply
with  legalistic  interpretations,  but  it  found  it  virtually  impossible  to  collect  facts,
or  exercise  more  than  vague  influence  over  U.S.,  GVN,  or  DRV  policy.  The
only  major  example  of  U.S.'  ignoring  the  ICC  was  the  instance  of  the  U.S.
Training  and  Equipment  Recovery  Mission  (TERM),  350  men  ostensibly  de-
ployed to  Vietnam  in  1956  to  aid  the  Vietnamese  in  recovering  equipment  left
by  the  French,  but  also  directed  to  act  as  an  extension  of  the  existing  MAAG
by  training  Vietnamese  in  logistics.  TERM  was  introduced  without  ICC  sanction,
although  subsequently  the  ICC  accepted  its  presence.

The  question  of  military  bases  was  similarly  occluded.  The  DRV  protested
repeatedly  that  the  U.S.  was  transforming  South  Vietnam  into  a  military  base  for
the  prosecution  of  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia.  In  fact,  as  ICC  investigation
subsequently  established,  there  was  no  wholly  U.S.  base  anywhere  in  South


250 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Vietnam.  It  was  evident,  however,  that  the  South  Vietnamese  government  had
made  available  to  the  U.S.  some  portions  of  existing  air  and  naval  facilities —
e.g.,  at  Tan  Son  Nhut,  Bien  Hoa,  and  Nha  Be — for  the  use  of  MAAG  and
TERM.  ICC  access  to  these  facilities  was  restricted,  and  the  ICC  was  never  able
to  determine  what  the  U.S.  was  shipping  through  them,  either  personnel  or
materiel.  By  the  same  token,  ICC  access  to  DRV  airports,  rail  terminals,  and
seaports  was  severely  limited,  and  its  ability  to  confirm  or  deny  allegations  con-
cerning the  rearming  of  the  People's  Army  of  Vietnam  correspondingly  circum-
scribed. International  apprehensions  over  arms  levels  and  potential  bases  for
aggression  were  heightened  by  statements  anticipating  South  Vietnam's  active
participation  in  SEATO,  or  pronouncements  of  DRV  solidarity  with  China  and
Russia.

Not  until  1959  and  1961  did  the  ICC  publish  reports  attempting  to  answer
directly  DRV  charges  that  the  U.S.  and  South  Vietnam  were  flagrantly  violating
the  arms  control  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords.  Similarly,  though  in  its
Tenth  and  Eleventh  Interim  Reports  (1960  and  1961)  the  ICC  noted  "the  con-
cern which  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  has  been  expressing  over  the  problem  of
subversion  in  South  Vietnam,"  it  did  not  mention  that  those  expressions  of  con-
cern had  been  continuous  since  1954,  or  attempt  to  publish  a  factual  study  of
that  problem  until  June  1962.  In  both  cases,  the  ICC  was  overtaken  by  events:
by  late  1960,  international  tensions  were  beyond  any  ability  of  the  ICC  to  provide
reassurances,  and  the  U.S.  was  faced  with  the  decision  whether  to  commit  major
resources  to  the  conflict  in  South  Vietnam.

The  Geneva  Settlement  thus  failed  to  provide  lasting  peace  because  it  was,  as
U.S.  National  Security  Council  papers  of  1956  and  1958  aptly  termed  it,  "only
a  truce."  It  failed  to  settle  the  role  of  the  U.S.  or  of  the  Saigon  government,  or,
indeed,  of  France  in  Vietnam.  It  failed  because  it  created  two  antagonist  Viet-
namese nations.  It  failed  because  the  Geneva  powers  were  unwilling  or  unable
to  concert  follow-up  action  in  Vietnam  to  supervise  effectively  observance  of  the
Accords,  or  to  dampen  the  mounting  tension.  Mutual  distrust  led  to  incremental
violations  by  both  sides,  but  on  balance,  though  neither  the  United  States  nor
South  Vietnam  was  fully  cooperative,  and  though  both  acted  as  they  felt  neces-
sary to  protect  their  interests,  both  considered  themselves  constrained  by  the
Accords.  There  is  no  evidence  that  either  deliberately  undertook  to  breach  the
peace.  In  contrast,  the  DRV  proceeded  to  mobilize  its  total  societal  resources
scarcely  without  pause  from  the  day  the  peace  was  signed,  as  though  to  sub-
stantiate the  declaration  of  its  Deputy  Premier,  Pham  Van  Dong,  at  the  closing
session  of  the  Geneva  Conference:

We  shall  achieve  unity.  We  shall  achieve  it  just  as  we  have  won  the  war.
No  force  in  the  world,  internal  or  external,  can  make  us  deviate  from  our
path  .  .  .

Diem's  rejection  of  elections  meant  that  reunification  could  be  achieved  in
the  foreseeable  future  only  by  resort  to  force.  Diem's  policy,  and  U.S.  support  of
it,  led  inevitably  to  a  test  of  strength  with  the  DRV  to  determine  whether  the
GVN's  cohesiveness,  with  U.S.  support,  could  offset  North  Vietnam's  drive  to
satisfy  its  unrequited  nationalism  and  expansionism.

REVOLT  AGAINST  MY-DIEM

By  the  time  President  Kennedy  came  to  office  in  1961,  it  was  plain  that  sup-
port for  the  Saigon  government  among  South  Vietnam's  peasants — 90%  of  the


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  251

population — was  weak  and  waning.  The  Manifesto  of  the  National  Liberation
Front,  published  in  December  1960,  trumpeted  the  existence  of  a  revolutionary
organization  which  could  channel  popular  discontent  into  a  political  program.
Increasingly  Diem's  government  proved  inept  in  dealing  either  through  its  public
administration  with  the  sources  of  popular  discontent,  or  through  its  security
apparatus  with  the  Viet  Cong.  Diem's  government  and  his  party  were  by  that
time  manifestly  out  of  touch  with  the  people,  and  into  the  gap  between  the
government  and  the  populace  the  Viet  Cong  had  successfully  driven.  When  and
why  this  gap  developed  is  crucial  to  an  understanding  of  who  the  Viet  Cong
were,  and  to  what  extent  they  represented  South  as  opposed  to  North  Viet-
namese interests.

The  U.S.  Government,  in  its  White  Papers  on  Vietnam  of  1961  and  1965,
has  blamed  the  insurgency  on  aggression  by  Hanoi,  holding  that  the  Viet  Cong
were  always  tools  of  the  DRV.  Critics  of  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam  usually  hold,
to  the  contrary,  that  the  war  was  started  by  South  Vietnamese;  their  counter-
arguments rest  on  two  propositions:  (1)  that  the  insurgency  began  as  a  rebellion
against  the  oppressive  and  clumsy  government  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem;  and  (2)  that
only  after  it  became  clear,  in  late  1960,  that  the  U.S.  would  commit  massive
resources  to  succor  Diem  in  his  internal  war,  was  the  DRV  impelled  to  unleash
the  South  Vietnamese  Viet  Minh  veterans  evacuated  to  North  Vietnam  after
Geneva.  French  analysts  have  long  been  advancing  such  interpretations;  Amer-
ican protagonists  for  them  often  quote,  for  example,  Philippe  Devillers,  who
wrote  in  1962  that:

...  In  1959,  responsible  elements  of  the  Communist  Resistance  in  Indo-
China  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  had  to  act,  whether  Hanoi  wanted
them  to  or  no.  They  could  no  longer  continue  to  stand  by  while  their  sup-
porters were  arrested,  thrown  into  prison  and  tortured,  without  attempting
to  do  anything  about  it  as  an  organization,  without  giving  some  lead  to  the
people  in  the  struggle  in  which  it  was  to  be  involved.  Hanoi  preferred  diplo-
matic notes,  but  it  was  to  find  that  its  hand  had  been  forced.

Devillers  related  how  in  March  1960  the  "Nambo  Veterans  of  the  Resistance
Association"  issued  a  declaration  appealing  for  "struggle"  to  "liberate  themselves
from  submission  to  America,  eliminate  all  U.S.  bases  in  South  Vietnam,  expel
American  military  advisors  .  .  ."  and  to  end  "the  colonial  regime  and  the  fascist
dictatorship  of  the  Ngo  family."  Shortly  thereafter,  according  to  Devillers,  a
People's  Liberation  Army  appeared  in  Cochinchina  and:

From  this  time  forward  it  carried  on  incessant  guerrilla  operations  against
Diem's  forces.

It  was  thus  by  its  home  policy  that  the  government  of  the  South  finally
destroyed  the  confidence  of  the  population,  which  it  had  won  during  the
early  years,  and  practically  drove  them  into  revolt  and  desperation.  The
non-Communist  (and  even  the  anti-Communist)  opposition  had  long  been
aware  of  the  turn  events  were  taking.  But  at  the  beginning  of  1960  very
many  elements,  both  civilian  and  military,  in  the  Nationalist  camp  came  to
a  clear  realization  that  things  were  moving  from  bad  to  worse,  and  that  if
nothing  were  done  to  put  an  end  to  the  absolute  power  of  Diem,  then
Communism  would  end  up  by  gaining  power  with  the  aid,  or  at  least  with
the  consent,  of  the  population.  If  they  did  not  want  to  allow  the  Communists


252 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

to  make  capital  out  of  the  revolt,  then  they  would  have  to  oppose  Diem
actively.  .  .  .

Based  on  a  similar  analysis,  Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,  held  that:

Diem's  authoritarianism,  which  increasingly  involved  manhunts,  po-
litical reeducation  camps,  and  the  "regroupment"  of  population,  caused
spreading  discontent  and  then  armed  resistance  on  the  countryside.  It  is
not  easy  to  disentangle  the  events  of  these  murky  years;  but  few  scholars
believe  that  the  growing  resistance  was  at  the  start  organized  or  directed
by  Hanoi.  Indeed,  there  is  some  indication  that  the  Communists  at  first
hung  back  ...  it  was  not  until  September,  1960  that  the  Communist  Party
of  North  Vietnam  bestowed  its  formal  blessing  and  called  for  the  libera-
tion of  the  south  from  American  imperialism.

Events  in  Vietnam  in  the  years  1954  to  1960  were  indeed  murky.  The  Diem
government  controlled  the  press  tightly,  and  discouraged  realism  in  reports  from
its  provincial  bureaucracy.  Even  official  U.S.  estimates  were  handicapped  by
reliance  upon  GVN  sources  for  inputs  from  the  grass  roots  of  Vietnamese  so-
ciety, the  rural  villages,  since  the  U.S.  advisory  effort  was  then  largely  confined
to  top  levels  of  the  GVN  and  its  armed  forces.  But  enough  evidence  has  now
accumulated  to  establish  that  peasant  resentment  against  Diem  was  extensive
and  well  founded.  Moreover,  it  is  clear  that  dislike  of  the  Diem  government  was
coupled  with  resentment  toward  Americans.  For  many  Vietnamese  peasants,  the
War  of  Resistance  against  French-Bao  Dai  rule  never  ended;  France  was  merely
replaced  by  the  U.S.,  and  Bao  Dai's  mantle  was  transferred  to  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.
The  Viet  Cong's  opprobrious  catchword  "My-Diem"  (American-Diem)  thus
recaptured  the  nationalist  mystique  of  the  First  Indochina  War,  and  combined
the  natural  xenophobia  of  the  rural  Vietnamese  with  their  mounting  dislike  of
Diem.  But  Viet  Cong  slogans  aside,  in  the  eyes  of  many  Vietnamese  of  no  par-
ticular political  persuasion,  the  United  States  was  reprehensible  as  a  modernizing
force  in  a  thoroughly  traditional  society,  as  the  provider  of  arms  and  money
for  a  detested  government,  and  as  an  alien,  disruptive  influence  upon  hopes  they
held  for  the  Geneva  Setdement.  As  far  as  attitudes  toward  Diem  were  con-
cerned, the  prevalence  of  his  picture  throughout  Vietnam  virtually  assured  his
being  accepted  as  the  sponsor  of  the  frequently  corrupt  and  cruel  local  officials
of  the  GVN,  and  the  perpetrator  of  unpopular  GVN  programs,  especially  the
population  relocation  schemes,  and  the  "Communist  Denunciation  Campaign."
Altogether,  Diem  promised  the  farmers  much,  delivered  little,  and  raised  not  only
their  expectations,  but  their  fears.

It  should  be  recognized,  however,  that  whatever  his  people  thought  of  him,
Ngo  Dinh  Diem  really  did  accomplish  miracles,  just  as  his  American  boosters
said  he  did.  He  took  power  in  1954  amid  political  chaos,  and  within  ten  months
surmounted  attempted  coups  d'etat  from  within  his  army  and  rebellions  by  dis-
parate irregulars.  He  consolidated  his  regime  while  providing  creditably  for  an
influx  of  nearly  one  million  destitute  refugees  from  North  Vietnam;  and  he  did
all  of  this  despite  active  French  opposition  and  vacillating  American  support.
Under  his  leadership  South  Vietnam  became  well  established  as  a  sovereign
state,  by  1955  recognized  de  jure  by  36  other  nations.  Moreover,  by  mid-1955
Diem  secured  the  strong  backing  of  the  U.S.  He  conducted  a  plebiscite  in  late
1955,  in  which  an  overwhelming  vote  was  recorded  for  him  in  preference  to
Bao  Dai;  during  1956,  he  installed  a  government — representative  in  form,  at
least — drafted  a  new  constitution,  and  extended  GVN  control  to  regions  that


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  253

had  been  under  sect  or  Viet  Minh  rule  for  a  decade;  and  he  pledged  to  initiate
extensive  reforms  in  land  holding,  public  health,  and  education.  With  American
help,  he  established  a  truly  national,  modern  army,  and  formed  rural  security
forces  to  police  the  countryside.  In  accomplishing  all  the  foregoing,  he  con-
founded those  Vietnamese  of  North  and  South,  and  those  French,  who  had
looked  for  his  imminent  downfall.

While  it  is  true  that  his  reforms  entailed  oppressive  measures — e.g.,  his  "po-
litical reeducation  centers"  were  in  fact  little  more  than  concentration  camps  for
potential  foes  of  the  government — his  regime  compared  favorably  with  other
Asian  governments  of  the  same  period  in  its  respect  for  the  person  and  property
of  citizens.  There  is  much  that  can  be  offered  in  mitigation  of  Diem's  au-
thoritarianism. He  began  as  the  most  singularly  disadvantaged  head  of  state  of
his  era.  His  political  legacy  was  endemic  violence  and  virulent  anti-colonialism.
He  took  office  at  a  time  when  the  government  of  Vietnam  controlled  only  a
few  blocks  of  downtown  Saigon;  the  rest  of  the  capital  was  the  feudal  fief  of
the  Binh  Xuyen  gangster  fraternity.  Beyond  the  environs  of  Saigon,  South  Viet-
nam lay  divided  among  the  Viet  Minh  enclaves  and  the  theocratic  dominions
of  the  Cao  Dai  and  the  Hoa  Hao  sects.  All  these  powers  would  have  opposed
any  Saigon  government,  whatever  its  composition;  in  fact,  their  existence  ac-
counts for  much  of  the  confidence  the  DRV  then  exhibited  toward  the  outcome
of  the  Geneva  Settlement.  For  Diem  to  have  erected  any  central  government
in  South  Vietnam  without  reckoning  resolutely  with  their  several  armed  forces
and  clandestine  organizations  would  have  been  impossible:  they  were  the  very
stuff  of  South  Vietnam's  politics.

Diem's  initial  political  tests  reinforced  his  propensity  to  inflexibility.  The  les-
sons of  his  first  10  months  of  rule  must  have  underscored  to  Diem  the  value  of
swift,  tough  action  against  dissent,  and  of  demanding  absolute  personal  loyalty  of
top  officials.  Also,  by  May  1955,  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  had  demonstrated  to  his  satis-
faction that  the  U.S.  was  sufficiently  committed  to  South  Vietnam  that  he  could
afford  on  occasion  to  resist  American  pressure,  and  even  to  ignore  American
advice.  Diem  knew,  as  surely  as  did  the  United  States,  that  he  himself  represented
the  only  alternative  to  a  communist  South  Vietnam.

Diem  was  handicapped  in  all  his  attempts  to  build  a  nation  by  his  political
concepts.  He  had  the  extravagant  expectations  of  a  Rousseau,  and  he  acted
with  the  zeal  of  a  Spanish  Inquisitor.  Despite  extensive  travel  and  education
in  the  West,  and  despite  his  revolutionary  mien,  he  remained  what  he  had  been
raised:  a  mandarin  of  Imperial  Hue,  steeped  in  filial  piety,  devoted  to  Vietnam's
past,  modern  only  to  the  extent  of  an  intense,  conservative  Catholicism.  The
political  apparatus  he  created  to  extend  his  power  and  implement  his  pro-
grams reflected  his  background,  personality,  and  experience:  a  rigidly  organized,
over-centralized  familial  oligarchy.  Though  his  brothers,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  and
Ngo  Dinh  Can,  created  extensive  personal  political  organizations  of  considerable
power — Nhu's  semi-covert  Can  Lao  party  borrowed  heavily  from  communist
doctrine  and  technique — and  though  a  third  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Thuc,  was  the
ranking  Catholic  bishop,  in  no  sense  did  they  or  Diem  ever  acquire  a  broad
popular  base  for  his  government.  Diem's  personality  and  his  political  methods
practically  assured  that  he  would  remain  distant,  virtually  isolated  from  the
peasantry.  They  also  seem  to  have  predetermined  that  Diem's  political  history
over  the  long-run  would  be  a  chronicle  of  disaffection:  Diem  alienated  one  after
another  of  the  key  groups  within  South  Vietnam's  society  until,  by  late  1960,  his
regime  rested  on  the  narrow  and  disintegrating  base  of  its  own  bureaucracy  and
the  northern  refugees.


254 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Such  need  not  have  been  the  case.  At  least  through  1957,  Diem  and  his  gov-
ernment enjoyed  marked  success  with  fairly  sophisticated  pacification  programs
in  the  countryside.  In  fact,  Diem  at  first  was  warmly  welcomed  in  some  former
Viet  Minh  domains,  and  it  is  probable  that  a  more  sensitive  and  adroit  leader
could  have  captured  and  held  a  significant  rural  following.  Even  the  failure  of
the  Geneva  Accords  to  eventuate  in  general  elections  in  1956  at  first  had  little
impact  upon  GVN  pacification.  The  strident  declamations  of  the  DRV  notwith-
standing, reunification  of  partitioned  Vietnam  was  not  at  first  a  vital  political
issue  for  South  Vietnam's  peasants.  By  and  large,  as  late  as  1961  as  Devillers
pointed  out:

For  the  people  of  the  South  reunification  is  not  an  essential  problem.
Peace,  security,  freedom,  their  standard  of  living,  the  agrarian  question —
these  are  far  more  important  questions  to  them.  The  stronghold  of  the  sects
over  certain  regions  remains  one  of  the  factors  of  the  situation,  as  is  also,
in  a  general  fashion,  the  distrustful  attitude  of  the  Southerner  towards  the
Northerner,  who  is  suspected  of  a  tendency  to  want  to  take  charge  of  affairs.

The  initial  GVN  pacification  effort  combined  promises  of  governmental  level
reforms  with  "civic  action"  in  the  hamlets  and  villages.  The  latter  was  carried
out  by  "cadre"  clad  in  black  pajamas,  implementing  the  Maoist  "three-withs"
doctrine  (eat  with,  sleep  with,  work  with  the  people)  to  initiate  rudimentary
improvements  in  public  health,  education,  and  local  government,  and  to  propa-
gandize the  promises  of  the  central  government.  Unfortunately  for  Diem,  his
civic  action  teams  had  to  be  drawn  from  the  northern  refugees,  and  encoun-
tered Cochinchinese-Tonkinese  tensions.  More  importantly,  however,  they  in-
curred the  enmity  of  the  several  Saigon  ministries  upon  whose  field  responsibili-
ties they  impinged.  Moreover,  they  became  preoccupied  with  Diem's  anti-com-
munist campaign  to  the  detriment  of  their  social  service.  By  the  end  of  1956,  the
civic  action  component  of  the  GVN  pacification  program  had  been  cut  back
severely.

But  the  salesmen  were  less  at  fault  than  their  product.  Diem's  reform  pack-
age compared  unfavorably  even  in  theory  with  what  the  Viet  Minh  had  done
by  way  of  rural  reform.  Diem  undertook  to:  (1)  resettle  refugees  and  other
land  destitute  Vietnamese  on  uncultivated  land  beginning  in  1955;  (2)  expro-
priate all  rice  land  holdings  over  247  acres  and  redistribute  these  to  tenant  farm-
ers beginning  in  1956;  and  (3)  regulate  landlord-tenant  relations  beginning  in
1957  to  fix  rents  within  the  range  15-25%  of  crop  yield,  and  to  guarantee
tenant  land  tenure  for  3-5  years.  Despite  invidious  comparison  with  Viet  Minh
rent-free  land,  had  these  programs  been  honestly  and  efficiently  implemented,
they  might  have  satisfied  the  land-hunger  of  the  peasants.  But  they  suffered,
as  one  American  expert  put  it  from  "lack  of  serious,  interested  administrators
and  top  side  command."  Government  officials,  beginning  with  the  Minister  for
Agrarian  Reform,  had  divided  loyalties,  being  themselves  land  holders.  More-
over, the  programs  often  operated  to  replace  paternalistic  landlords  with  com-
petitive bidding,  and  thus  increased,  rather  than  decreased,  tenant  insecurity.
And  even  if  all  Diem's  goals  had  been  honestly  fulfilled — which  they  were  not —
only  20%  of  the  rice  land  would  have  passed  from  large  to  small  farmers.  As
it  turned  out,  only  10%  of  all  tenant  farmers  benefited  in  any  sense.  By  1959,
the  land  reform  program  was  virtually  inoperative.  As  of  1960,  45%  of  the
land  remained  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  2%  of  landowners,  and  15%  of
the  landlords  owned  75%  of  all  the  land.  Those  relatively  few  farmers  who  did


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  255

benefit  from  the  program  were  more  often  than  not  northerners,  refugees,  Catho-
lics, or  Annamese — so  that  land  reform  added  to  the  GVN's  aura  of  favoritism
which  deepened  peasant  alienation  in  Cochinchina.  Farmer-GVN  tensions  were
further  aggravated  by  rumors  of  corruption,  and  the  widespread  allegation  that
the  Diem  family  itself  had  become  enriched  through  the  manipulation  of  land
transfers.

Diem's  whole  rural  policy  furnishes  one  example  after  another  of  political
maladroitness.  In  June  1956,  Diem  abolished  elections  for  village  councils,  ap-
parently out  of  concern  that  large  numbers  of  Viet  Minh  might  win  office.  By
replacing  the  village  notables  with  GVN  appointed  officials.  Diem  swept  away
the  traditional  administrative  autonomy  of  the  village  officials,  and  took  upon
himself  and  his  government  the  onus  for  whatever  corruption  and  injustice
subsequently  developed  at  that  level.  Again,  the  GVN  appointees  to  village
office  were  outsiders — northerners,  Catholics,  or  other  "dependable"  persons —
and  their  alien  presence  in  the  midst  of  the  close-knit  rural  communities  en-
couraged revival  of  the  conspiratorial,  underground  politics  to  which  the  villages
had  become  accustomed  during  the  resistance  against  the  French.

But  conspiracy  was  almost  a  natural  defense  after  Diem  launched  his  De-
nunciation of  Communists  Campaign,  which  included  a  scheme  for  classifying
the  populace  into  lettered  political  groups  according  to  their  connections  with
the  Viet  Minh.  This  campaign,  which  featured  public  confessions  reminiscent
of  the  "people's  courts"  of  China  and  North  Vietnam,  invited  neighbors  to
inform  on  each  other,  and  raised  further  the  premium  on  clandestine  political
activity.  In  1956,  the  GVN  disclosed  that  some  15-20,000  communists  had
been  detained  in  its  "political  reeducation  centers,"  while  Devillers  put  the
figure  at  50,000.  By  GVN  figures  in  1960,  nearly  50,000  had  been  detained.  A
British  expert  on  Vietnam,  P.  J.  Honey,  who  was  invited  by  Diem  to  investigate
the  reeducation  centers  in  1959,  concluded  that,  after  interviewing  a  number
of  rural  Vietnamese,  "the  consensus  of  the  opinion  expressed  by  these  peoples
is  that  .  .  .  the  majority  of  the  detainees  are  neither  communists  nor  pro-com-
munists." Between  1956  and  1960,  the  GVN  claimed  that  over  100,000  former
communist  cadres  rallied  to  the  GVN,  and  thousands  of  other  communist  agents
had  surrendered  or  had  been  captured.  The  campaign  also  allegedly  netted  over
100,000  weapons  and  3,000  arms  caches.  Whatever  it  contributed  to  GVN
internal  security,  however,  the  Communist  Denunciation  Campaign  thoroughly
terrified  the  Vietnamese  peasants,  and  detracted  significantly  from  the  regime's
popularity.

Diem's  nearly  paranoid  preoccupation  with  security  influenced  his  popula-
tion relocation  schemes.  Even  the  refugee  relief  programs  had  been  executed
with  an  eye  to  building  a  "living  wall"  between  the  lowland  centers  of  popula-
tion and  the  jungle  and  mountain  redoubts  of  dissidents.  Between  April  1957
and  late  1961,  the  GVN  reported  that  over  200,000  persons — refugees  and
landless  families  from  coastal  Annam — were  resettled  in  147  centers  carved  from
220,000  acres  of  wilderness.  These  "strategic"  settlements  were  expensive:  al-
though they  affected  only  2%  of  South  Vietnam's  people,  they  absorbed  50%
of  U.S.  aid  for  agriculture.  They  also  precipitated  unexpected  political  reactions
from  the  Montagnard  peoples  of  the  Highlands.  In  the  long  run,  by  introducing
ethnic  Vietnamese  into  traditionally  Montagnard  areas,  and  then  by  concen-
trating Montagnards  into  defensible  communities,  the  GVN  provided  the  tribes
with  a  cause  and  focused  their  discontent  against  Diem.  The  GVN  thus  facili-
tated rather  than  hindered  the  subsequent  subversion  of  the  tribes  by  the  Viet
Cong.  But  of  all  Diem's  relocation  experiments,  that  which  occasioned  the  most


256 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

widespread  and  vehement  anti-GVN  sentiment  was  the  "agroville"  program  be-
gun in  mid- 1959.  At  first,  the  GVN  tried  to  establish  rural  communities  which
segregated  families  with  known  Viet  Cong  or  Viet  Minh  connections  from  other
citizens,  but  the  public  outcry  caused  this  approach  to  be  dropped.  A  few  months
later,  the  GVN  announced  its  intent  to  build  80  "prosperity  and  density  centers"
along  a  "strategic  route  system."  By  the  end  of  1963,  each  of  these  80  agrovilles
was  to  hold  some  400  families,  and  each  would  have  a  group  of  satellite  agro-
villes of  120  families  each.  In  theory,  the  agroville  master  plan  was  attractive:
there  were  provisions  for  community  defense,  schools,  dispensary,  market  cen-
ter, public  garden,  and  even  electricity.  Despite  these  advantages,  however,  the
whole  program  incurred  the  wrath  of  the  peasants.  They  resented  the  corvee
labor  the  GVN  resorted  to  for  agroville  construction,  and  they  abhorred  aban-
doning their  cherished  ancestral  homes,  tombs,  and  developed  gardens  and  fields
for  a  strange  and  desolate  community.  Passive  peasant  resistance,  and  then  in-
surgent attacks  on  the  agrovilles,  caused  abandonment  of  the  program  in  early
1961  when  it  was  less  than  25%  complete.

Yet,  for  all  Diem's  preoccupation  with  rural  security,  he  poorly  provided  for
police  and  intelligence  in  the  countryside.  Most  of  the  American  aid  the  GVN
received  was  used  for  security,  and  the  bulk  of  it  was  lavished  on  the  Army
of  Vietnam.  Security  in  the  villages  was  relegated  to  the  Self-Defense  Corps
(SDC)  and  the  Civil  Guard  (CG) — poorly  trained  and  equipped,  miserably
led.  They  could  scarcely  defend  themselves,  much  less  secure  the  farmers.  In-
deed, they  proved  to  be  an  asset  to  insurgents  in  two  ways:  they  served  as  a
source  of  weapons;  and  their  brutality,  petty  thievery,  and  disorderliness  induced
innumerable  villagers  to  join  in  open  revolt  against  the  GVN.  The  Army  of
Vietnam,  after  1956,  was  withdrawn  from  the  rural  regions  to  undergo  reorgani-
zation and  modernization  under  its  American  advisors.  Its  interaction  with  the
rural  populace  through  1959  was  relatively  slight.  The  SDC  and  CG,  placed
at  the  disposal  of  the  provincial  administrators,  were  often  no  more  venal  nor
offensive  to  the  peasants  than  the  local  officials  themselves,  but  the  corrupt,
arrogant  and  overbearing  men  the  people  knew  as  the  GVN  were  among  the
greatest  disadvantages  Diem  faced  in  his  rural  efforts.

Nor  was  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  successful  in  exercising  effective  leadership  over
the  Vietnamese  urban  population  or  its  intellectuals.  Just  as  Diem  and  his
brothers  made  the  mistake  of  considering  all  former  Viet  Minh  communists,
they  erred  in  condemning  all  non-Diemist  nationalists  as  tools  of  Bao  Dai  or
the  French.  The  Diem  family  acted  to  circumscribe  all  political  activity  and
even  criticism  not  sanctioned  by  the  oligarchy.  In  late  1957,  newspapers  critical
of  the  regime  began  to  be  harassed,  and  in  March  1958,  after  a  caustic  editorial,
the  GVN  closed  down  the  largest  newspaper  in  Saigon.  Attempts  to  form  op-
position political  parties  for  participation  in  the  national  assembly  met  vague
threats  and  bureaucratic  impediments.  In  1958,  opposition  politicians  risked
arrest  for  assaying  to  form  parties  unauthorized  by  Nhu  or  Can,  and  by  1959
all  opposition  political  activity  had  come  to  a  halt.  In  the  spring  of  1960,  how-
ever, a  group  of  non-communist  nationalist  leaders  came  together — with  more
courage  than  prudence — to  issue  the  Caravelle  Manifesto,  a  recital  of  grievances
against  the  Diem  regime.  Eleven  of  the  18  signers  had  been  cabinet  members
under  Diem  or  Bao  Dai;  4  had  been  in  other  high  government  positions,  and
others  represented  religious  groups.  Their  manifesto  lauded  Diem  for  the
progress  that  he  had  made  in  the  aftermath  of  Geneva,  but  pointed  out  that  his
repressions  in  recent  years  had  "provoked  the  discouragement  and  resentment  of
the  people."  They  noted  that  "the  size  of  the  territory  has  shrunk,  but  the  num-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  257

ber  of  civil  servants  has  increased  and  still  the  work  doesn't  get  done";  they
applauded  the  fact  that  "the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  has  left  the  country
and  a  Republican  Army  has  been  constituted,  thanks  to  American  aid,"  but
deplored  the  fact  that  the  Diem  influence  "divides  the  men  of  one  and  the  same
unit,  sows  distrust  between  friends  of  the  same  rank,  and  uses  as  a  criterion
for  promotion  fidelity  to  the  party  in  blind  submission  to  its  leaders";  they
described,  despairingly,  "a  rich  and  fertile  country  enjoying  food  surpluses"
where  "at  the  present  time  many  people  are  out  of  work,  have  no  roof  over
their  heads,  and  no  money."  They  went  on  to  "beseech  the  government  to
urgently  modify  its  policies."  While  the  Caravelle  Manifesto  thoroughly  fright-
ened Diem,  coming,  as  it  did,  three  days  after  Syngman  Rhee  was  overthrown
in  Korea,  it  prompted  him  only  to  further  measures  to  quell  the  loyal  opposition.
By  the  fall  of  1960,  the  intellectual  elite  of  South  Vietnam  was  politically  mute;
labor  unions  were  impotent;  loyal  opposition  in  the  form  of  organized  parties
did  not  exist.  In  brief,  Diem's  policies  virtually  assured  that  political  challenges
to  him  would  have  to  be  extra-legal.  Ultimately,  these  emerged  from  the  tradi-
tional sources  of  power  in  South  Vietnam — the  armed  forces,  the  religious  sects,
and  the  armed  peasantry.

Through  1960,  the  only  serious  threats  to  Diem  from  inside  the  GVN  were
attempted  military  coups  d'etat.  In  his  first  10  months  in  office,  Diem  had
identified  loyalty  in  his  top  army  commanders  as  a  sine  qua  non  for  his  survival.
Thereafter  he  took  a  personal  interest  in  the  positioning  and  promoting  of
officers,  and  even  in  matters  of  military  strategy  and  tactics.  Many  of  Viet-
nam's soldiers  found  Diem's  attentions  a  means  to  political  power,  wealth,  and
social  prominence.  Many  others,  however,  resented  those  who  rose  by  favoritism,
and  objected  to  Diem's  interference  in  military  matters.  In  November  1960,  a
serious  coup  attempt  was  supported  by  three  elite  paratroop  battalions  in  Saigon,
but  otherwise  failed  to  attract  support.  In  the  wake  of  the  coup,  mass  arrests
took  place  in  which  the  Caravelle  Group,  among  others,  were  jailed.  In  Febru-
ary 1962,  two  Vietnamese  air  force  planes  bombed  the  presidential  palace  in
an  unsuccessful  assassination  attempt  on  Diem  and  the  Nhus.  Again,  there  was
little  apparent  willingness  among  military  officers  for  concerted  action  against
Diem.  But  the  abortive  attempts  of  1960  and  1962  had  the  effect  of  dramatizing
the  choices  open  to  those  military  officers  who  recognized  the  insolvency  of
Diem's  political  and  military  policies.

Diem's  handling  of  his  military  impinged  in  two  ways  on  his  rural  policy.
Diem  involved  himself  with  the  equipping  of  his  military  forces  showing  a  dis-
tinct proclivity  toward  heavy  military  forces  of  the  conventional  type.  He  wanted
the  Civil  Guard  equipped  very  much  like  his  regular  army — possibly  with  a
view  to  assuring  himself  a  check  on  army  power.  There  were  a  few  soldiers,
like  General  Duong  Van  Minh,  who  sharply  disagreed  with  the  President  on
this  point.  Nonetheless,  Diem  persisted.  His  increasing  concern  for  the  loyalty
of  key  officials,  moreover,  led  him  to  draw  upon  the  military  officer  corps  for
civil  administrators.  From  1956  on  his  police  apparatus  was  under  military
officers,  and  year  by  year,  more  of  the  provincial  governments  were  also  placed
under  military  men.  By  1958,  about  V3  of  the  province  chiefs  were  military
officers;  by  1960,  that  fraction  had  increased  to  nearly  V3\  by  1962,  %  of  all
provinces  were  headed  by  soldiers.

Diem's  bete  noire  was  communism,  and  he  appealed  to  threats  from  com-
munists to  justify  his  concentration  on  internal  security.  In  August  1956,  GVN
Ordinance  47  defined  being  a  communist,  or  working  for  them,  as  a  capital
crime.  In  May  1959,  by  GVN  Law  10/59,  the  enforcement  of  Ordinance  47


258 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

was  charged  to  special  military  tribunals  from  whose  decisions  there  was  no
appeal.  But  "communist"  was  a  term  not  used  by  members  of  the  Marxist-
Leninist  Party  headed  by  Ho  Chi  Minh,  or  its  southern  arms.  Beginning  in  1956,
the  Saigon  press  began  to  refer  to  "Viet  Cong,"  a  fairly  precise  and  not  neces-
sarily disparaging  rendition  of  "Vietnamese  Communist."  There  is  little  doubt
that  Diem  and  his  government  applied  the  term  Viet  Cong  somewhat  loosely
within  South  Vietnam  to  mean  all  persons  or  groups  who  resorted  to  clandestine
political  activity  or  armed  opposition  against  his  government;  and  the  GVN
meant  by  the  term  North  as  well  as  South  Vietnamese  communists,  who  they
presumed  acted  in  concert.  At  the  close  of  the  Franco- Viet  Minh  War  in  1954,
some  60,000  men  were  serving  in  organized  Viet  Minh  units  in  South  Vietnam.
For  the  regroupments  to  North  Vietnam,  these  units  were  augmented  with  large
numbers  of  young  recruits;  a  reported  90,000  armed  men  were  taken  to  North
Vietnam  in  the  regroupment,  while  the  U.S.  and  the  GVN  estimated  that  from
5-10,000  trained  men  were  left  behind  as  "cadre."  If  French  estimates  are
correct  that  in  1954  the  Viet  Minh  controlled  over  60-90%  of  rural  South
Vietnam  outside  the  sect  domains,  these  5-10,000  stay-behinds  must  have  repre-
sented only  a  fraction  of  the  Viet  Minh  residue,  to  which  GVN  figures  on  re-
canting and  detained  communists  in  the  years  through  1960  attest.

From  studies  of  defectors,  prisoners  of  war,  and  captured  documents,  it  is
now  possible  to  assess  armed  resistance  against  Diem  much  better  than  the
facts  available  at  the  time  permitted.  Three  distinct  periods  are  discernible.
From  1954  through  1957,  there  was  a  substantial  amount  of  random  dissidence
in  the  countryside,  which  Diem  succeeded  in  quelling.  In  early  1957,  Vietnam
seemed  to  be  enjoying  the  first  peace  it  had  known  in  over  a  decade.  Beginning,
however,  in  mid- 1957  and  intensifying  through  mid- 1959,  incidents  of  violence
attributed  to  Viet  Cong  began  to  occur  in  the  countryside.  While  much  of  this
violence  appeared  to  have  a  political  motive,  and  while  there  is  some  evidence
that  it  was  part  of  a  concerted  strategy  of  guerrilla  base  development  in  ac-
cordance with  sound  Mao-Giap  doctrine,  the  GVN  did  not  construe  it  as  a
campaign,  considering  the  disorders  too  diffuse  to  warrant  committing  major
GVN  resources.  In  early  1959,  however.  Diem  perceived  that  he  was  under
serious  attack  and  reacted  strongly.  Population  relocation  was  revivified.  The
Army  of  Vietnam  was  committed  against  the  dissidents,  and  the  Communist
Denunciation  Campaign  was  reinvigorated.  By  autumn  1959,  however,  the  VC
were  in  a  position  to  field  units  of  battalion  size  against  regular  army  forma-
tions. By  1960,  VC  could  operate  in  sufficient  strength  to  seize  provincial  capi-
tals for  periods  ranging  up  to  24  hours,  overrun  ARVN  posts,  and  cut  off  entire
districts  from  communication  with  the  GVN-controlled  towns.  Diem's  counter-
measures  increasingly  met  with  peasant  obstructionism  and  outright  hostility.
A  U.S.  Embassy  estimate  of  the  situation  in  January  1960  noted  that:

While  the  GVN  has  made  an  effort  to  meet  the  economic  and  social
needs  of  the  rural  populations  .  .  .  these  projects  appear  to  have  enjoyed
only  a  measure  of  success  in  creating  support  for  the  government  and,  in
fact,  in  many  instances  have  resulted  in  resentment  .  .  .  the  situation  may
be  summed  up  in  the  fact  that  the  government  has  tended  to  treat  the
population  with  suspicion  or  to  coerce  it  and  has  been  rewarded  with  an
attitude  of  apathy  or  resentment.

In  December  1960,  the  National  Liberation  Front  of  SVN  (NLF)  was
formally  organized.  From  its  inception  it  was  designed  to  encompass  all  anti-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  259

GVN  activists,  including  communists,  and  it  formulated  and  articulated  ob-
jectives for  all  those  opposed  to  "My-Diem."  The  NLF  placed  heavy  empha-
;  sis  on  the  withdrawal  of  American  advisors  and  influence,  on  land  reform  and
liberalization  of  the  GVN,  on  coalition  government  and  the  neutralization  of
Vietnam;  but  through  1963,  the  NLF  soft-pedalled  references  to  reunification
of  Vietnam.  The  NLF  leadership  was  a  shadowy  crew  of  relatively  obscure
;  South  Vietnamese.  Despite  their  apparent  lack  of  experience  and  competence,
ii  however,  the  NLF  rapidly  took  on  organizational  reality  from  its  central  com-
mittee, down  through  a  web  of  subordinate  and  associated  groups,  to  villages
I  all  over  South  Vietnam.  Within  a  few  months  of  its  founding,  its  membership
doubled,  doubled  again  by  fall  1961,  and  then  redoubled  by  early  1962.  At
that  time  an  estimated  300,000  were  on  its  rolls.  Numerous  administrative  and
functional  "liberation  associations"  sprang  into  being,  and  each  member  of  the
NLF  normally  belong  simultaneously  to  several  such  organizations.
\ The  key  operational  components  of  the  NLF  were,  however,  the  Liberation
!  Army  and  the  People's  Revolutionary  Party.  The  former  had  a  lien  on  the
:  services  of  every  NLF  member,  man,  woman,  or  child,  although  functionally
its  missions  were  usually  carried  out  by  formally  organized  military  units.  The
People's  Revolutionary  Party  was  explicitly  the  "Marxist-Leninist  Party  of
South  Vietnam"  and  claimed  to  be  the  "vanguard  of  the  NLF,  the  paramount
member."  It  denied  official  links  with  the  communist  party  of  North  Vietnam
beyond  "fraternal  ties  of  communism."  Although  the  PRP  did  not  come  into
existence  until  1962,  it  is  evident  that  communists  played  a  paramount  role  in
forming  the  NLF,  and  in  its  rapid  initial  growth.  The  official  U.S.  view  has
been  that  the  PRP  is  merely  the  southern  arm  of  the  DRV's  communist  party,
and  a  principal  instrument  through  which  Hanoi  instigated  and  controlled  the
revolt  against  "My-Diem."  The  organizational  genius  evident  in  the  NLF,  as
well  as  the  testimony  of  Vietnamese  communists  in  interrogations  and  captured
documents  supports  this  interpretation.

But  significant  doubt  remains.  Viet  Minh  stay-behinds  testified  in  1955  and
1956  that  their  mission  was  political  agitation  for  the  holding  of  the  general
elections  promised  at  Geneva.  Captured  documents  and  prisoner  interrogations
indicate  that  in  1957  and  1958,  although  there  was  some  "wildcat"  activity  by
local  communists,  party  efforts  appeared  to  be  devoted  to  the  careful  construc-
tion of  an  underground  apparatus  which,  though  it  used  assassinations  and
kidnapping,  circumspectly  avoided  military  operations.  All  evidence  points  to
fall  of  1959  as  the  period  in  which  the  Viet  Cong  made  their  transition  from  a
clandestine  political  movement  to  a  more  overt  military  operation.  Moreover,
throughout  the  years  1954-1960,  a  "front"  seems  to  have  been  active  in  Viet-
nam. For  example,  the  periodic  report  submitted  by  USMAAG,  Vietnam,  on
15  July  1957 — a  time  of  ostensible  internal  peace — noted  that:

The  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  and  propagandists,  however,  are  still  waging
a  grim  battle  for  survival.  In  addition  to  an  accelerated  propaganda  cam-
paign, the  Communists  have  been  forming  "front"  organizations  to  influ-
ence portions  of  anti-government  minorities.  Some  of  these  organizations
are  militant,  some  are  political.  An  example  of  the  former  is  the  "Viet-
namese Peoples'  Liberation  Movement  Forces,"  a  military  unit  composed
of  ex-Cao  Dai,  ex-Hoa  Hao,  ex-Binh  Xuyen,  escaped  political  prisoners,
and  Viet  Cong  cadres.  An  example  of  the  latter  is  the  "Vietnam-Cambodian
Buddhist  Association,"  one  of  several  organizations  seeking  to  spread  the
theory  of  "Peace  and  Co-existence."


260 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Whether  early  references  to  the  "front"  were  to  the  organizations  which  sub-
sequently matured  as  the  NLF  cannot  be  determined.  Indeed,  to  shed  further
light  on  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  proposition  that  the  DRV  did  not  inter-
vene in  South  Vietnam  until  after  the  NLF  came  into  existence,  it  is  necessary
to  turn  to  the  events  in  North  Vietnam  during  the  years  1954-1960.

HANOI  AND  THE  INSURGENCY  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

The  primary  question  concerning  Hanoi's  role  in  the  origins  of  the  insurgency
is  not  so  much  whether  it  played  a  role  or  not — the  evidence  of  direct  North
Vietnamese  participation  in  subversion  against  the  Government  of  South  Viet-
nam is  now  extensive — but  when  Hanoi  intervened  in  a  systematic  way.  Most
attacks  on  U.S.  policy  have  been  based  on  the  proposition  that  the  DRV  move
on  the  South  came  with  manifest  reluctance,  and  after  massive  U.S.  intervention
in  1961.  For  example,  George  McTurnin  Kahin  and  John  W.  Lewis,  in  their
book  The  United  States  in  Vietnam,  state  that:

Contrary  to  United  States  policy  assumptions,  all  available  evidence
shows  that  the  revival  of  the  civil  war  in  the  South  in  1958  was  undertaken
by  Southerners  at  their  own — not  Hanoi's — initiative.  .  .  .  Insurgency  ac-
tivity against  the  Saigon  government  began  in  the  South  under  Southern
leadership  not  as  a  consequence  of  any  dictate  from  Hanoi,  but  contrary
to  Hanoi's  injunctions.

As  discussed  above,  so  much  of  this  argument  as  rests  on  the  existence  in  South
Vietnam  of  genuine  rebellion  is  probably  valid.  The  South  Vietnamese  had  both
the  means,  the  Viet  Minh  residue,  and  motive  to  take  up  arms  against  Ngo
Dinh  Diem.  Moreover,  there  were  indications  that  some  DRV  leaders  did  attempt
to  hold  back  southern  rebels  on  the  grounds  that  "conditions"  were  not  ripe  for
an  uprising.  Further,  there  was  apparently  division  within  the  Lao  Dong  Party
hierarchy  over  the  question  of  strategy  and  tactics  in  South  Vietnam.  However,
the  evidence  indicates  that  the  principal  strategic  debate  over  this  issue  took
place  between  1956  and  1958;  all  information  now  available  (spring,  1968)
points  to  a  decision  taken  by  the  DRV  leaders  not  later  than  spring,  1959,  ac-
tively to  seek  the  overthrow  of  Diem.  Thereafter,  the  DRV  pressed  toward  that
goal  by  military  force  and  by  subversive  aggression,  both  in  Laos  and  in  South
Vietnam..

But  few  Administration  critics  have  had  access  to  the  classified  information
upon  which  the  foregoing  judgments  are  based.  Such  intelligence  as  the  U.S.
has  been  able  to  make  available  to  the  public  bearing  on  the  period  1954-1960
has  been  sketchy  and  not  very  convincing:  a  few  captured  documents,  and  a  few
prisoner  interrogations.  Indeed,  up  until  1961  the  Administration  itself  publicly
held  that  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  was  firmly  in  control  in  South  Vietnam,  and  that  the
United  States  aid  programs  were  succeeding  in  meeting  such  threat  to  GVN  secu-
rity as  existed  both  within  South  Vietnam  and  from  the  North.  Too,  the  vigorous
publicizing  of  "wars  of  national  liberation"  by  N.  S.  Khrushchev  and  the  "dis-
covery" of  counterinsurgency  by  the  Kennedy  Administration  in  early  1961
tended  to  reinforce  the  overall  public  impression  that  North  Vietnam's  aggres-
sion was  news  in  that  year.  Khrushchev's  speech  of  6  January  1961,  made,  ac-
cording to  Kennedy  biographer  Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,  "a  conspicuous  impres-
sion on  the  new  President,  who  took  it  as  an  authoritative  exposition  of  Soviet
intentions,  discussed  it  with  his  staff  and  read  excerpts  from  it  aloud  to  the
National  Security  Council."  Thereafter,  Administration  leaders,  by  their  fre-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  261

quently  identifying  that  Khrushchev  declamation  as  a  milestone  in  the  develop-
ment of  communist  world  strategy,  lent  credence  to  the  supposition  that  the
;  Soviet  Union  had  approved  aggression  by  its  satellite  in  North  Vietnam  only  in

December  1960 — the  month  the  NLF  was  formed,
j  American  Kremlinologists  had  been  preoccupied,  since  Khrushchev's  "de-Sta-
i  linization"  speech  at  the  20th  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet
I  Union  in  February  1956,  with  the  possibilities  of  a  genuine  detente  with  the
USSR.  They  were  also  bemused  by  the  prospect  of  a  deep  strategic  division  with
the  "Communist  Bloc"  between  the  Soviets  and  the  Chinese.  Yet,  despite  evi-
dences of  disunity  in  the  Bloc — in  Yugoslavia,  Albania,  Hungary,  Poland,  and
East  Germany — virtually  all  experts  regarded  North  Vietnamese  national  strategy,
to  the  extent  that  they  considered  it  at  all,  as  a  simple  derivative  of  that  of  either
the  USSR  or  the  CPR.  P.  J.  Honey,  the  British  authority  on  North  Vietnam,
tends  to  the  view  that  Hanoi  remained  subservient  to  the  dictates  of  Moscow
from  1956  through  1961,  albeit  carefully  paying  lip  service  to  continue  solidarity
with  Peking.  More  recently,  a  differing  interpretation  has  been  offered,  which
holds  that  the  Hanoi  leaders  were  in  those  years  motivated  primarily  by  their
concern  for  internal  development,  and  that  they,  therefore,  turned  to  the  Soviet
Union  as  the  only  nation  willing  and  able  to  furnish  the  wherewithal  for  rapid
economic  advancement.  Both  interpretations  assume  that  through  1960  the
DRV  followed  the  Soviet  line,  accepted  "peaceful  coexistence,"  concentrated  on
internal  development,  and  took  action  in  South  Vietnam  only  after  Moscow  gave
the  go-ahead  in  late  1960.

But  it  is  also  possible  that  the  colloquy  over  strategy  among  the  communist
nations  in  the  late  1950's  followed  a  pattern  almost  exactly  the  reverse  of  that
usually  depicted:  that  North  Vietnam  persuaded  the  Soviets  and  the  Chinese  to
accept  its  strategic  view,  and  to  support  simultaneous  drives  for  economic  ad-
vancement and  forceful  reunification.  Ho  Chi  Minh  was  an  old  Stalinist,  trained
in  Russia  in  the  early  '20's,  Comintern  colleague  of  Borodin  in  Canton,  and  for
three  decades  leading  exponent  of  the  Marxist-Leninist  canon  on  anti-colonial
i  war.  Presumably,  Ho  spoke  with  authority  within  the  upper  echelons  of  the
communist  party  of  the  Soviet  Union.  What  he  said  to  them  privately  was,  no
doubt,  quite  similar  to  what  he  proclaimed  publicly  from  1956  onward:  the
circumstances  of  North  Vietnam  were  not  comparable  to  those  of  the  Soviet
Union,  or  even  those  of  the  CPR,  and  North  Vietnam's  policy  had  to  reflect  the
differences.

Khrushchev's  de-Stalinization  bombshell  burst  in  February  1956  at  a  dramati-
cally bad  time  for  the  DRV.  It  overrode  the  Chinese  call  for  reconvening  of  the
Geneva  Conference  on  Vietnam,  and  it  interfered  with  the  concerting  of  com-
munist policy  on  what  to  do  about  Diem  regime's  refusal  to  proceed  toward  the
:  general  elections.  Although  the  Soviets  issued  in  March  1956  a  demand  for  GVN
observance  of  the  Accords,  its  diplomacy  not  only  failed  to  bring  about  any
action  on  behalf  of  the  DRV,  but  elicited,  in  April  1956,  a  sharp  British  note
I  condemning  Hanoi  for  grave  violations  of  the  Accords.  Hanoi  received  the
:  British  note  about  the  time  that  Khrushchev  proclaimed  that  the  Soviet  was
I  committed  to  a  policy  of  "peaceful  coexistence."  At  the  Ninth  Plenum  of  the
Central  Committee  of  the  Lao  Dong  Party,  held  in  Hanoi  that  month.  Ho  Chi
Minh  lauded  "de-Stalinization,"  but  unequivocally  rejected  "peaceful  coexis-
;  tence"  as  irrelevant  to  the  DRV.  In  November  1957,  after  more  than  a  year  of
1^  upheavals  and  evident  internal  political  distress  in  North  Vietnam,  Ho  Chi  Minh
and  Le  Duan  journeyed  to  Moscow  for  the  Conference  of  Communist  and
:  Workers'  Parties  of  Socialist  Countries.  That  conference  issued  a  declaration


262 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

admitting  the  possibility  of  "non-peaceful  transition  to  socialism"  remarkably
similar  in  thrust  to  Ho's  1956  speech.  Further,  Khrushchev's  famous  January
1961  speech  was  simply  a  precis  of  the  Declaration  of  the  November  1960  Con-
ference of  Communist  and  Workers'  Parties  of  Socialist  Countries.  That  1960
Declaration,  which  formed  the  basis  for  Khrushchev's  pronouncements  on  wars
of  national  liberation  in  turn  explicitly  reaffirmed  the  1957  Declaration.

Other  evidence  supports  the  foregoing  hypothesis.  The  DRV  was,  in  1960,
an  orthodoxically  constituted  communist  state.  Both  the  government  and  the
society  were  dominated  by  the  Lao  Dong  (Communist)  Party,  and  power  within
the  party  concentrated  in  a  small  elite — Ho  Chi  Minh  and  his  lieutenants  from
the  old-time  Indochinese  Communist  Party.  This  group  of  leaders  were  unique
in  the  communist  world  for  their  homogeneity  and  for  their  harmony — there
has  been  little  evidence  of  the  kind  of  turbulence  which  has  splintered  the  leader-
ship of  most  communist  parties.  While  experts  have  detected  disputes  within
the  Lao  Dong  hierarchy — 1957  appears  to  be  a  critical  year  in  that  regard —
the  facts  are  that  there  has  been  no  blood-purge  of  the  Lao  Dong  leadership,  and
except  for  changes  occasioned  by  apparently  natural  deaths,  the  leadership  in
1960  was  virtually  identical  to  what  it  had  been  in  1954  or  1946.  This  remark-
ably dedicated  and  purposeful  group  of  men  apparently  agreed  among  them-
selves as  to  what  the  national  interests  of  the  DRV  required,  what  goals  should
be  set  for  the  nation,  and  what  strategy  they  should  pursue  in  attaining  them.

These  leaders  have  been  explicit  in  setting  forth  DRV  national  goals  in  their
public  statements  and  official  documents.  For  example,  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  his
colleagues  placed  a  premium  on  "land  reform" — by  which  they  meant  a  com-
munization  of  rural  society  along  Maoist  lines.  Moreover,  they  clearly  con-
sidered a  disciplined  society  essential  for  victory  in  war  and  success  in  peace.
It  was  also  evident  that  they  were  committed  to  bring  about  an  independent,
reunified  Vietnam  capable  of  exerting  significant  influence  throughout  South-
east Asia,  and  particularly  over  the  neighboring  states  of  Laos  and  Cambodia.
What  is  not  known  with  certainty  is  how  they  determined  the  relative  priority
among  these  objectives.

In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  Geneva,  the  DRV  deferred  to  the  Geneva
Accords  for  the  achievement  of  reunification,  and  turned  inward,  concentrating
its  energies  on  land  reform  and  rehabilitation  of  the  war-torn  economy.  By  the
summer  of  1956,  this  strategy  was  bankrupt:  the  Geneva  Settlement  manifestly
would  not  eventuate  in  reunification,  and  the  land  reform  campaign  foundered
from  such  serious  abuses  by  Lao  Dong  cadre  that  popular  disaffection  imperiled
DRV  internal  security.  In  August  1956,  the  Lao  Dong  leadership  was  compelled
to  "rectify"  its  programs,  to  postpone  land  reform,  and  to  purge  low  echelon
cadre  to  mollify  popular  resentment.  Even  these  measures,  however,  proved
insufficient  to  forestall  insurrection;  in  November  1956,  the  peasant  rebellions
broke  out,  followed  by  urban  unrest.  Nonetheless,  the  DRV  leadership  survived
these  internal  crises  intact,  and  by  1958  appears  to  have  solved  most  of  the
problems  of  economic  efficiency  and  political  organization  which  occasioned  the
1956-1957  outbursts.

But  domestic  difficulty  was  not  the  only  crisis  to  confront  the  Lao  Dong
leaders  in  early  1957.  In  January,  when  the  Soviet  Union  proposed  to  the  United
Nations  the  admitting  of  North  and  South  Vietnam  as  separate  states,  it  signalled
that  the  USSR  might  be  prepared  in  the  interests  of  "peaceful  coexistence,"  to
make  a  great  power  deal  which  would  have  lent  permanency  to  the  partition
of  Vietnam.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  in  evident  surprise,  violently  dissented.  When  in
February  1957  Khrushchev  went  further  in  affirming  his  intention  to  "coexist"


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  263

with  the  United  States,  the  DRV  quickly  moved  to  realign  its  own  and  Soviet
policies.  In  May  1957,  the  Soviet  head  of  state,  Voroshilov,  visited  Hanoi,
and  in  July  and  August  1957,  Ho  Chi  Minh  traveled  extensively  in  Eastern
Europe,  spending  several  days  in  Moscow.  The  Voroshilov  visit  was  given  top
billing  by  the  Hanoi  Press  and  Ho,  upon  his  return  from  Moscow,  indicated  that
important  decisions  had  been  reached.  Thereafter,  Hanoi  and  Moscow  marched
more  in  step.

In  the  meantime,  the  needs  and  desires  of  communist  rebels  in  South  Vietnam
had  been  communicated  directly  to  Hanoi  in  the  person  of  Le  Duan,  who  is
known  to  have  been  in  South  Vietnam  in  1955  and  1956,  and  to  have  returned
to  Hanoi  sometime  before  the  fall  of  1957.  In  September  of  that  year,  upon
Ho's  return  from  Europe,  Le  Duan  surfaced  as  one  of  the  members  of  the  Lao
Dong  Politburo;  it  is  possible  that  he  was  already  at  that  time  de  facto  the
First  Secretary  of  the  Lao  Dong  Party,  to  which  position  he  was  formally  pro-
moted in  September  1960.  In  1955  and  1956,  Le  Doan,  from  the  testimony  of
prisoners  and  captured  documents,  had  been  expressing  .conviction  that  Diem
would  stamp  out  the  communist  movement  in  South  Vietnam  unless  the  DRV
were  to  reinforce  the  party  there.  Presumably,  he  carried  these  views  into  the
inner  councils  of  the  DRV.  In  November  1957,  Le  Duan  and  Ho  traveled  to
Moscow  to  attend  the  Conference  of  Communist  and  Workers'  Parties  of  Social-
ist Countries.  The  Declaration  of  that  conference,  quoted  above,  has  since  been
cited  repeatedly  by  both  North  and  South  Vietnamese  communists,  as  one  of  the
strategic  turning  points  in  their  modern  history.  Le  Duan,  upon  his  return  to
Hanoi  from  Moscow,  issued  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  DRV's  way  was
now  clear.  Taking  Le  Duan  literally,  it  could  be  construed  that  the  DRV  deemed
the  Moscow  Declaration  of  1957  the  "go  ahead"  signal  from  Moscow  and  Peking
for  forceful  pursuit  of  its  objectives.

There  is  some  sparse  evidence  that  the  DRV  actually  did  begin  moving  in
1958  to  set  up  a  mechanism  for  supporting  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,
But  even  had  the  decision  been  taken,  as  suggested  above,  in  late  1957,  it  is
unlikely  that  there  would  have  been  much  manifestation  of  it  in  1958.  The
Lao  Dong  leadership  had  for  years  stressed  the  lessons  that  they  had  learned
from  experience  on  the  essentiality  of  carefully  preparing  a  party  infrastructure
and  building  guerrilla  bases  before  proceeding  with  an  insurgency.  Viet  Minh
doctrine  would  have  dictated  priority  concern  to  refurbishing  the  communist
party  apparatus  in  South  Vietnam,  and  it  is  possible  that  such  a  process  was  set
in  motion  during  1958.  Orders  were  captured  from  Hanoi  which  directed
guerrilla  bases  be  prepared  in  South  Vietnam  in  early  1959.

There  is,  however,  other  evidence  that  questioning  among  the  DRV  hierarchy
concerning  strategy  and  tactics  for  South  Vietnam  continued  throughout  1958
and  into  1959.  Captured  reports  from  party  headquarters  in  South  Vietnam
betrayed  doubt  and  indecisions  among  party  leaders  there  and  reflected  the
absence  of  clear  guidance  from  Hanoi.  Moreover,  in  1958,  and  in  1959,  the  DRV
did  concentrate  much  of  its  resources  on  agricultural  and  industrial  improve-
ment; extensive  loans  were  obtained  from  the  Soviet  Union  and  from  the
Chinese  Peoples  Republic,  and  ambitious  uplift  programs  were  launched  in  both
sectors.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  accept  the  view  that  through  1958  the  DRV
still  accorded  priority  to  butter  over  guns,  as  part  of  its  base  development
strategy.

In  the  larger  sense,  domestic  progress,  "consolidation  of  the  North,"  was
fundamental  to  that  strategy.  As  General  Vo  Nguyen  Giap  put  it  in  the  Lao
Dong  Party  journal  Hoc  Tap  of  January  1960:


264 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

The  North  has  become  a  large  rear  echelon  of  our  army  .  .  .  The  North
is  the  revolutionary  base  for  the  whole  country.

Up  until  1959,  the  economy  of  North  Vietnam  was  scarcely  providing  sub-
sistence for  its  people,  let  alone  support  for  foreign  military  undertakings;  by
that  year,  substantial  progress  in  both  agriculture  and  industry  was  evident:

NORTH  VIETNAM
FOOD  GRAIN  PER  CAPITA

1955 1956 1957 1958 1959  1960

Kilograms  260 310 283 315 358  304

%  100 119 109 121 138  117

Due  mainly,  however,  to  industrial  growth,  the  Gross  National  Product  reached
a  growth  rate  of  6%  per  annum  in  1958,  and  sustained  that  rate  thereafter.  Both
1958  and  1959  were  extraordinarily  good  years  in  both  industry  and  agriculture.
A  long-range  development  plan  launched  in  1958  achieved  an  annual  industrial
expansion  of  21%  per  year  through  1960,  chiefly  in  heavy  industry.  Foreign
aid — both  Chinese  and  Soviet — was  readily  obtained,  the  USSR  supplanting  the
CPR  as  prime  donor.  Foreign  trade  stepped  up  markedly.  Compared  with  1955,
the  DRV's  foreign  commerce  doubled  by  1959,  and  nearly  tripled  by  1960.

By  1959,  it  seems  likely  that  the  DRV  had  elected  to  pursue  a  "guns  and
butter"  strategy,  and  obtained  requisite  Soviet  and  Chinese  aid.  While  pressing
forward  with  its  economic  improvement  programs — which  were  showing  definite
progress — the  DRV  prepared  with  word  and  deed  for  large-scale  intervention  in
South  Vietnam.  In  May  1959,  at  the  Fifteenth  Plenum  of  the  Central  Committee
of  the  Lao  Dong  Party,  a  Resolution  was  adopted  identifying  the  United  States
as  the  main  obstacle  to  the  realization  of  the  hopes  of  the  Vietnamese  people,
and  as  an  enemy  of  peace.  The  Resolution  of  the  Fifteenth  Plenum  called  for
a  strong  North  Vietnam  as  a  base  for  helping  the  South  Vietnamese  to  over-
throw Diem  and  eject  the  United  States.  A  Communist  Party  history  captured
in  South  Vietnam  in  1966,  and  the  testimony  of  high-ranking  captives,  indicate
that  South  Vietnamese  communists  still  regard  the  resolution  of  the  Fifteenth
Plenum  as  the  point  of  departure  for  DRV  intervention.

Within  a  month  of  the  Fifteenth  Plenum,  the  DRV  began  to  commit  its  armed
forces  in  Laos,  and  steadily  escalated  its  aid  to  the  Pathet  Lao.  By  the  time  the
National  Liberation  Front  issued  its  manifesto  in  December  1960,  the  conflict  in
Laos  had  matured  to  the  point  that  Pathet  Lao-NVA  troops  controlled  most
of  NE  Laos  and  the  Laotian  panhandle;  moreover,  by  that  time,  the  Soviet
Union  had  entered  the  fray,  and  was  participating  in  airlift  operations  from  North
Vietnam  direct  to  Pathet  Lao-NVA  units  in  Laos.  Also,  by  fall  of  1959,  the
insurgency  in  South  Vietnam  took  a  definite  upsurge.  Viet  Cong  units  for  the  first
time  offered  a  direct  challenge  to  the  Army  of  Vietnam.  Large  VC  formations
seized  and  held  district  and  province  capitals  for  short  periods  of  time,  and  as-
sassinations and  kidnappings  proliferated  markedly.  The  Preamble  of  the  Con-
stitution of  the  DRV,  promulgated  on  1  January  1960,  was  distinctly  bellicose,
condemning  the  United  States,  and  establishing  the  reunification  of  Vietnam
as  a  DRV  national  objective.  During  1959  and  1960,  the  relatively  undeveloped
intelligence  apparatus  of  the  U.S.  and  the  GVN  confirmed  that  over  4,000  in-
filtrators were  sent  from  North  Vietnam  southward — most  of  them  military  or
political  cadre,  trained  to  raise  and  lead  insurgent  forces.

In  September  1960,  the  Lao  Dong  Party  convened  its  Third  National  Congress.
There  Ho  Chi  Minh,  Le  Duan,  Giap,  and  others  presented  speeches  further  com-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  265

mitting  the  DRV  to  support  of  the  insurgency  in  the  South,  demanding  the
U.S.  stop  its  aid  to  Diem,  and  calling  for  the  formation  of  a  unified  front  to
lead  the  struggle  against  "My-Diem."  The  Resolution  of  the  Third  Congress,  re-
flecting these  statements,  is  another  of  those  historic  benchmarks  referred  to  in
captured  party  documents  and  prisoner  interrogations.

In  November  1960,  the  Moscow  Conference  of  Communist  and  Workers'
Parties  of  Socialist  Countries  once  again  declared  its  support  of  the  sort  of  "just"
war  the  DRV  intended  to  prosecute.  The  United  States  was  identified  as  the
principal  colonial  power,  and  the  right  and  obligation  of  communist  parties  to
lead  struggles  against  colonial  powers  was  detailed.  By  the  time  Khrushchev  cited
that  Declaration  in  his  "wars  of  national  liberation"  speech,  the  "liberation  war"
for  South  Vietnam  was  nearly  a  year  and  a  half  old.

The  evidence  supports  the  conclusion,  therefore,  that  whether  or  not  the  re-
bellion against  Diem  in  South  Vietnam  proceeded  independently  of,  or  even
contrary  to  directions  from  Hanoi  through  1958,  Hanoi  moved  thereafter  to
capture  the  revolution.  There  is  little  doubt  that  Hanoi  exerted  some  influence
over  certain  insurgents  in  the  South  throughout  the  years  following  Geneva,  and
there  is  evidence  which  points  to  its  preparing  for  active  support  of  large-scale
insurgency  as  early  as  1958.  Whatever  differences  in  strategy  may  have  existed
among  Moscow,  Peking,  and  Hanoi,  it  appears  that  at  each  critical  juncture
Hanoi  obtained  concurrence  in  Moscow  with  an  aggressive  course  of  action.
Accordingly,  it  was  not  "peaceful  coexistence,"  or  concern  over  leadership  of
the  "socialist  camp"  which  governed  Hanoi's  policy.  What  appeared  to  matter
to  Hanoi  was  its  abiding  national  interests:  domestic  consolidation  in  inde-
pendence, reunification,  and  Vietnamese  hegemony  in  Southeast  Asia.  Both
Soviet  and  Chinese  policy  seems  to  have  bent  to  these  ends  rather  than  the
contrary.  If  Hanoi  applied  brakes  to  eager  insurgents  in  South  Vietnam,  it  did
so  not  from  lack  of  purpose  or  because  of  Soviet  restraints,  but  from  concern
over  launching  one  more  premature  uprising  in  the  South.  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  was
entirely  correct  when  he  stated  that  his  was  a  nation  at  war  in  early  1959;  South
Vietnam  was  at  war  with  both  the  Viet  Cong  insurgents  and  with  the  DRV,  in
that  the  latter  then  undertook  to  provide  strategic  direction  and  leadership
cadres  to  build  systematically  a  base  system  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam
for  subsequent,  large-scale  guerrilla  warfare.  Persuasive  evidence  exists  that  by
1960  DRV  support  of  the  insurgency  in  South  Vietnam  included  materiel
as  well  as  personnel.  In  any  event,  by  late  1959,  it  seems  clear  that  Hanoi  con-
sidered the  time  ripe  to  take  the  military  offensive  in  South  Vietnam,  and  that
by  1960  circumstances  were  propitious  for  more  overt  political  action.  A  recently
captured  high-ranking  member  of  the  National  Liberation  Front  has  confirmed
that  in  mid- 1960  he  and  other  Lao  Dong  Party  leaders  in  South  Vietnam  were
instructed  by  Hanoi  to  begin  organizing  the  National  Liberation  Front,  which
was  formally  founded  upon  the  issuance  of  its  Manifesto  on  20  December  1960.
The  rapid  growth  of  the  NLF  thereafter — it  quadrupled  its  strength  in  about
one  year — is  a  further  indication  that  the  Hanoi-directed  communist  party  ap-
paratus had  been  engaged  to  the  fullest  in  the  initial  organization  and  subsequent
development  of  the  NLF.

U.S.  PERCEPTIONS  OF  THE  INSURGENCY,  1954-1960

!?i Much  of  what  the  U.S.  knows  about  the  origins  of  the  insurgency  in  South
'  Vietnam  rests  on  information  it  has  acquired  since  1963,  approximately  the
span  of  time  that  an  extensive  and  effective  American  intelligence  apparatus  had
been  functioning  in  Vietnam.  Before  then,  our  intelligence  was  drawn  from  a


266 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


significantly  more  narrow  and  less  reliable  range  of  sources,  chiefly  Vietnamese,
and  could  not  have  supported  analysis  in  depth  of  insurgent  organization  and
intentions.  The  U.S.  was  particularly  deprived  of  dependable  information  con-
cerning events  in  South  Vietnam's  countryside  in  the  years  1954  through  1959.
Nonetheless,  U.S.  intelligence  estimates  through  1960  correctly  and  consistently
estimated  that  the  threat  to  GVN  internal  security  was  greater  than  the  danger
from  overt  invasion.  The  intelligence  estimates  provided  to  policy  makers  in
Washington  pegged  the  Viet  Cong  military  offensive  as  beginning  in  late  1959,
with  preparations  noted  as  early  as  1957,  and  a  definite  campaign  perceived  as
of  early  1959.  Throughout  the  years,  they  were  critical  of  Diem,  consistently
expressing  skepticism  that  he  could  deal  successfully  with  his  internal  political
problems.  These  same  estimates  miscalculated  the  numerical  and  political
strength  of  the  Viet  Cong,  misjudged  the  extent  of  rural  disaffection,  and  over-
rated the  military  capabilities  of  the  GVN.  But  as  strategic  intelligence  they  were
remarkably  sound.

Indeed,  given  the  generally  bleak  appraisals  of  Diem's  prospe'cts,  they  who
made  U.S.  policy  could  only  have  done  so  by  assuming  a  significant  measure  of
risk.  For  example,  on  3  August  1954,  an  NIE  took  the  position  that:

Although  it  is  possible  that  the  French  and  Vietnamese,  even  with  firm
support  from  the  U.S.  and  other  powers,  may  be  able  to  establish  a  strong
regime  in  South  Vietnam,  we  believe  that  the  chances  for  this  development
are  poor  and,  moreover,  that  the  situation  is  more  likely  to  continue  to
deteriorate  progressively  over  the  next  year  .  .  .

This  estimate  notwithstanding,  the  U.S.  moved  promptly  to  convene  the  Manila
Conference,  bring  SEATO  into  being  with  its  protocol  aegis  over  Vietnam,  and
eliminate  France  as  the  recipient  of  U.S.  aid  for  Vietnam.  Again  on  26  April
1955,  an  NIE  charged  that:

Even  if  the  present  empasse  [with  the  sects]  were  resolved,  we  believe  that
that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult,  at  best,  for  a  Vietnamese  government,
regardless  of  its  composition,  to  make  progress  towards  developing  a
strong,  stable,  anti-Communist  government  capable  of  resolving  the  basic
social,  economic,  and  political  problems  of  Vietnam,  the  special  problems
arising  from  the  Geneva  Agreement  and  capable  of  meeting  the  long-
range  challenge  of  the  Communists  .  .  .

Within  a  matter  of  weeks,  however,  the  U.S.  firmly  and  finally  committed  itself
to  unstinting  support  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  accepted  his  refusal  to  comply  with
the  political  settlement  of  Geneva,  and  acceded  to  withdrawal  of  French  military
power  and  political  influence  from  South  Vietnam.  Even  at  the  zenith  of  Diem's
success,  an  NIE  noted  adverse  political  trends  stemming  from  Diem's  "authori-
tarian role"  and  predicted  that,  while  no  short-term  opposition  was  in  prospect:

Over  a  longer  period,  the  accumulation  of  grievances  among  various
groups  and  individuals  may  lead  to  development  of  a  national  opposition
movement  .  .  .

There  was  no  NIE  published  between  1956  and  1959  on  South  Vietnam:  an
NIE  of  May  1959  took  the  position  that  Diem  had  a  serious  military  problem
on  his  hands:

The  [GVN]  internal  security  forces  will  not  be  able  to  eradicate  DRV
supported  guerrilla  or  subversive  activity  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Army


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  267

units  will  probably  have  to  be  diverted  to  special  internal  security  assign-
ments .  .  .

The  same  NIE  noted  a  waning  of  popular  enthusiasm  for  Diem,  the  existence
of  some  disillusionment,  "particularly  among  the  educated  elite,"  some  "dissat-
isfaction among  military  officers,"  but  detected  little  "identifiable  public  unrest":

The  growth  of  dissatisfaction  is  inhibited  by  South  Vietnam's  continuing
high  standard  of  living  relative  to  that  of  its  neighbors,  the  paternalistic  atti-
tude of  Diem's  government  towards  the  people,  and  the  lack  of  any  feasible
alternative  to  the  present  regime.

The  1959  NIE  again  expressed  serious  reservations  about  Diem's  leadership
and  flatly  stated  that:

The  prospects  for  continued  political  stability  in  South  Vietnam  hang
heavily  upon  President  Diem  and  his  ability  to  mantain  firm  control  of  the
army  and  police.  The  regime's  efforts  to  assure  internal  security  and  its
belief  that  an  authoritarian  government  is  necessary  to  handle  the  country's
problems  will  result  in  a  continued  repression  of  potential  opposition  ele-
ments. This  policy  of  repression  will  inhibit  the  growth  of  popularity  of
the  regime  and  we  believe  that  dissatisfaction  will  grow,  particularly  among
those  who  are  politically  conscious  .  .  .

Despite  these  reservations,  U.S.  policy  remained  staunchly  and  fairly  uncritically
behind  Diem  through  1959.

The  National  Intelligence  Estimates  reservations  re  Diem  do  not  appear  to
have  restrained  the  National  Security  Council  in  its  two  major  reviews  of  U.S.
policy  between  1954  and  1960.  In  1956,  the  NSC  (in  policy  directive  NSC
5612)  directed  that  U.S.  agencies

Assist  Free  Vietnam  to  develop  a  strong,  stable,  and  constitutional  gov-
ernment to  enable  Free  Vietnam  to  assert  an  increasingly  attractive  con-
trast to  conditions  in  the  present  Communist  zone  .  .  .  [and]  work  toward
the  weakening  of  the  Communists  in  North  and  South  Vietnam  in  order
to  bring  about  the  eventual  peaceful  reunification  of  a  free  and  independent
Vietnam  under  anti-Communist  leadership.

In  1958  (in  NSC  5809)  this  policy,  with  its  "roll-back"  overtones,  was  reiterated,
although  revisions  were  proposed  indicating  an  awareness  of  the  necessity  to
adapt  the  army  of  Vietnam  for  anti-guerrilla  warfare.  Operations  Coordinating
Board  Progress  Reports  on  the  implementation  of  the  policies  laid  out  in  NSC
5612  and  5809  revealed  awareness  that  Vietnam  was  under  internal  attack,  and
that  "in  spite  of  substantial  U.S.  assistance,  economic  development,  though
progressing,  is  below  that  which  is  politically  desirable."

While  classified  policy  papers  through  1959  thus  dealt  with  risks,  public  state-
ments of  U.S.  officials  did  not  refer  to  the  jeopardy.  To  the  contrary,  the  pic-
ture presented  the  public  and  Congress  by  Ambassador  Durbrow,  General  Wil-
liams, and  other  Administration  spokesmen  was  of  continuing  progress,  virtually
miraculous  improvement,  year-in  and  year-out.  Diem  was  depicted  as  a  strong
and  capable  leader,  firmly  in  command  of  his  own  house,  leading  his  people
into  modern  nationhood  at  a  remarkable  pace.  As  late  as  the  summer  of  1959,
Ambassador  Durbrow  and  General  Williams  assured  the  Senate  Foreign  Rela-
tions Committee  that  Vietnam's  internal  security  was  in  no  serious  danger,  and
that  Vietnam  was  in  a  better  position  to  cope  with  invasion  from  the  North


268 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

than  it  had  ever  been.  In  the  fall  of  1959,  in  fact,  General  Williams  expressed
the  opinion  that  by  1961  GVN  defense  budgets  could  be  reduced,  and  in  the
spring  of  1960,  he  wrote  to  Senator  Mansfield  that  American  military  advisors
could  begin  a  phased  withdrawal  from  MAAG,  Vietnam  the  following  year.

Whatever  adverse  judgment  may  be  deserved  by  such  statements  or  by  the
quality  of  U.S.  assistance  to  Vietnam  on  behalf  of  its  internal  security,  the
American  aid  program  cannot  be  faulted  for  failing  to  provide  Diem  funds  in
plenty.  The  U.S.  aid  program — economic  and  military — for  South  Vietnam  was
among  the  largest  in  the  world.  From  FY  1946  through  FY  1961,  Vietnam  was
the  third  ranking  non-Nato  recipient  of  aid,  and  the  seventh  worldwide.  In  FY
1961,  the  last  program  of  President  Eisenhower's  Administration,  South  Vietnam
was  the  fifth  ranking  recipient  overall.  MAAG,  Vietnam,  was  the  only  military
aid  mission  anywhere  in  the  world  commanded  by  a  lieutenant  general,  and
the  economic  aid  mission  there  was  by  1958  the  largest  anywhere.

Security  was  the  focus  of  U.S.  aid;  more  than  75%  of  the  economic  aid  the
U.S.  provided  in  the  same  period  went  into  the  GVN  military  budget;  thus  at
least  $8  out  of  every  $10  of  aid  provided  Vietnam  went  directly  toward  security.
In  addition,  other  amounts  of  nominally  economic  aid  (e.g.,  that  for  public
administration)  went  toward  security  forces,  and  aid  for  agriculture  and  trans-
portation principally  funded  projects  with  strategic  purposes  and  with  an
explicit  military  rationale.  For  example,  a  20-mile  stretch  of  highway  from
Saigon  to  Bien  Hoa,  built  at  Gen.  Williams'  instance  for  specifically  military  pur-
poses, received  more  U.S.  economic  aid  than  all  funds  provided  for  labor,  com-
munity development,  social  welfare,  health,  and  education  in  the  years  1954-1961.

In  March  1960,  Washington  became  aware  that  despite  this  impressive  out-
pouring of  treasure,  material,  and  advice,  the  Viet  Cong  were  making  significant
headway  against  Diem,  and  that  U.S.  aid  programs  ought  to  be  reconfigured.  In
March,  the  JCS  initiated  action  to  devise  a  Counter-insurgency  Plan  (CIP),  in-
tended to  coordinate  the  several  U.S.  agencies  providing  assistance  to  the  GVN,
and  rationalize  the  GVN's  own  rural  programs.  The  CIP  was  worked  out  among
the  several  U.S.  agencies  in  Washington  and  Saigon  during  the  summer  and  fall
of  1960.

The  heightened  awareness  of  problems  in  Vietnam  did  not,  however,  precipi-
tate changes  in  NSC  policy  statements  on  Vietnam.  Objectives  set  forth  in  NSC
6012  (25  July  1960)  were  virtually  identical  to  those  of  NSC  5809.

Planning  proceeded  against  a  background  of  developing  divergence  of  view
between  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense.  As  Ambassador  Durbrow  and
his  colleagues  of  State  saw  the  problem  on  the  one  hand,  Diem's  security  problems
stemmed  from  his  political  insolvency.  They  argued  that  the  main  line  of  U.S.
action  should  take  the  form  of  pressures  on  Diem  to  reform  his  government  and
his  party,  liberalizing  his  handling  of  political  dissenters  and  the  rural  populace.
Department  of  Defense  officials,  on  the  other  hand,  usually  deprecated  the
significance  of  non-communist  political  dissent  in  South  Vietnam,  and  regarded
Diem's  difficulties  as  proceeding  from  military  inadequacy.  In  this  view,  what  was
needed  was  a  more  efficient  internal  defense,  and,  therefore,  the  Pentagon  tended
to  oppose  U.S.  leverage  on  Diem  because  it  might  jepardize  his  confidence  in  the
U.S.,  and  his  cooperation  in  improving  his  military  posture.  Communist  machina-
tion, as  Defense  saw  it,  had  created  the  crisis;  the  U.S.  response  should  be  "un-
swerving support"  for  Diem.

While  the  CIP  was  being  developed,  Department  of  Defense  moved  to  adapt
the  U.S.  military  assistance  program  to  the  exigencies  of  the  situation.  On  30
March  1 960  the  JCS  took  the  position  that  the  Army  of  Vietnam  should  develop
an  anti-guerrilla  capability  within  the  regular  force  structure,  thus  reversing  an


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  269

antithetical  position  taken  by  General  Williams.  During  1959  Diem  had  at-
tempted to  form  a  number  of  special  "commando"  units  from  his  regular  forces,
and  the  MAAG  had  opposed  him  on  the  grounds  that  these  would  deplete  his
conventional  strength.  In  May,  MAAG  was  authorized  to  place  advisers  down
to  battalion  level.  In  June,  1960,  additional  U.S.  Army  special  forces  arrived  in
Vietnam,  and  during  the  summer  a  number  of  Ranger  battalions,  with  the
express  mission  of  counter-guerrilla  operations,  were  activated.  In  September,
1  General  Williams  was  replaced  by  General  McGarr  who,  consistent  with  the
]  directives  of  the  JCS,  promptly  began  to  press  the  training  of  RVNAF  to
produce  the  "anti-guerrilla  guerrilla."  General  McGarr's  desire  for  an  RVNAF
capable  of  meeting  and  defeating  the  Viet  Cong  at  their  own  game  was  evident
in  the  CIP  when  it  was  forwarded  to  Washington,  in  January,  1961,  just  before
John  F.  Kennedy  took  office.

The  CIP  had  been  well  coordinated  within  the  U.S.  mission  in  Vietnam,  but
only  partially  with  the  Vietnamese.  The  plan,  as  forwarded,  incorporated  one
major  point  of  difference  between  the  Embassy  and  MAAG.  General  McGarr
desired  to  increase  the  RVNAF  force  level  by  some  20,000  troops,  while  Am-
I bassador  Durbrow  maintained  reservations  concerning  the  necessity  or  the  wis-
dom of  additional  forces.  The  Ambassador's  position  rested  on  the  premise  that
Diem  wanted  the  force  level  increase,  and  that  the  United  States  should  not
I provide  funds  for  that  purpose  until  Diem  was  patently  prepared  to  take  those
I unpalatable  political  measures  the  Ambassador  had  proposed  aimed  at  liberal-
I izing  the  GVN.  The  Ambassador  held  out  little  hope  that  either  the  political  or
even  military  portions  of  the  CIP  could  be  successfully  accomplished  without
some  such  leverage:  "Consideration  should,  therefore,  be  given  to  what  actions  we
are  prepared  to  take  to  encourage,  or  if  necessary  to  force,  acceptance  of  all

I  essential  elements  of  the  plan."  In  the  staff  reviews  of  the  CIP  in  Washington,  the
divergence  between  State  and  Defense  noted  above  came  once  more  to  the  fore.

II  Those  (chiefly  within  DOD)  who  considered  the  VC  threat  as  most  important,
i  and  who  therefore  regarded  military  measures  against  this  threat  as  most  urgent,
I  advocated  approval  and  any  other  measures  which  would  induce  Diem's  accep-
1  tance  of  the  CIP,  and  his  cooperation  with  MAAG.  They  were  impatient  with
1  Ambassador  Durbrow's  proposed  "pressure  tactics"  since  they  saw  in  them
I  the  possibility  of  GVN  delay  on  vital  military  matters,  and  the  prospect  of  little
j  profit  other  than  minor  concessions  from  Diem  in  political  areas  they  deemed
i  peripheral  or  trivial  in  countering  the  VC.  Tipping  the  scales  toward  what  might
;  be  called  the  Diem/MAAG/DOD  priorities  was  the  coincident  and  increasing
1  need  to  "reassure"  Diem  of  U.S.  support  for  the  GVN  and  for  him  personally.

! The  fall  of  President  Syngman  Rhee  of  Korea  in  April,  the  abortive  November

\ 1960  coup  d'etat  in  Saigon,  Ambassador  Durbrow's  persistent  overtures  for  re-
form, and  above  all,  uncertainties  over  U.S.  support  for  the  Royal  Laotian

I Government.  This  requirement  to  reassure  Diem  was  plainly  at  cross  purposes
with  the  use  of  pressure  tactics.

Ten  days  after  President  Kennedy  came  to  office,  he  authorized  a  $41  million

I increase  in  aid  for  Vietnam  to  underwrite  a  level  increase  and  improvements  in
the  Civil  Guard — a  complete  buy  of  the  CIP.  In  March,  Ambassador  Durbrow

;  was  replaced  by  Frederick  E.  Nolting.  Ambassador  Durbrow's  closing  interview
with  Diem  in  mid-March  was  not  reassuring.  While  Diem  stated  that  he  was

\  prepared  to  carry  out  the  military  aspects  of  the  CIP,  he  dodged  Durbrow's
^  questions  on  the  political  action  prescribed.  It  was  on  this  disquieting  note  that

'  the  Kennedy  Administration  began  its  efforts  to  counter  the  insurgency  in  South
Vietnam.

End  of  Summary


270


g S  o  -5  3  c  .2  .22  ;g
.2  Sbo'^..  S^.^flB^-


^ -2  «  §  §  o  S


I  2  ^-S  ^73  o  o  -

^  <H  M-(C3X500(U^+:50CJ3^M


i>s  ^  ^  K CkO  •«


tti  ^^^^ ^ ^ o  --iSs/ES^  o


^  go


1^  1^ I  £-3fe  .I'Seri^ tip ^  ^


i  ill  liffiPifi!  llf H!!

5 o  c<j >  Jit  O >^  03 ..-^  -j^  C  L-'  -(f '-H  il  n  O


o  o


^ ^  ^  S  ^  til  C


S  ^  -3


271


o


•2


SB


B  ^


O  „


a
.2

1


5  ^  -6


I

Oh
O


So

I

T3  ^  ^

^ <N  ^


2

o


o


o


(U  O


I  ^


> S  n-i


O OX)  o
G ^ ^  n  C


272


(U


^  d


tj

O o  ^


»r; c/5  C

o  (u  o


^  ^  IT)


o


O  O


11^
I -Sol


I  DO)


^  o


o  a

CI.


•-^  .S  O

Oh43  J


P  o


t3


° C  g

^  B  >

Oh  ^  O
O >^  S

.11  2


o

a

o  d
o  o


^  wo
d  2^

^  o  ti


C/3


f2<


•5

on

M-( >  O

^  (U

o  ^  p

^  S5  ^

73  O


d

'>

O

o


u

Oh
O


B

9  <u

■  d

^'  ^  g
Si  d

d


a  73


d

O  I

^  ^  .s  2


o  a


i

o

1

§

o
U


273


o


1


d  a
o  ^


^  'S  ^  g


■  ^  GO  D  ^
^  .2^  ^  .52

a --^^  -o


O  C3

Slo.S  S  ^  22
-H  b  <i>  —  9


IS

in


CI.  JH
4-  O


O  CI.
Oh  Cj


=^  OS

.2  o

c  o

'C  o


^  ^  2  ^ U ^ §  =3  ^'S  °  § 2^  c  S  S  ^  §  o


a C  ^ e 0>Jf?S i^^"^ O  ^ ^ <0  ^  ^  'Tn  C

j=i  ^ >^ 9  'Zi P 5 >. c3 Oh.^ O C  S fll  7^  -rt  Q


^  o


i:§i -s-ss  -§11

• >^  a>  c  o  c  2


274


;2


§  O ^  D

J3


B  6

J-l


O  X!


— S^TD  <
— (U <U  .ti  uJL

O O P  >^J^  P


>  c  2:  ^  o  "


c3


c«  X  w  OS  (1>  3  <fi
C/5  S  Oh  Oh-O  S5


-a  5

G D «  5

2  S  c  o  w  «
S  eg ^  p


^  -  c  ^ jU  ,^  ^


'O  .5


O  0)


S


;h  <U
o  22  D


o  o


G  -G


1


G  in ^  ■"  G

« s  s s  o  o  i

<uS  -  ^J^-^c^GoJ
G


G  03

'>  S  -2

'2  O  G

S  s


o


O  ^

Oh


73

W)^  o3

J? ^  ^

^  ^ O  03

G  jH  ^  '-2

G  V5  ^  j::

a>  +-•  o

'>  1^

!>  (U

d


G  «5

W)  G
G


l-H  ^

03  o


G  x>
1)  ^


C  O
G

O  O
N


Cd  M-l


■5


G

a3  »-i  «

2i  (u  o

^  o

G  1:^


(/3


O CI.  d^-t!


O  .G

03  O
"7?


«  O

o  o  S


6


03


^  g  G  -5  T3

O  o  G  C


G  S  §  5
=  G  S  0.

O  CL,'T3

c


(/5


o3 (U  ^


■p/^S -^2  ^

O cd .-H  c«


7:  >  03  G
£  2  ^  ^  3

Oh O  -a  .G


GOG

:g  o

c3  O


-c?

Go.:


•a 2  -c  g

O oJ  *^  *-!

0:  ;j  2i  2  .s


G

<u


G  '^3  O
p ^3 2  o  ,G


275


0)


B

a

^  B


o  c

(l> S ^  -M

O  03  C

C  C  a>

i>  >  5


0.  -a  .s


So  o


c/2


"  ^  ^

<U  (U  as  ^  O
^  ^ O C  ^

B  !>!  ^  •=  ^

O 3 D  C3


N

3  'o


on  0)

CM  o
Dh  O  ON

(4—1


p  O


1)  0)


•  r3 O <iO  ^
OS  ^  o  2

^  2^  1


^  .2  ^

|>  ^<

c  5  S5  ^<u

_e


H-1 Clh  H


O O  c/5


>  g

c  c
o  o

S  n


O  D


O  pQ

X5  m

c/3 C  <D

(U (U  O


>  .S


P  c«

^2  ^  2^  „

«  W)^  00

C  c«  «2


O^^StSoCO^ <X5-bZ^-HH^  (NZ^-sLZLPH-t!^


.sis I  s


Oh  C  S  -i^
C/5 <U  CX,  Oh


o

j_,  CO


01^

TO  c/3
I— I  <^

03  ITS

si


0)


>  03


276


<3


«  0)  "  o


i  £  o  ^  -5  <^


O


o


o

0)

C/5  -I-'

03  ^
OX)  O

O


GO

0)

>^  p

l-H  »-l

O O  S

^ 5;?  ^
=^  c!

c3 g  C3
on o <1>  <1>  t

id  S ^  •


o  -  S  U  ^  <


I

a.


■5  2

Si
oi  2.


«2<


O  On
N  ^

X)  <


o  ^

■*->


o


3


0\


Is

II


•|0

on  ^


Co
o


W i '  QJ


P P  .5


hJ O  03


^  «4_,

go

03


■  ^ i-( X >J  i-j

II  ^  -5  s


^  X3  4)


Oh

O o 00 ^  ^
3  ^  P


277


si

O  <1>

a-' — '

C/D  3h


>  .

CO  K  ^


CO -  o
O


c
o

H  tjo  tojo  u

O  O  O  r

S  ><  £  i

^  5  § O  CM

<  >  ^  eg  i


c3

o

'd

'5  r— 1

O C2  fN|

(U  T3  ^

c  c  g  t;

N  J  ^  ^


O  03
O

n  03


C/2

D
03

<^  §
— on  ^
5 <1>  t3

03  O


S  6-2

C3

^  ^  CI.

iS  M-(

^  o

03  w  T3

a
a


N  ^  ::i


o  c
=2  2^  ^  ^

C/D 03 O  Zll


O

U

C3  OO
O  <^

-I


03 o  O

§  s  §

c  <u  ^


03


O


o  >


l-H

o3
P

o3  \C>


O  Os
03  W)


•  o

S  C3  P

O  03  03

-  =5  pq  ^


03


c  o

M c  03
03

03 tXO ^  rj  r—i


o  o  c

03

o


o


V.  G


.2  °

'5b  c/3

f2.2

G

c  2

O  «4H


G
G

o

G

^  S


<  K  H  t;5  :^


°1

N


G

o


a  ^

03  U-)

1/3

o  <


G


O  rn


O on  .

rr,  ^


t:  B


G  ^
Dh  03


>

§  ^

•^-^  M-i  "is
o


^  o  >^

X 03  «2


.2  rT

I  ^

on  (U


G

.2
6

.2

s  ^

<U  G

S3


.2^2

15  G  G

<U  HH  o


U  .2

o

c/3 C  g

S.2  g

116


a

.2  '  ^


5  G


G<^r3.2

rG  c/3  G  G
X) n  «


rG  c/3  G  j-i
X) C O  G


278


C  cti  >

*^ <U  c  «

^  c  ti

c« 03  C  ^

O  C  3


y ^  ^


o  :5
o

o  o


1/5


O

ON


»0


_  (U

.2  o  _o

to  r-i

■Z! C O  O

(u  +^  a
e>x) c  0

.2  o  'o  "2
13  ^  ■>
-a  2

X!  .2  -5  -o

>;  ^  ^

£  o  -o  o

l-H  P

^  §  c
i>  ^  ^  £  ^

<  cd  ;=3  -G  3  4-:

-^1  &I  e<


G  G


i3  G

G  0

c  <^

.2  o

G  a>


o

«  o

§  ^

Cd  a.


O  I — I


;=J  o
1.2


G  13

a  ^
a  ^

o  <u
0  i2

^  G
d  _o

"So
o  ^

*c
to  c

(U  g

O  o

^6

O  ^

^  T3

00  (U

0)  c

o

(U  03
G  Oh


a

sa
.a  u

G  2^

"g

is
^1


xi  ^
o


73  I — I
G


O  ^
G


c  a


-5 a  o  i


a  r— ,

a  ^

G  <


a'^
a  00

^  o
X

O


G

«  G

a  2

rG  O


.a  a

03

-8.2
S  2

a^

U  o


- 1


2


03


•S  W  c3  ^  ^  _
G tin  G <^  O


G  <.


03


—  O ~  G
3 O G .--^  O

^au^.2  §3
-a  u  :^  <2  H


On


G

.a

<D C3  S

G  43  ^

03

a«  2
a  o  I


o  o

.2

o


ua^

O  03


O  <U
^ too  (U

.2  a  §  a

43 3  03


oO

G  -C  ^

.2  PQ  ^

42  S  -3


G^«
3  O

C3  ^  ^
H  g  G

>

4-10)"^

sT  P

Oh  -  43
O  3  ^
<U  3  «4_|
Ph  PQ  O


G  .a  ^

o  '

O  0)

43  O
G  ^

(u  PQ

«4-l  G

o  :g

(U  o


>  o

D
G

I—

ON


3
t-»

3
o
43

o
o

*>
o


05


a
a


1^  §

a  i3  a

<U G  O

-ti  o  ^


t/5

mber

signa-
reements

D  03
C  >
C  (u

G  d)

T3  too

0  <u  0

G  03

0

=^  0

peal

the

nfer

Pro

rties
ies  t

<  0  U

£2

o  ^


too
03


279


€.<

2

O  »n
00  On
O  ^


^<

O  ^
O  >0

00  o^
o


^  On
O  ^
O  ^

00

O


o  ^  «n

<^

o  ^  o  -

O ^  00

C/D J-<  (/3

- D C  D

tOD  CUD
D C  p

£<  o<

0)


-2 .Si  >

>  _  s


a  ~  ^


0)  c  v;  'O


§  §  2

<U

o  o  -  P


.2

O  (U

c  c

OS  _0

§  s

-I  e

N  ^
O


^  a
^  o
c

si

.1:1

^  ti
<u  <

§  Q


03


03


<  S


s  I

73  U


u_i  73 ,


D  a>

'S  ^  s  s

S  73 O  o

Oh  c  ^  "r:

-'>^^|

" .ti  03  .S


X)


^  73


u


flj  o3


c  •  -  c


y  tin


oT.S
^  fa

Id


73  «  (u

^  ^  -o

>  <L>  C3

•5  <  s


280


§ac>^§o  ^^u5ft  o  Be,


o


o  c  2

5  V.  2  £

'  '>  cVi  ^  '2t:'5


lliyflf 111  I „i  III

slls.iilisg I  i It  ill


C  ,^5  »-|


i  ^l^ll ^  ill


.2-02  -JSc/^tci..  -^3^°


Sc  i^>GHa><u  225«


281


^  i.s  *J  e-:S^|  «  §S|  cS  ^5
^  ^  B  i S  ^  s  8  >^  o  ^  ^ 1 1  _g  -s  (3

^  6^cdC/5CX)-ya3<4:ioOO(/3<UiUVj^O.-^^


S  >  2  S >  S 6  -B  g-S  S S  ---j:  = S  „  s  ^  S  =  ^  .2  J  S  I  c


>
o

u

a,
o


'5  Q

1/3  [T,

So

o

^  o
c  e

g  g

<>


^  o


o  XI  -9

c3

S^S  S  8  g

S  i  2  §  S


282


O

o  -  ^


p  -


o  ^  o


03

o


Ph  J  VM  O


^  Pi


<c

> J  o


o  -

^  o


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  283


1. FAILURE  OF  THE  GENEVA  SETTLEMENT


A. INTRODUCTION:  THE  FLAWED  PEACE

The  Geneva  Conference  of  1954  brought  only  transitory  peace  to  Indochina.
Nonetheless,  except  for  the  United  States,  the  major  powers  were,  at  the  time
of  the  Conference,  satisfied  that  with  their  handiwork:  the  truce  averted  a  further
U.S.  military  involvement  on  the  Asian  mainland,  and  dampened  a  heightening
crisis  between  East  and  West  which  might  readily  have  led  to  conflict  outside
Southeast  Asia.  So  long  as  these  conditions  obtained,  neither  France,  the  U.K.,
the  U.S.S.R.  nor  Communist  China  were  seriously  disposed  to  disturb  the  modus
Vivendi  in  Vietnam.  U.S.  leaders  publicly  put  the  best  face  possible  on  the  Geneva
Settlement — about  all  that  might  possibly  have  been  obtained  from  a  seriously
disadvantaged  negotiating  position,  and  no  serious  impairment  to  freedom  of
United  States  action.  But  the  U.S.,  within  its  inner  councils  immediately  after
Geneva,  viewed  the  Settlement's  provisions  for  Vietnam  as  "disaster,"  and  de-
termined to  prevent,  if  it  could,  the  further  extension  of  communist  government
over  the  Vietnamese  people  and  territory.  U.S.  policy  adopted  in  1954  to  this
end  did  not  constitute  an  irrevocable  nor  "open-ended"  commitment  to  the
government  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.  But  it  did  entail  a  progressively  deepening  U.S.
involvement  in  the  snarl  of  violence  and  intrigue  within  Vietnam,  and  therefore
a  direct  role  in  the  ultimate  breakdown  of  the  Geneva  Settlement.

The  Settlement  of  Geneva,  though  it  provided  respite  from  years  of  political
violence,  bitterly  disappointed  Vietnamese  of  North  and  South  alike  who  had
looked  toward  a  unified  and  independent  Vietnam.  For  the  Viet  Minh,  the  Settle-
ment was  a  series  of  disappointing  compromises  to  which  they  had  agreed  at  the
urging  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  China,  compromises  beyond  what  hard  won
military  advantage  over  the  French  had  led  them  to  expect.  For  the  State  of
Vietnam  in  the  South,  granted  independence  by  France  while  the  Geneva  Con-
ference was  in  progress,  the  Settlement  was  an  arrangement  to  which  it  had  not
been  party,  and  to  which  it  could  not  subscribe.  The  truce  of  1954,  in  fact,
embodied  three  serious  deficiencies  as  a  basis  for  stable  peace  among  the  Viet-
namese:

— It  relied  upon  France  as  its  executor.

— It  ignored  the  opposition  of  the  State  of  Vietnam.

— It  countenanced  the  disassociation  of  the  United  States.
These  weaknesses  turned  partitioned  Vietnam  into  two  hostile  states,  and  given
the  absence  of  a  stabilizing  international  force  and  the  impotence  of  the  ICC,
brought  about  an  environment  in  which  war  was  likely,  perhaps  inevitable.  A
nominally  temporary  "line  of  demarcation"  between  North  and  South  at  the  17th
parallel  was  transformed  into  one  of  the  more  forbidding  frontiers  of  the  world.
A  mass  displacement  of  nearly  5%  of  the  population  disrupted  the  polity  and
heightened  tensions  in  both  North  and  South.  And  both  the  Democratic  Govern-
ment of  Vietnam  (DRV)  in  the  North,  and  the  Government  of  Vietnam  (GVN)
in  the  South  armed,  with  foreign  aid,  for  what  each  perceived  as  a  coming  strug-
gle over  reunification.  Some  of  the  main  roots  of  the  present  conflict  run  to  these
failures  of  Geneva.


284 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


B. THE  PARTITION  OF  VIETNAM

1. Provisions  for  Unifying  Vietnam

The  sole  formal  instrument  of  the  Geneva  Conference  was  the  document
signed  by  the  military  commanders  of  the  two  hostile  forces  termed  "Agreement
on  the  Cessation  of  Hostilities  in  Viet-Nam,"  dealing  largely  with  the  disengage-
ment and  regroupment  of  military  forces.  Article  14  of  the  Agreement  con-
tained one  brief — but  fateful  allusion — to  a  future  political  solution:

Article  14a.  Pending  the  general  elections  which  will  bring  about  the  uni-
fication of  Vietnam,  the  conduct  of  civil  administration  in  each  regrouping
zone  shall  be  in  the  hands  of  the  party  whose  forces  are  to  be  regrouped
there  in  virtue  of  the  present  agreement.  .  .  .

A  more  general  expression  of  the  intent  of  the  conferees  was  the  unsigned  "Final
Declaration  of  the  Geneva  Conference,"  by  which  the  Conference  "takes  note"  of
the  aforementioned  Agreement  and  several  declarations  by  represented  nations
and:

.  .  .  recognizes  that  the  essential  purpose  of  the  agreement  relating  to
Vietnam  is  to  settle  military  questions  with  a  view  to  ending  hostilities  and
that  the  military  demarcation  line  is  provisional  and  should  not  in  any  way
be  interpreted  as  constituting  a  political  or  territorial  boundary  .  .  .  de-
clares that,  so  far  as  Vietnam  is  concerned,  the  settlement  of  political
problems,  effected  on  the  basis  of  respect  for  the  principles  of  independence,
unity,  and  territorial  integrity,  shall  permit  the  Vietnamese  people  to  enjoy
the  fundamental  freedoms,  guaranteed  by  democratic  institutions  estab-
lished as  a  result  of  free  general  elections  by  secret  ballot.  In  order  to
insure  that  sufficient  progress  in  the  restoration  of  peace  has  been  made,
and  that  all  the  necessary  conditions  obtain  for  free  expression  of  the
national  will,  general  elections  shall  be  held  in  July,  1956,  under  the  super-
vision of  an  international  commission  composed  of  representatives  of  the
member  States  of  the  International  Supervisory  Commission,  referred  to  in
the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities.  Consultations  will  be  held  on
this  subject  between  the  competent  representative  authorities  of  the  two
zones  from  20  July  1955  onwards.  .  .  .

The  DRV  approved  the  Final  Declaration,  and,  having  failed  in  its  attempts
to  bring  about  immediate  elections  on  unification,  no  doubt  did  so  reluctantly.
There  has  been  some  authoritative  speculation  that  the  Viet  Minh  accepted  this
aspect  of  the  Settlement  with  deep  cynicism;  Pham  Van  Dong,  the  DRV  dele-
gate at  Geneva  is  supposed  to  have  expressed  conviction  that  the  elections
would  never  be  held.  But  it  seems  more  likely  that  the  communist  powers  fully
expected  the  nascent  GVN,  already  badly  shaken  from  internal  stresses,  to  col-
lapse, and  unification  to  follow  with  elections  or  not.  In  any  event,  the  public
stance  of  the  DRV  stressed  their  expectations  that  the  election  would  be  held.
Ho  Chi  Minh  stated  unequivocally  on  22  July  1954  that:  "North,  Central  and
South  Vietnam  are  territories  of  ours.  Our  country  will  surely  be  unified,  our
entire  people  will  surely  be  liberated."

The  Saigon  Government  was  no  less  assertive  in  calling  for  unification  of


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  285

Vietnam.  In  a  note  to  the  French  of  17  July  1954,  the  GVN  delegate  at  Geneva
protested  having  been  left  until  then  "in  complete  ignorance"  of  French  intentions
regarding  the  division  of  the  country,  which  he  felt  failed  to  "take  any  account  of
the  unanimous  will  for  national  unity  of  the  Vietnamese  people";  he  proposed,
futilely,  United  Nations  trusteeship  of  all  Vietnam  in  preference  to  a  nation
"dismembered  and  condemned  to  slavery."  At  the  final  session  of  the  Conference,
when  called  upon  to  join  in  the  Final  Declaration,  the  GVN  delegate  announced
that  his  government  "reserves  its  full  freedom  of  action  in  order  to  safeguard
the  sacred  right  of  the  Vietnamese  people  to  its  territorial  unity,  national  inde-
pendence and  freedom."  Thus  the  Geneva  truce  confronted  from  the  outset  the
anomaly  of  two  sovereign  Vietnamese  states,  each  calling  for  unification,  but
only  one,  the  DRV,  committed  to  achieving  it  via  the  terms  of  the  Settlement.

2. France  Withdraws,  1954-1956

France,  as  the  third  party  in  Vietnam,  then  became  pivotal  to  any  political
settlement,  its  executor  for  the  West.  But  France  had  agreed  to  full  independence
for  the  GVN  on  June  4,  1954,  nearly  six  weeks  before  the  end  of  the  Geneva
Conference.  By  the  terms  of  that  June  agreement,  the  GVN  assumed  responsi-
bility for  international  contracts  previously  made  on  its  behalf  by  France;  but,
there  having  been  no  reference  to  subsequent  contracts,  it  was  technically  free
of  the  Geneva  Agreements.  It  has  been  argued  to  the  contrary  that  the  GVN
was  bound  by  Geneva  because  it  possessed  at  the  time  few  of  the  attributes  of
full  sovereignty,  and  especially  because  it  was  dependent  on  France  for  de-
fense. But  such  debates  turn  on  tenuous  points  of  international  law  regarding
the  prerogatives  of  newly  independent  or  partitioned  states.  France  speedily
divested  itself  of  responsibilities  for  "civil  administration"  in  South  Vietnam.
In  February,  1956,  the  GVN  requested  France  to  withdraw  its  military  forces,
and  on  April  26,  1956,  the  French  military  command  in  Vietnam,  the  signatory
of  the  Geneva  Agreement,  was  dissolved.  France,  torn  by  domestic  political
turbulence  in  which  past  disappointments  and  continued  frustrations  in  Vietnam
figured  prominently,  and  tested  anew  in  Algeria,  abandoned  its  position  in
Southeast  Asia.  No  doubt,  an  increasingly  acerbic  relation  between  its  representa-
tives and  those  of  the  United  States  in  South  Vietnam  hastened  its  departure,
where  American  policy  clashed  with  French  over  the  arming  and  training  of  a
national  army  for  the  GVN,  over  French  military  assistance  for  the  religious
sects,  over  French  economic  policy  on  repatriating  investments,  and  over  general
French  opposition  to  Diem.  But  more  fundamentally,  France  felt  itself  shouldered
aside  in  South  Vietnam  by  the  United  States  over:

(1)  Policy  toward  the  DRV.  The  French  averred  initially  that  Ho  was  a
potential  Tito,  and  that  they  could  through  an  accommodation  with  him  pre-
serve their  economic  and  cultural  interests  in  Vietnam — in  their  view,  a  "co-
existence experiment"  of  world  wide  significance  in  the  Cold  War.  As  of  Decem-
ber, 1954,  they  were  determined  to  carry  out  the  Geneva  elections.  Eventually,
however,  they  were  obliged  to  choose  between  the  U.S.  and  the  DRV,  so  firmly
did  the  U.S.  foreclose  any  adjustment  to  the  DRV's  objectives.

(2)  Policy  toward  Diem.  France  opposed  Diem  not  solely  because  he  was  a
vocally  Francophobe  Annamite,  but  because  he  threatened  directly  their  posi-
tion in  Vietnam.  His  nationalism,  his  strictures  against  "feudalists,"  his  notions
of  moral  regeneration  all  conjoined  in  an  enmity  against  the  French  nearly  as
heated  as  that  he  harbored  against  the  communists — but  to  greater  effect,  for
it  was  far  easier  for  him  to  muster  his  countrymen's  opinion  against  the  French


286 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol  I

than  against  the  Viet  Minh.  By  the  spring  of  1955,  the  Diem-France  contro-
versy acquired  military  dimensions  when  French  supported  sect  forces  took  up
arms  against  the  GVN.  At  that  time,  while  the  U.S.  construed  its  policy  as
aiding  "Free  Vietnam,"  the  French  saw  Diem  as  playing  Kerensky's  role  in
Vietnam,  with  the  People's  Revolutionary  Committee  as  the  Bolsheviks,  and
Ho,  the  Viet  Minh  Lenin,  waiting  off  stage.

(3)  Military  Policy.  By  the  end  of  1954,  the  French  were  persuaded  that
SEATO  could  never  offer  security  for  their  citizens  and  other,  interests  in
Vietnam,  and  had  despaired  of  receiving  U.S.  military  aid  for  a  French  Ex-
peditionary corps  of  sufficient  size  to  meet  the  threat.  U.S.  insistence  that  it
should  train  RVNAF  increased  their  insecurity.  Within  the  combined  U.S.-
French headquarters  in  Saigon  thereafter,  officers  of  both  nations  worked  side
by  side  launching  countervailing  intrigues  among  the  Vietnamese,  and  among
each  other.  In  March  of  1956,  as  France  prepared  to  accede  to  the  GVN  request
for  withdrawal  of  its  remaining  military  forces.  Foreign  Minister  Pineau,  in  a
Paris  speech,  took  the  U.K.  and  the  U.S.  to  task  for  disrupting  Western  unity.
While  Pineau  selected  U.S.  support  of  French-hating  Diem  for  particular  rancor,
he  did  so  in  the  context  of  decrying  France's  isolation  in  dealing  with  nationalist
rebels  in  North  Africa — and  thus  generally  indicated  two  powers  who  had
threatened  the  French  empire  since  the  U.K.  intervened  in  Syria  in  1941,  and
President  Roosevelt  assured  the  Sultan  of  Morocco  that  his  sympathies  lay  with
the  colonial  peoples  struggling  for  independence.

Ultimately,  France  had  to  place  preservation  of  its  European  position  ahead  of
empire,  and,  hence,  cooperation  with  the  U.S.  before  opposition  in  Indochina.
France's  vacating  Vietnam  in  1956  eased  U.S.  problems  there  over  the  short
run,  and  smoothed  Diem's  path.  But  the  DRV's  hope  for  a  national  plebescite
were  thereby  dashed.  On  January  1,  1955,  as  the  waning  of  France's  power  in
Vietnam  became  apparent,  Pham  Van  Dong,  DRV  Premier,  declared  that  as
far  as  Hanoi  was  concerned:  ".  .  .  it  was  with  you,  the  French,  that  we  signed
the  Geneva  Agreements,  and  it  is  up  to  you  to  see  that  they  are  respected."  Some
thirteen  months  later  the  Foreign  Minster  of  France  stated  that:

We  are  not  entirely  masters  of  the  situation.  The  Geneva  Accords  on
the  one  hand  and  the  pressure  of  our  allies  on  the  other  creates  a  very
complex  juridical  situation.  .  .  .  The  position  in  principle  is  clear:  France
is  the  guarantor  of  the  Geneva  Accords  .  .  .  But  we  do  not  have  the
means  alone  of  making  them  respected.

But  the  GVN  remained  adamantly  opposed  to  elections,  and  neither  the  U.S.
nor  any  other  western  power  was  disposed  to  support  France's  fulfillment  of  its
responsibility  to  the  DRV.

3. Diem  Refuses  Consultation,  1955

Communist  expectations  that  the  Diem  government  would  fall  victim  to  the
voracious  political  forces  of  South  Vietnam  were  unfulfilled.  Diem  narrowly
escaped  such  a  fate,  but  with  American  support — albeit  wavering,  and  ac-
companied by  advice  he  often  ignored — Diem  within  a  year  of  the  Geneva  Con-
ference succeeded  in  defeating  the  most  powerful  of  his  antagonists,  the  armed
sects,  and  in  removing  from  power  Francophile  elements  within  his  government,
including  his  disloyal  military  chiefs.  He  spoke  from  comparatively  firm  political
ground  when,  on  July  16,  1955,  before  the  date  set  for  consulting  with  the
DRV  on  the  plebescite,  he  announced  in  a  radio  broadcast  that:


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  287
We  did  not  sign  the  Geneva  Agreements.

We  are  not  bound  in  any  way  by  these  Agreements,  signed  against  the
will  of  the  Vietnamese  people.  .  .  .  We  shall  not  miss  any  opportunity
which  would  permit  the  unification  of  our  homeland  in  freedom,  but  it  is
out  of  the  question  for  us  to  consider  any  proposal  from  the  Viet  Minh  if
proof  is  not  given  that  they  put  the  superior  interests  of  the  national  com-
munity above  those  of  communism.

Moreover,  Diem  spoke  with  some  assurance  of  American  backing,  for  the
U.S.  had  never  pressed  for  the  elections  envisaged  by  the  Settlement.  At  the
final  session  of  Geneva,  rather  than  joining  with  the  Conference  delegates  in  the
Final  Declaration,  the  U.S.  "observer,"  Under  Secretary  of  State  Walter  Bedell
Smith,  had  linked  U.S.  policy  vis-a-vis  Vietnam  to  that  for  Korea,  Taiwan  and
Germany  in  these  terms:

In  the  case  of  nations  now  divided  against  their  will,  we  shall  continue
to  seek  to  achieve  unity  through  free  elections  supervised  by  the  United
Nations  to  insure  that  they  are  conducted  fairly.

Although  the  U.S.  opposed  elections  in  1954  because  Ho  Chi  Minh  would  have
then  won  them  handily,  the  records  of  the  National  Security  Council  and  the
Operations  Coordinating  Board  of  the  summer  of  1954  establishes  that  this
government  then  nonetheless  expected  elections  eventually  to  be  held  in  Viet-
nam. But,  two  major  misapprehensions  were  evident:  (1)  the  U.S.  planned
through  "political  action"  to  ameliorate  conditions  in  Southeast  Asia  to  the
point  that  elections  would  not  jeopardize  its  objective  of  survival  for  a  "free"
Vietnam;  and  (2)  the  U.S.  estimated  that  France  would  usefully  remain  in
Vietnam.  By  the  spring  of  1955,  although  U.S.  diplomacy  had  brought  the  South-
east Asia  Treaty  Organization  into  being,  and  although  Diem  had  with  U.S.
aid  weathered  a  number  of  severe  political  storms,  the  U.S.  was  less  sanguine
than  its  "poHtical  action"  would  suffice,  and  that  further  French  presence  would
be  helpful.  Accordingly,  it  began  to  look  closely  at  the  conditions  under  which
elections  might  be  held,  and  urged  that  Vietnamese  do  the  same.  One  definition
of  terms  acceptable  to  the  U.S.  was  set  forth  in  a  State  Department  memorandum
of  5  May  1955,  approved  by  Secretary  Dulles:

The  U.S.  believes  that  the  conditions  for  free  elections  should  be  those
which  Sir  Anthony  Eden  put  forward  and  the  three  Western  Powers  sup-
ported at  Berlin  in  connection  with  German  reunification.  The  United  States
believes  that  the  Free  Vietnamese  should  insist  that  elections  be  held  under
conditions  of  genuine  freedom;  that  safeguards  be  agreed  to  assure  this
freedom  before,  after,  and  during  elections  and  that  there  be  adequate
guarantees  for,  among  other  things,  freedom  of  movement,  freedom  of
presentation  of  candidates,  immunity  of  candidates,  freedom  from  arbitrary
arrest  or  victimization,  freedom  of  association  or  political  meetings,  freedom
of  expression  for  all,  freedom  of  the  press,  radio,  and  free  circulation  of
newspapers,  secrecy  of  the  vote,  and  security  of  polling  stations  and  ballot
boxes.

Although  the  U.S.  communicated  to  Diem  its  conviction  that  proposing  such
conditions  to  the  DRV  during  pre-plebescite  consultations  would  lead  promptly
to  a  flat  rejection,  to  Diem's  marked  advantage  in  world  opinion.  Diem  found  it


288 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

preferable  to  refuse  outright  to  talk  to  the  North,  and  the  U.S.  indorsed  his
policy.

4.  Divided  Vietnam:  Status  Quo  Accepted

The  deadline  for  the  consultations  in  July  1955,  and  the  date  set  for  elections
in  July  1956,  passed  without  further  international  action  to  implement  those
provisions  of  the  Geneva  Settlement.  The  DRV  communicated  directly  with  the
GVN  in  July,  1955,  and  again  in  May  and  June  of  1956,  proposing  not  only
consultative  conference  to  negotiate  "free  general  elections  by  secret  ballot,"
but  to  liberalize  North-South  relations  in  general.  Each  time  the  GVN  replied
with  disdain,  or  with  silence.  The  17th  parallel,  with  its  demilitarized  zone  on
either  side,  became  de  facto  an  international  boundary,  and — since  Ngo  Dinh
Diem's  rigid  refusal  to  traffic  with  the  North  excluded  all  economic  exchanges  and
even  an  interstate  postal  agreement — one  of  the  most  restricted  boundaries  in
the  world.  The  DRV  appealed  to  the  U.K.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  as  co-chairmen  of  the
Geneva  Conference  to  no  avail.  In  January,  1956,  Communist  China  requested
another  Geneva  Conference  to  deal  with  the  situation,  but  the  U.S.S.R.  and  the
U.K.  responded  only  by  extending  the  functions  of  the  International  Control
Commission  beyond  its  1956  expiration  date.  By  early  1957  the  partition  of
Vietnam  was  generally  accepted  throughout  the  international  community.  In
January,  1957,  the  Soviet  Union  proposed  the  admission  of  both  the  GVN  and
the  DRV  to  the  United  Nations,  the  U.S.S.R.  delegate  declaring  that  "in
Vietnam  two  separate  States  existed,  which  differed  from  one  another  in
political  and  economic  structure.  .  .  ."

Professor  Hans  Morgenthau,  writing  at  the  time,  and  following  a  visit  to
South  Vietnam,  described  the  political  progress  of  the  GVN  as  a  "miracle,"  but
stated  that  conditions  for  free  elections  obtained  in  neither  the  North  nor  the
South.  He  concluded  that:

Actually,  the  provision  for  free  elections  which  would  solve  ultimately
the  problem  of  Vietnam  was  a  device  to  hide  the  incompatibility  of  the
Communist  and  Western  positions,  neither  of  which  can  admit  the  domina-
tion of  all  of  Vietnam  by  the  other  side.  It  was  a  device  to  disguise  the
fact  that  the  line  of  military  demarcation  was  bound  to  be  a  line  of
political  division  as  well.  .  .  .

5.  The  Discontented

However,  there  were  three  governments,  at  least,  for  which  the  status  quo
of  a  Vietnam  divided  between  communist  and  non-communist  governments  was
unacceptable.  The  GNV,  while  remaining  cool  to  the  DRV,  pursued  an  active
propaganda  campaign  prophesying  the  overturning  of  communism  in  the  North,
and  proclaiming  its  resolve  ultimately  to  reunify  the  nation  in  freedom.  The
United  States  supported  the  GVN,  having  established  as  national  policy  in
1956,  reaffirmed  again  in  1958,  these  guidelines:

Assist  Free  Viet  Nam  to  develop  a  strong,  stable  and  constitutional
government  to  enable  Free  Viet  Nam  to  assert  an  increasingly  attractive
contrast  to  conditions  in  the  present  Communist  zone.  .  .  .  Work  toward
the  weakening  of  the  Communists  in  North  and  South  Viet  Nam  in  order
to  bring  about  the  eventual  peaceful  reunification  of  a  free  and  inde-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  289

pendent  Viet  Nam  under  anti-Communist  leadership.  .  .  .  Support  the
position  of  the  Government  of  Free  Viet  Nam  that  all  Viet  Nam  elections
may  take  place  only  after  it  is  satisfied  that  genuinely  free  elections  can  be
held  throughout  both  zones  of  Viet  Nam.  .  .  .  Treat  the  Viet  Minh  as  not
constituting  a  legitimate  government,  and  discourage  other  non-Communist
states  from  developing  or  maintaining  relations  with  the  Viet  Minh  re-
gime. .  .  .

And  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  became  increasingly  vocal  in  its  calls
for  "struggle"  to  end  partition.  In  April,  1956,  as  the  plebescite  deadline  neared,
Ho  Chi  Minh  declared  ominously  that:

While  recognizing  that  in  certain  countries  the  road  to  socialism  may  be
a  peaceful  one,  we  should  be  aware  of  this  fact:  In  countries  where  the
machinery  of  state,  the  armed  forces,  and  the  police  of  the  bourgeois  class
are  still  strong,  the  proletarian  class  still  has  to  prepare  for  armed  struggle.

While  recognizing  the  possibility  of  reunifying  Vietnam  by  peaceful
means,  we  should  always  remember  that  our  people's  principal  enemies  are
the  American  imperialists  and  their  agents  who  still  occupy  half  our  coun-
try and  are  preparing  for  war.  .  .  .

In  1956,  however,  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  the  DRV  faced  mounting  internal  diffi-
culties, and  were  not  yet  in  a  position  to  translate  the  partition  of  Vietnam  into
casus  belli.

C. REFUGEES:  DISRUPTION  OF  VIETNAM'S  SOCIETY

1.  Provisions  for  Regroupment

Article  14  of  the  "Agreement  on  the  Cessation  of  Hostilities  in  Vietnam,"
which  provided  for  separate  political  administrations  north  and  south  of  the
17th  parallel,  also  stated  that:

14(d)  From  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  the  present  agreement  until
the  movement  of  troops  is  completed,  any  civilians  residing  in  a  district
controlled  by  one  party  who  wish  to  go  and  live  in  the  zone  assigned  to  the
other  party  shall  be  permitted  and  helped  to  do  so  by  the  authorities  in
that  district.

It  is  probable  that  none  of  the  conferees  foresaw  the  ramifications  of  that  one
sentence,  for  it  put  in  motion  one  million  Vietnamese  refugees,  most  of  them
destitute,  who  became  at  first  heavy  burdens  on  the  DRV  and  the  GVN,  and
ultimately  political  and  military  assets  for  both  regimes.  For  the  United  States,
the  plight  of  these  peoples  lent  humanitarian  dimensions  to  its  policy  toward
Vietnam,  and  new  perspectives  to  its  economic  and  military  assistance.

2.  Exodus  to  South  Vietnam

In  accordance  with  Article  1  of  the  Agreement  on  Cessation  of  Hostilities,
190,000  troops  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  were  moved  from  North
Vietnam  to  the  South.  In  addition,  some  900,000  civilians  exercised  their  option
under  Article  14  (d)  of  the  Armistice.  While  no  wholly  reliable  statistics  exist,
there  is  agreement  among  several  authorities  that  the  figures  presented  by  the
International  Commission  for  Supervision  and  Control  in  Vietnam  (ICC),  citing
chiefly  the  Saigon  Government  as  its  source,  are  generally  correct.


290 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


FIGURES  OF  MOVEMENT  OF  POPULATION
IN  VIETNAM  UNDER  ARTICLE  14  (d)

North  Zone  to  South  Zone


([) Total  arrivals

(Figs,  given  by  the
State  of  Vietnam)


(ii)  Estimate  of  arrivals

not  registered  (Figs,
given  by  the  State  of
Vietnam  in  April)

(iii)  Figs,  given  by  PAVN


Period  Ending
19.5.55


19.5.55
20.7.55
Up  to  20.7.55


By  air
By  sea

Across  provisional
demarcation  line
By  other  means

Total


Total


213,635
550,824

12,344
41,324
818,127


70,000
888,127

4,749


TOTAL  892,876


The  uncertainty  of  statistics  concerning  total  numbers  of  refugees  stems  not
only  from  DRV  reluctance  to  report  departures,  but  also  the  turbulent  condi-
tions which  then  obtained  throughout  Vietnam,  where  the  French  were  in  the
process  of  turning  over  public  administration  to  Vietnamese,  and  where  Saigon's
communications  with  refugee  relief  operations  in  the  field  were  at  best  tenuous.
U.S.  Department  of  State  analysis  in  1957  estimated  the  following  composition
and  disposition  of  the  refugees.


CIVILIAN  REGROUPEES  FROM  THE  NORTH,  1954-1955
Category  Number  {Approximate)

1.  Registered  with  GVN  for  640,000  Vietnamese
refugee  benefits  15,000  Nungs

5,000  Chinese

2.  French  citizens  resettled  or

repatriated  by  France  40,000

3.  Chinese  absorbed  into  Chinese

community  in  South  45,000

Total 640,000  Vietnamese

(Remainder,  200,000  Vietnamese  absorbed  without  aid,  e.g.,
dependents  of  military,  civil  servants.)

The  GVN  director  of  refugee  programs  reported  that  the  refugees  were  com-
posed, by  trade,  as  follows :

Farmers  76%
Fishermen  10%
Artisans,  small  businessmen,

students,  government

employees,  professionals  14%


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  291

But  it  was  religious  orientation  which  ultimately  assumed  the  greatest  impor-
tance in  South  Vietnam's  political  life:  an  estimated  65%  of  North  Vietnam's
Catholics  moved  to  the  South,  more  than  600,000  in  all;  these,  with  2,000
northern  Protestants,  were  settled  in  their  own  communities.

3. Causes  of  the  Exodus

The  flight  from  North  Vietnam  reflected  apprehension  over  the  coming  to
power  of  the  Viet  Minh.  Institutionally,  the  Viet  Minh  were  further  advanced
in  North  Vietnam  than  the  South,  and  had  in  areas  of  the  North  under  their
control  already  conducted  several  experiments  in  social  revolution.

[Material  missing]

II. REBELLION  AGAINST  MY-DIEM

A. DIEM'S  POLITICAL  LEGACY:  VIOLENCE
AND  ANTI-COLONIALISM

World  War  II  and  the  First  Indochina  War  left  the  society  of  South  Vietnam
severely  torn.  The  Japanese,  during  the  years  of  their  presence  from  1940-1945,
had  encouraged  armed  factionalism  to  weaken  the  French  administration  and
strengthen  their  own  position.  The  war  between  the  Viet  Minh  and  the  French
— which  began  in  South  Vietnam  in  September,  1945 — wrought  further  dis-
unity. Paradoxically,  the  South  suffered  political  damage  compared  to  the  North
from  having  been  the  secondary  theater  of  both  wars.  The  Japanese  had  sought
during  World  War  II  to  control  it  without  sizable  occupation  forces.  Similarly,
in  the  First  Indochina  War,  the  French  had  practiced  economy  of  force  in  the
South  so  that  they  could  concentrate  in  Tonkin.  For  conventional  forces,  both
the  Japanese  and  the  French  substituted  irregular  warfare  and  a  system  of  bribes,
subversion,  arms,  military  advice,  and  officially  condoned  concessions  in  corrup-
tion. From  1945-1954,  the  fighting  in  South  Vietnam  was  more  sporadic  and
diffuse  than  in  the  North,  but  in  a  societal  sense,  ultimately  more  destructive.
While  in  Tonkin  the  Viet  Minh  flowed  in  through  and  behind  the  French  and
continued  to  build  a  nation  and  unify  the  people  with  surprising  efficiency,  in
the  South  they  were  unable  to  do  so.  Not  only  were  the  Viet  Minh  centers  of
power  in  the  North  and  the  China  base  area  too  remote  to  support  effectively
the  southern  insurgency,  but  also  the  French  had  imitated  the  Japanese  in  arming
and  supplying  certain  South  Vietnamese  factions,  fomenting  civil  war  against
the  southern  arm  of  the  Viet  Minh.  The  results  approached  anarchy:  a  virtual
breakdown  in  public  administration  by  Franco-Vietnamese  central  governments
and  deep  cleavages  within  the  Vietnamese  body  politic.  By  the  summer  of  1954,
conspiracy  had  become  the  primary  form  of  political  communication  in  South
Vietnam,  and  violence  the  primary  mode  of  political  change.

Politically,  as  well  as  geographically,  South  Vietnam  consisted  of  three  dis-
tinctive regions:  the  narrow,  coastal  plan  of  Annam,  thickly  settled  by  Viet-
namese, where  was  located  Hue,  the  ancient  Viet  capital  and  cultural  center;
the  Highlands,  sparsely  populated  by  Montagnard  tribesmen,  in  which  was  sit-
uated the  summer  capital  of  Dalat;  and  Cochinchina,  the  fertile,  densely  peopled
river-delta  area  in  which  Saigon  stood  [maps  deleted].  Cochinchina  had  experi-
enced a  political  development  markedly  different  from  that  of  Annam.  The  last
area  of  modern  Vietnam  to  be  occupied  by  the  Viet  people  in  their  expansion
southward  (8th  Century,  A.D.),  and  the  first  area  to  fall  to  French  rule  (mid-
19th  Century),  Cochinchina  had  been  administered  by  the  French  directly  as


292 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Viet  Expansion  French  Einpire

HISTORIC  DEVELOPMENT  OF  VIETNAM


Dates  of  Conquest

a  colony,  while  Annam  remained  under  the  Emperor  as  a  French  protectorate.
While  the  mandarinal  rule  of  the  Annamese  court  was  more  a  matter  of  form
than  substance,  Annam's  public  administration  preserved  a  degree  of  unity  among
the  Vietnamese  despite  the  impress  of  French  culture.  In  South  Vietnam,  the
French  seemed  to  be  a  wholly  divisive  influence.  Though  Cochinchina  was  the
site  of  some  of  the  achievements  of  which  French  colonialists  were  most  proud
— the  chief  seat  of  the  rubber  industry,  and  focus  of  major  feats  of  engineering
with  canals  and  railroads — the  Cochinchinese  seem  to  recall  less  the  triumphs  of
French  civilization  than  its  burdens:  the  French  rubber  plantations,  abrasive
with  their  labor,  high-handed  with  local  peoples;  the  oppressive  taxes,  and  the
French  controlled  monopolies  on  salt,  alcohol  and  opium;  recurrent  famine  in
the  midst  of  one  of  the  earth's  richest  farming  regions;  socially  restrictive  school-
ing; modernizing  challenges  to  familial  piety,  village  centralism,  and  other  cher-
ished fundaments  of  Viet  culture.  While  Annam — and  Tonkin  to  the  north —
developed  indigenous  political  movements  opposing  French  rule,  these  were
mainly  foreign-based,  foreign-oriented  parties,  such  as  the  Nationalist  Party
(VNQDD),  a  Vietnamese  copy  of  the  Kuomintang,  or  the  Indochinese  Com-
munist Party  (ICP)  of  the  Comintern,  headed  by  Russian-trained  Ho  Chi  Minh.
In  Cochinchina,  however,  there  emerged  a  number  of  nationalist  movements
peculiar  to  that  region,  or  principally  based  on  that  region.  Saigon,  for  example,
developed  a  range  of  leftist  movements  competitive  with  the  ICP,  including  two
Trotskyite  parties,  as  well  as  a  number  of  VNQDD  splinter  movements,  and  a
politically  active  gangster  fraternity,  the  Binh  Xuyen.  But  the  important  differ-
ences were  in  the  countryside,  where  millions  of  Vietnamese  joined  wholly  Co-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  293

chinchinese  religious  sects  which  propagated  xenophobic  nationalism,  established
theocracies,  and  fielded  armed  forces.  French  and  Japanese  policy  had  deliber-
ately fostered  conflict  among  these  several  factions  to  the  extent  that  Cochinchina
was,  in  1954,  literally  fractioned  among  the  religious  sects,  the  Binh  Xuyen,  and
the  Viet  Minh.  While  by  1954  the  Viet  Minh  dominated  Annam  and  the  High-
lands, control  of  Cochinchina  eluded  them,  for  all  their  ruthless  efficiency.

1.  The  Binh  Xuyen

Saigon  itself  in  1954  was  under  the  rule  of  the  Binh  Xuyen,  a  secret  society  of
brigands  evolved  from  the  Black  Flag  pirates  which  had  for  generations  preyed
on  the  city's  commerce.  The  Binh  Xuyen  ethos  included  a  fierce — albeit  eclectic
— nationalism.  They  collaborated  with  the  Japanese  during  World  War  II,  and
in  September,  1945,  led  the  savage  attack  against  the  French  in  Saigon  which
marked  the  start  of  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War.  The  Binh  Xuyen  leader,  Le
Van  (Bay)  Vien,  subsequently  contracted  an  alliance  with  the  Viet  Minh,
allied  his  1300  soldiers  with  their  guerrillas,  and  served  for  a  time  as  the  Viet
Minh  deputy  commander  for  Cochinchina  and  one  of  its  chief  sources  of  funds.
Bay  Vien's  refusal  to  assassinate  certain  Viet  Minh-condemned  Vietnamese  in-
tellectuals reputedly  stirred  Viet  Minh  misgivings,  and  called  the  Binh  Xuyen
favorably  to  the  attention  of  the  National  United  Front,  an  anti-communist,  Viet
nationalist  group  then  operating  out  of  Shanghai.  In  1947,  Bay  Vien  was  per-
suaded to  cooperate  with  the  National  United  Front.  Informed,  the  Viet  Minh
invited  him  to  the  Plain  of  Reeds  in  an  attempt  to  capture  him.  Bay  Vien  es-
caped, and  thereupon  threw  in  his  lot  with  the  French  and  the  State  of  Vietnam,
accepting  a  commission  as  the  first  colonel  of  the  Vietnamese  National  Army.
Bay  Vien  afterwards  paid  Bao  Dai  what  Colonel  Lansdale  termed  "a  staggering
sum"  for  control  of  gambling  and  prostitution  in  Cholon,  and  of  the  Saigon-
Cholon  police.  The  French  accepted  the  arrangement  because  Bay  Vien  offset
the  Viet  Minh  threat  to  Saigon.  By  1954,  Bay  Vien  was  operating  "Grande
Monde,"  a  gambling  slum  in  Cholon;  "Cloche  d'Or,"  Saigon's  preeminent  gam-
bling establishment;  the  "Noveautes  Catinat,"  Saigon's  best  department  store;  a
hundred  smaller  shops;  a  fleet  of  river  boats;  and  a  brothel,  spectacular  even  by
Asian  standards,  known  as  the  Hall  of  Mirrors.  Besides  a  feudal  fief  south  of
Saigon,  he  owned  an  opium  factory  and  distribution  system,  and  held  substan-
tial interests  in  fish,  charcoal,  hotels,  and  rubber  plantations.  Besides  the  police
apparatus  and  other  followers  numbering  5000  to  8000,  he  had  some  2500
soldiers  at  his  disposal.  He  ruled  Saigon  absolutely;  not  even  Viet  Minh  terrorists
were  able  to  operate  there.  Moreover,  he  exercised  significant  influnce  over  the
Cao  Dai  and  the  Hoa  Hao  leaders.

2.  The  Cao  Dai

The  Cao  Dai  were  a  religious  sect  founded  by  a  colonial  bureaucrat  named
Ngo  Van  Chieu,  who  with  one  Pham  Cong  Tac  conducted  a  series  of  spiritualist
seances  from  which  emerged  a  new  religious  faith,  and  in  the  early  1920's,  a
"church"  with  clerical  organization  similar  to  Roman  Catholicism.  The  doctrine
of  the  Cao  Dai  was  syncretic,  melding  veneration  of  Christ,  Buddha,  Confucius,
and  Lao  Tze  with  a  curious  occultism  which  deified  such  diverse  figures  as  Joan
of  Arc,  Victor  Hugo,  and  Sun  Yat  Sen.  With  the  dissolution  of  the  authority
of  the  central  government  during  the  1940's  and  early  1950's,  the  Cao  Dai  ac-
quired increasing  political  and  military  autonomy.  The  sect's  1,500,000  to  2,-
000,000  faithful  comprised  a  loose  theocracy  centered  in  Tay  Ninh,  the  border


294 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I


province  northwest  of  Saigon.  The  Cao  Dai,  too,  cooperated  first  with  the  Japa-
nese, and  then  with  the  Viet  Minh;  and  the  Cao  Dai  leadership  also  found  the
latter  uncomfortable  allies.  In  1947,  the  Cao  Dai  realigned  with  the  French,
agreeing  to  secure  with  their  forces  specified  rural  areas  against  the  Viet  Minh  in
return  for  military  assistance.  Although  plagued  throughout  its  history  by  minor
heresy  and  factional  disputes,  the  Cao  Dai  became  the  largest  political  move-
ment in  Cochinchina;  the  Cao  Dai  shared  with  the  Hoa  Hao  the  distinction  of
being  the  only  important  political  forces  to  originate  in  the  Vietnamese  peasantry.
When  Diem  came  to  power  in  1954,  Pham  Cong  Tac,  the  Cao  Dai  Pope,  had
declared  for  Bao  Dai,  controlled  some  15,000  to  20,000  armed  followers,  and
ruled  the  region  northwest  of  Saigon.


3. The  Hoa  Hao

Southwest  of  Saigon  there  existed  the  Hoa  Hao,  a  newer  sect,  similarly  en-
dowed with  politico-military  autonomy,  which  repeatedly  clashed  with  the  Cao
Dai  and  the  Binh  Xuyen.  In  1939,  a  mystic  faith  healer  named  Huynh  Phu  So,
from  a  village  named  Hoa  Hao,  launched  a  reformed  Hinayana  Buddhist  move-
ment which  swiftly  acquired  a  wide  following.  (Among  the  Vietnamese  whom
Huynh  Phu  So  favorably  impressed  was  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.)  Huynh  Phu  So  en-
joyed Japanese  protection,  and  with  their  aid,  in  1944  the  Hoa  Hao  formed
armed  bands,  among  the  leaders  of  which  there  was  one  Tran  Van  Soai.  A  Viet
Minh  attempt  to  gain  the  assistance  of  the  Hoa  Hao  failed,  and  the  Viet  Minh
on  8  September  1945  massacred  hundreds  of  Hoa  Hao  faithful  in  the  town  of
Can  Tho.  Tran  Van  Soai  replied  in  kind,  and  in  the  ensuing  weeks  Can  Tho


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  295

became  the  center  of  extensive  slaughter.  French  intervention  stopped  the  vio-
lence, but  turned  the  Hoa  Hao  against  the  French.  In  April,  1947,  the  Viet  Minh
executed  Huynh  Phu  So,  which  caused  Tran  Van  Soai  to  rally  v^ith  2,000  armed
men  to  the  French.  He  was  accepted  into  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  with
the  rank  of  general,  and  assigned  the  mission  of  pacifying  his  own  region.  The
French  from  that  time  forward,  until  1955,  paid  the  salaries  of  the  Hoa  Hao
soldiers.  At  the  time  Diem  came  to  office  in  1954,  the  sect  had  some  1,500,000
believers,  controlled  most  of  the  Mekong  Delta  region,  and  had  10,000  to  15,000
men  under  arms.

4.  The  Viet  Minh

In  1954,  the  Viet  Minh  controlled  some  60  to  90  percent  of  South  Vietnam's
villages  (by  French  estimates)  and  30  to  40  percent  of  its  territory  (by  U.S.
estimates).  The  bulk  of  organized  Viet  Minh  forces  were  located  in  Annam  and
the  Highlands,  proximate  to  Tonkin,  and  in  regions  free  of  competition  from
the  armed  sects.  In  Cochinchina,  they  were  militarily  strongest  in  areas  along
the  Cambodian  border  and  in  the  Camau  peninsula  of  the  extreme  south  remote
from  the  principal  concentrations  of  people.  Nonetheless,  their  political  organ-
ization was  pervasive,  and  in  some  localities,  e.g.,  Quang  Ngai  province  in  Annam,
the  Viet  Minh  were  the  only  effective  government.  A  hierarchy  of  Viet  Minh
committees  paralleled  the  formal  government  from  the  village  Administrative
and  Resistance  Committee  (ARC)  through  district,  province,  and  what  the  Viet
Minh  termed  "interzone"  or  "region."  No  reliable  estimates  exist  of  the  numbers
of  cadres  involved  in  this  apparatus,  but  Viet  Minh  military  forces  of  all  types
south  of  the  17th  parallel  probably  numbered  around  100,000.  When  orders
were  issued  for  the  Geneva  regroupment,  the  "provisional  assembly  areas"  desig-
nated coincided  with  the  areas  in  which  Viet  Minh  strength  had  been  greatest.
During  the  time  allowed  for  collecting  forces  for  the  move  north,  the  Viet  Minh
evidently  undertook  to  bank  the  fires  of  revolution  by  culling  out  of  their  units
trained  and  reliable  cadres  for  "demobilization,"  "recruiting"  youth — forcibly  in
many  instances — to  take  their  place,  and  caching  weapons.  Particularly  in  An-
nam and  the  Highlands,  then,  the  Viet  Minh  posed  a  significant  challenge  to  Ngo
Dinh  Diem.  His  test  of  strength  with  the  Viet  Minh,  however,  was  to  be  deferred
by  the  Geneva  Settlement  and  DRV  policy  for  some  years.

5 .  An  ti-Colonialism

The  political  prospects  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  when  he  accepted  the  premiership
from  Bao  Dai  were  dimmed  not  only  by  Viet  Minh  residue,  and  by  the  existence
of  the  armed  sects,  but  by  the  taint  of  colonialism.  As  far  as  most  Cochinchinese
peasants  were  concerned,  Diem  was  linked  to  Bao  Dai,  and  to  the  corrupt,  French
dominated  government  he  headed.  Studies  of  peasant  attitudes  conducted  in
recent  years  have  demonstrated  that  for  many,  the  struggle  which  began  in  1945
against  colonialism  continued  uninterrupted  throughout  Diem's  regime:  in  1954,
the  foes  of  nationalists  were  transformed  from  France  and  Bao  Dai,  to  Diem
and  the  U.S. — My-Diem,  American-Diem,  became  the  universal  term  of  Viet
Cong  opprobrium — but  the  issues  at  stake  never  changed.  There  was,  moreover,
some  substance  to  the  belief  that  Diem  represented  no  change,  in  that,  although
Ngo  Dinh  Diem  took  office  before  the  Geneva  Settlement  as  prime  minister  with
"full  powers  civil  and  military,"  he  did  not  acquire  actual  administrative  auton-
omy until  September,  1954;  proclaim  independence  until  January,  1955;  or  take


296 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

command  of  his  army  until  February,  1955.  There  was  perforce  a  significant
carry-over  of  civil  servants  from  the  pre-Diem  days.  The  national  flag  and  the
national  anthem  remained  unchanged.  Moreover,  the  laws  remained  substantially
as  they  had  been:  the  land-holdings,  against  which  was  directed  much  peasant
discontent,  were  based  on  pre-Diem  law;  and  old  legal  proscriptions  against  na-
tionalist political  activities  remained  on  the  books  during  Diem's  tenure  of  office.
The  onus  of  colonialism  was  among  the  heavy  burdens  which  Ngo  Dinh  Diem
had  to  shoulder  from  the  outset.


B. NGO  DINH  DIEM:  BASIS  OF  POWER

1. Political  Origins

Why  amid  the  military  disasters  of  spring  1954,  Bao  Dai,  head  of  the  State
of  Vietnam,  chose  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  from  among  other  Vietnamese  nationalists
to  form  a  government,  has  long  been  debated.  Diem  was  an  Annamese  Catholic
who  in  his  youth  had  some  experience  in  public  administration,  first  as  governor
of  Phan  Thiet  province,  and  then  Minister  of  Interior  at  Bao  Dai's  Imperial  Court
in  Hue.  In  1933  Diem  discovered,  after  a  year  in  the  latter  office,  that  reforms
he  had  been  promised  were  being  blocked  by  high  French  and  Annamite  officials.
He  promptly  resigned  his  office  and  went  into  political  retirement — an  act  which
earned  him  modest  fame  for  integrity.  Through  the  years  of  war  and  distress  in
his  homeland  thereafter,  Diem  had  hewed  to  attentisme,  and  by  refusing  public
office,  had  avoided  the  political  discoloration  which  besmirched  more  involved
Viet  nationalists.  Bao  Dai  had  sought  him  for  his  premier  in  1945,  Ho  Chi  Minh
for  the  DRV  government  in  1946,  the  French  for  their  "solutions"  in  1947  and
1949 — all  unsuccessfully.  Hence,  Diem's  reputation  for  incorruptible  nationalism,
to  the  extent  that  he  enjoyed  one  in  1954,  was  based  on  an  event  20  years  old
and  a  long  period  of  political  aloofness.  He  did  come  from  a  prominent  family;
a  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Thuc  was  a  leading  Catholic  clergyman  with  countrywide
connections,  and  the  family  proper  retained  some  considerable  influence  in
Annam.  But  his  personal  handicaps  were  considerable:  bachelor,  ascetic,  shy,
inexperienced,  he  seemed  ill-fit  for  the  seething  intrigues  of  Saigon.

One  school  of  conjecture  holds  that  the  French  pressed  him  upon  Bao  Dai
in  the  belief  that  under  him  the  newly  independent  State  of  Vietnam  would
founder;  another  that  Bao  Dai  advanced  him  to  power  convinced  that  his  in-
evitable failure  would  eliminate  him  as  a  political  competitor.  There  are  those
who  believe  that  Diem  was  foisted  upon  the  Vietnamese  and  the  French  by  a
cabal  of  prominent  American  Catholics  and  a  CIA  agent.  It  can  be  said  that
Diem  was  relatively  well  acquainted  among  leading  Americans,  and  that  Bao
Dai  might  correctly  have  regarded  Diem's  contacts  in  the  United  States  as  a
possible  source  of  support  for  Vietnam.  Whatever  the  reasons  for  his  selection,
however,  at  the  time  he  took  office  there  were  few  who  regarded  Diem  as  prom-
ising, and  fewer  still  openly  willing  to  back  him.  Indeed,  from  the  time  he  took
office  on  7  July  1954,  until  the  following  May,  he  was  virtually  alone.  Unaided
by  Bao  Dai,  opposed  by  the  French,  and  proferred  by  Americans  mainly  advice,
criticism,  and  promises — but  scant  material  assistance — Ngo  Dinh  Diem  in  ten
months  surmounted  the  partition  of  his  nation  by  the  Geneva  powers,  two
threatened  military  coups  by  his  Army  Chiefs  of  Staff,  frenetic  clashes  with  the
Binh  Xuyen  armed  sects,  the  withdrawal  of  the  Viet  Minh,  and  the  inffux  of
900,000  refugees  from  North  Vietnam.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  297


2. Early  U.S-Diem  Relations

Diem's  durability  was  one  of  those  surprises  in  Vietnam  which  prompted
Americans  thereafter  to  refer  to  the  "miracle  in  Vietnam."  On  7  December  1954,
Senator  Mansfield  judged  that  U.S.  "prospects  for  helping  Diem  strengthen  and
uphold  South  Vietnam  look  very  dim."  U.S.  Ambassador  Heath  reported  from
Saigon  on  17  December  1954  a  dim  view  of  Diem's  chances  since  "there  is  every
evidence  that  the  French  do  not  want  Diem  to  succeed."  In  a  January,  1955,
report  to  the  National  Security  Council,  General  J.  Lawton  Collins  agreed  with
both  analyses.  On  7  April  1955,  Collins  cabled  from  Saigon  that:  ".  .  .  it  is
my  considered  judgment  that  the  man  lacks  the  personal  qualities  of  leadership
and  the  executive  ability  successfully  to  head  a  government  that  must  compete
with  the  unity  of  purpose  and  efficiency  of  the  Viet  Minh  under  Ho  Chi  Minh."
On  19  April,  Collins  again  cabled:  "I  see  no  alternative  to  the  early  replacement
of  Diem."

On  26  April  1955,  U.S.  National  Intelligence  Estimate  63.1-2-55,  "Possible
Developments  in  South  Vietnam,"  took  the  view  that:

A  political  impasse  exists  in  Saigon  where  the  legally  constituted  govern-
ment of  Premier  Diem  is  being  challenged  by  a  venal  special  interest  group,
the  Binh  Xuyen,  which  controls  the  National  Security  Police,  and  is  tem-
porarily allied  with  some  elements  of  the  religious  sects.  .  .  .

Even  if  the  present  impasse  were  resolved,  we  believe  that  it  would  be
extremely  difficult,  at  best,  for  a  Vietnamese  government,  regardless  of  its
composition,  to  make  progress  toward  developing  a  strong,  stable  anti-
Communist  government  capable  of  resolving  the  basic  social,  economic,  and
political  problems  of  Vietnam,  the  special  problems  arising  from  the  Geneva
agreement,  and  capable  of  meeting  the  long-range  challenge  of  the  Com-
munists. .  .  .

But  opinion  in  Washington  swung  sharply  when,  in  late  April,  Diem  managed  to
survive  a  severe  test  of  arms  with  his  army  and  the  sects.  Senators  Mansfield  and
Knowland  issued  strong  statements  of  support  for  him,  and  on  May  2  Senator
Hubert  Humphrey  told  the  Senate  that:

Premier  Diem  is  the  best  hope  that  we  have  in  South  Vietnam.  He  is  the
leader  of  his  people.  He  deserves  and  must  have  the  wholehearted  support
of  the  American  Government  and  our  foreign  policy.  This  is  no  time  for
uncertainty  or  half-hearted  measures.  ...  He  is  the  only  man  on  the  po-
litical horizon  of  Vietnam  who  can  rally  a  substantial  degree  of  support  of
his  people.  .  .  .  If  we  have  any  comments  about  the  leadership  in  Vietnam
let  it  be  directed  against  Bao  Dai.  ...  If  the  Government  of  South  Viet-
nam has  not  room  for  both  these  men,  it  is  Bao  Dai  who  must  go.  .  .  .

On  9  May  1955,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  judged  that  "the  government  of
Prime  Minister  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  shows  the  greatest  promise  of  achieving  the
internal  stability  essential  for  the  future  security  of  Vietnam."  Five  months
later,  on  11  October,  1955,  the  National  Intelligence  Estimate  was  revised.  In
NIE  63.1-3-55,  "Probable  Developments  in  Vietnam  to  July  1956,"  the  U.S.
Intelligence  Advisory  Committee  found  it  possible  to  be  more  sanguine  con-
cerning Diem's  prospects:

.  .  .  Diem  has  made  considerable  progress  toward  establishing  the  first
fully  independent  Vietnamese  government.  ...  He  faced  a  basically  un-


298 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

stable  and  deteriorating  situation.  .  .  .  The  most  significant  articulate  po-
litical sentiments  of  the  bulk  of  the  population  was  an  antipathy  for  the
French  combined  with  a  personal  regard  for  Ho  Chi  Minh  as  the  symbol
of  Vietnamese  nationalism.  .  .  .

Diem  was  forced  to  move  slowly.  Although  possessing  considerable  na-
tional prestige  as  a  patriot,  he  was  inexperienced  in  administration  and  was
confronted  at  the  outset  by  the  intrigues  of  Bao  Dai  and  other  self-inter-
ested individuals  and  groups,  who  in  many  cases  benefited  from  French
support.  .  .  .

Diem  concentrated  on  eliminating  or  neutralizing  the  most  important
groups  and  individuals  challenging  the  authority  of  his  government.  .  .  .
By  bribery,  persuasion,  and  finally  force.  Diem  virtually  eliminated  the
Binh  Xuyen  and  the  most  important  elements  of  the  Hoa  Hao  sects  as
threats  to  his  authority.  At  the  same  time,  he  maneuvered  the  Cao  Dai —
the  strongest  of  the  sects — into  an  uneasy  alliance.  As  a  result  of  these
successful  actions.  Diem  gained  prestige  and  increased  popularity  as  a
symbol  of  Diem's  efforts  to  establish  a  viable  anti-communist  government
are  still  in  doubt.  .  .  .

Provided  the  Communists  do  not  exercise  their  capabilities  to  attack
across  the  17th  Parallel  or  to  initiate  large-scale  guerrilla  warfare  in  South
Vietnam,  Diem  will  probably  make  further  progress  in  developing  a  more
effective  government.  His  position  will  probably  be  strengthened  as  a  re-
sult of  increased  popular  support,  the  continued  loyalty  of  the  VNA,  and
a  deterioration  in  the  strength  and  cohesiveness  of  his  non-Communist  op-
position. The  national  government  will  probably  increase  the  number  of
rural  communities  under  its  control,  particularly  in  areas  now  held  by  the
sects.  .  .  .

It  is  likely  that  Diem's  stormy  first  10  months  in  office,  June,  1954  to  May,
1955,  strongly  conditioned  his  behavior  in  later  years.  He  must  have  been  im-
pressed almost  at  once  with  the  political  importance  of  the  army,  and  the
essentiality  of  personally  loyal  ranking  officers.  He  chose  openly  to  oppose  the
armed  sects  against  the  advice  of  both  his  American  and  French  advisers,  and
his  success  no  doubt  instilled  confidence  in  his  own  judgments.  The  same  events
probably  gave  him  reason  thereafter  to  value  head-on  confrontation  with  a  foe
over  conciliation  or  compromise.  And  in  his  adamant  stand  against  consultations
with  the  DRV  on  plebescite,  again  contrary  to  initial  American  advice,  he  no
doubt  learned  that  on  major  issues  the  U.S.  stake  in  his  future  was  sufficiently
high  that  he  could  lead,  and  American  policy  would  follow.  In  any  event,  he
moved  with  new  assurance  from  mid- 1955  forward.  In  many  respects  his  first
300  days  were  his  finest  hours,  when  he  was  moving  alone,  rapidly,  and  with
determination  against  great  odds.

3. Political  Concepts:  Family  Centralism  and  Personalism

But  Diem's  early  victories  were  essentially  negative,  in  eliminating  or  bypass-
ing obstacles.  It  remained  for  him  to  provide  programs  for  finding  homes  and
occupations  for  the  refugees,  for  solving  the  politically  crucial  problems  of  rural
land  distribution  and  taxation,  for  installing  capable  and  incorrupt  public  admin-
istrators, for  stimulating  the  economy,  for  improving  the  education  system — in
short,  for  coping  with  the  whole  broad  range  of  problems  of  governing  a  develop-
ing nation,  each  rendered  especially  acute  by  South  Vietnam's  war  trauma,  in-
ternal dissention,  and  partition  from  North  Vietnam.  To  cite  but  a  few:  600,000


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  299

refugees  were  dependent  on  his  government  for  subsistence;  85,000  people  were
jobless  as  a  result  of  the  French  troop  withdrawal;  inter-provincial  communica-
tions were  impaired — 700  miles  of  main  road  were  war-damaged,  one  third  of
the  railway  trackage  lay  destroyed,  68  concrete  bridges  on  860  miles  of  track
lay  blown.  In  devising  programs  to  meet  these  challenges,  Diem  worked  from
two  primal  concepts:  family  centralism,  and  "personalism"  as  a  state  philosophy.

Diem  was  raised  in  a  Mandarinal  family,  born  to  a  tradition  of  high  position
in  the  social  hierarchy  and  governmental  bureaucracy.  It  was  also  a  Catholic
family,  and  Diem  received  a  heritage  of  obdurate  devotion  to  Christianity  un-
der intense  persecution — within  a  century  of  his  birth  one  hundred  relatives
had  been  burned  to  death  by  Buddhists  in  central  Annam.  His  rearing  developed
his  reverence  for  the  past,  a  capacity  for  hard  work,  and  a  deep  seated  piety.
Two  French  authors  believed  that  his  outlook  on  life  was  "born  of  a  profound,
of  an  immense  nostalgia  for  the  Vietnamese  past,  of  a  desperate  filial  respect
for  the  society  of  ancient  Annam.''  There  was  some  thought  of  his  becoming
a  priest,  but  he  elected  public  administration;  his  elder  brother  Thuc,  the  cleric,
is  said  to  have  speculated  that  Diem  found  himself  too  inflexible,  too  willful,
too  severe  for  the  priesthood.  But  above  all  else,  Diem's  early  years  impressed
upon  him  the  importance  of  family  in  performing  the  duties  of  station:  the
family  was  the  first  means  of  extending  personal  power,  the  essential  mode  of
political  expression.  It  is  possible  that  Diem  resorted  to  nepotism  simply  because
he  lacked  a  personal  political  apparatus  which  would  have  permitted  him  to
operate  otherwise,  but  nepotism  became  the  style  of  his  rule,  and  it  was  quite
consistent  with  his  upbringing.

"Society,"  said  Diem,  "functions  through  personal  relations  among  men  at  the
top."  One  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  received  the  title  of  Advisor  to  the  President,
and  controlled  the  semi-covert  Personalist  Labor  Revolutionary  Party.  His  wife,
Madame  Nhu,  became  the  President's  official  hostess,  a  deputy  in  the  National
Assembly,  and  the  founder-chairman  of  the  Woman's  Solidarity  Movement.  Her
father  became  one  of  Diem's  ambassadors,  and  his  wife  the  GVN  observer  at
the  UN.  A  second  brother  of  Diem,  Ngo  Dinh  Can,  became  the  virtual  over-
lord of  Annam,  holding  no  official  position,  but  ruling  the  region  in  all  respects.
A  third  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Thuc,  the  Archbishop  of  Hue  and  Primate  of  Viet-
nam, also  held  no  office,  but  functioned  as  Presidential  advisor,  and  levered
Catholic  opinion  on  behalf  of  Diem.  A  fourth  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Luyen,  be-
came an  Ambassador.  Three  family  members — Tran  Van  Chuong,  Tran  Van
Do,  and  Tran  Van  Bac — served  in  Diem's  first  cabinet,  and  two  other  in-laws,
Nguyen  Huu  Chau  and  Tran  Trung  Dung,  held  the  key  portfolios  of  Secretary
of  State  at  the  Presidency  and  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  National  Defense.
One  of  the  reasons  General  Collins  opposed  Diem  may  be  a  letter  he  received
in  April,  1955,  from  a  group  of  nationalists  headed  by  former  Premier  Nguyen
Phan  Long,  urging  the  United  States  to  withdraw  its  support  of  Diem  on  the
grounds  that  his  brothers  were  effectively  isolating  Diem  politically.  The  obser-
vation proved  to  be  correct:  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  and  Ngo  Dinh  Can  increasingly
gathered  power  into  their  own  hands,  and  non-family  politicians  found  them-
selves quietly  shunted  aside.  Gradually,  a  concentration  of  power  also  occurred
within  the  family  circle,  again  toward  Nhu,  Mme  Nhu  and  Can,  and  at  the
expense  of  the  more  remotely  related.  The  President's  family  thus  became  an
entirely  extra-legal  elite  which  in  class  and  geographic  origin,  as  well  as  re-
ligion, was  distinct  from  the  South  Vietnamese  as  a  whole.

The  Diem  family  circle  was  promptly  targeted  by  gossipers.  In  Saigon,  ru-
mors were  the  political  medium,  and  stories  were  soon  rampant  that  members


300 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


of  the  family  were  looting  the  government.  By  1957,  the  whispering  campaign
against  the  Nhus  mounted  to  such  proportions  that  they  issued  a  public  state-
ment denying  that  they  had  ever  removed  money  from  the  country,  engaged  in
financial  or  commercial  speculation,  or  accepted  bribes.  But  the  impression  re-
mained, fed  by  numerous  credible  reports  of  official  graft  at  lower  levels,  that
whether  or  not  the  Diem  family  took  for  personal  gain,  they  took.

Another  disadvantage  proceeded  from  the  Diem's  familial  concentration  of
power:  bureaucratic  overcentralization;  Diem  himself  seems  to  have  been  pe-
culiarly at  fault  in  this  instance,  reserving  for  himself  the  power  of  decision  in
minute  matters,  and  refusing  to  delegate  authority  to  subordinates  who  might
have  relieved  him  of  a  crushing  administrative  burden.  In  part,  this  may  have
been  simply  inexperience  in  handling  a  large  enterprise,  but  there  seems  to
have  been  deeper,  philosophical  reasons — a  passion  for  perfection,  a  distrust  of
other  men,  a  conviction  that  all  subordinates  required  his  paternalistic  guidance.
The  result  was  an  impairment  of  an  administrative  system  already  crippled  by
the  absence Vl^^rench  civil  servants.  Subordinate  officials,  incapable  of  making
decisions,  f&ful  of  making  them,  or  forbidden  to  make  them,  passed  upward
even  minute  matters  on  paper  to  the  brothers  Ngo,  glutting  the  communications
of  government,  and  imposing  long  delays  on  all,  even  important  actions.

Personalism,  as  Diem  called  his  personal  political  philosophy,  was  a  melange
of  Asian  and  European  notions  which  resembled  the  French  Catholic  person-
nalisme  of  Emmanuel  Mounier,  or  the  Encyclicals  of  Popes  Leo  XIII  and  Pius
XI.  More  accurately,  it  was  a  blend  of  Christianity,  Marxism,  and  Confucianism
which  stressed  the  development  of  each  individual's  moral  character  as  the
basis  for  community  progress  toward  democracy.  Diem  saw  himself  as  a  re-
former, even  a  revolutionary,  in  the  moral  realm.  His  central  social  message
was  that  each  citizen  achieved  moral  fulfillment  or  harmony  only  if  he  applied
himself  energetically  to  his  civic  duties,  avoiding  on  the  one  hand  the  selfishness
of  capitalism,  and  on  the  other,  the  selflessness  of  Marxist  collectivism.  "The
basis  for  democracy  can  only  be  a  spiritual  one,"  said  Diem  in  his  Message  to
the  National  Assembly  on  the  Constitution  of  1956,  and  in  New  Delhi  in  1957,
he  took  Asians  to  task  for  losing  sight  of  the  spiritual  essence  of  their  political
traditions:

.  .  .  Does  not  our  spirituality  of  which  we  are  so  proud,  simply  con-
ceal a  narrow  conservatism  and  a  form  of  escapism  from  concrete  re-
sponsibility? .  .  .  Has  not  Buddhist  compassion  become  a  pretext  for  not
practicing  justice  .  .  .  And  is  not  tolerance,  which  so  many  can  mistake
for  freedom,  the  result  of  paternalistic  indulgence?

And  the  same  year,  in  Korea,  he  spoke  of  his  hopes  for  restoring  the  spiritual
strength  of  Vietnam  after  "the  tremendous  material  and  political  difficulties
which  assailed  Vietnam  after  Geneva  had  plunged  even  the  best  of  her  sons
into  a  state  of  apprehension  colored  with  despair  .  .  ."

We  pursue  two  aims.

First  we  want  to  rearm  the  Vietnamese  citizen  morally  and  to  make  him
impervious  to  all  tyranny  whatever  its  origin.

Second,  we  want  to  reinforce  the  spiritual  cohesion  of  the  Vietnamese
people,  cohesion  which  accounts  for  capacity  to  enjoy  a  largely  decentralized
system  without  falling  into  anarchy.  Yet  this  cohesion  has  been  largely
shaken  by  the  impact  of  the  west.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  301

Yet  man  does  not  live  only  by  the  idea  of  liberty.  He  must  be  given  a
J minimum  of  material  support  which  will  guarantee  that  liberty  .  .  .

A  GVN  approved  biography  of  Diem  explained  that  he  recognized  in  com-
munism the  antithesis  of  true  freedom,  precisely  because  communism  denied  the
existence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Personalism  was  the  answer
therefore  to  communism,  since:

Personalism  is  a  system  based  on  the  divine,  therefore  spiritual  law,
which  .  .  .  extols  man's  transcendent  value  .  .  .  The  practice  of  Person-
alism is  symbolic  of  good  citizenship  with  a  highly  developed  civic
spirit  .  .  .

Late  in  Diem's  reign,  when  his  combat  with  the  communists  had  been  fully
joined,  these  vague  precepts  were  elaborated  by  his  brother,  Nhu,  but  hardly
clarified :

The  personalist  conception  holds  that  freedom  in  an  underdeveloped  so-
ciety is  not  something  that  is  simply  given  or  bestowed.  It  can  only  be
achieved  through  militancy  and  vigilance,  by  doing  away  with  all  preten-
tions and  pretexts  for  not  realistically  applying  ourselves  to  our  goals.  In  a
situation  of  underdevelopment,  and  during  a  bleeding  war  of  internal
division,  it  may  be  argued  that  there  is  reason  enough  not  to  seek  to  de-
velop democracy,  but  our  personalist  approach  is  precisely  militant  in  deny-
ing this.  Human  rights  and  human  dignity  are  not  static  phenomenons.
They  are  only  possibilities  which  men  must  actively  seek  and  deserve,  not
just  beg  for.  In  this  sense,  of  believing  in  the  process  of  constantly  perfect-
ing of  oneself  in  moral  as  well  as  practical  ways  our  personalist  approach
is  similar  to  Confucianism.  Personalism  stresses  hard  work,  and  it  is  the
working  class,  the  peasants,  who  are  better  able  to  understand  the  concept
than  the  intellectuals.  We  must  use  Personalist  methods  to  realize  democ-
racy at  the  level  where  people  are  fighting  and  working,  and  in  our  new
scale  of  values  it  is  those  who  participate  physically  and  selflessly  in  the
fight  against  communism  who  are  most  privileged,  then  those  who  courage-
ously serve  the  villages  without  profit,  and  finally  those  who  engage  dili-
gently in  productive  labor  for  their  own  as  well  as  for  their  villages'
benefit  .  .  .

Some  American  observers  found  these  ideas  with  their  emphasis  on  "democ-
racy" reassuring.  Others,  including  General  Edward  Lansdale,  urged  on  Diem
a  broader  ideological  strategem  of  forming  a  "front"  embracing  the  concepts  of
the  more  traditional  Viet  nationalist  parties.

"Personalism,"  like  Diem's  Spanish-style  Catholicism,  harbored  little
tolerance;  merely  difi'erent  political  theories  were  interpreted  as  competitive,
and  even  dangerous.  Personalism  thus  limited  Diem's  political  horizons,  and
almost  certainly  impaired  his  government's  ability  to  communicate  with  the
peasantry.  "Personalism"  became  the  official  philosophy  of  the  state,  and
though  government  employees  were  required  to  attend  weekly  sessions  on
its  tenets,  it  never  succeeded  in  becoming  much  more  than  the  cant  of  Diem's
administration,  and  the  credo  of  the  two  political  parties  organized  and
directly  controlled  by  his  family.


302 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

4. Political  Parties

The  latter  were  peculiarly  Diemist:  paternally  authoritarian,  organized  as  an
extension  of  family  power.  The  pivotal  organization  was  the  Personalist  Labor
Revolutionary  Party  {Can  Lao  Nhan  Vi  Cach  Mang  Dang),  an  apparatus  devised
and  controlled  by  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  semi-covert,  self-effacing,  but  with  members
stationed  at  all  the  levers  of  power  within  Saigon,  and  a  web  of  informants  every-
where in  the  country.  Nhu  envisaged  the  Can  Lao  as  the  vanguard  of  Diem's
undertakings,  and  it  became  in  fact  the  backbone  of  the  regime.  Drawing  intelli-
gence from  agents  at  all  echelons  of  government  in  the  village,  in  factories,
schools,  military  units,  the  Can  Lao  sought  to  detect  the  corrupt  or  disloyal  citi-
zen, and  was  empowered  to  bring  him  to  arrest  and  trial.  The  Can  Lao,  unfor-
tunately for  Diem's  political  flexibility,  concentrated  on  disloyalty.  Ngo  Dinh
Nhu,  who  admitted  that  the  Can  Lao  closely  resembled  the  communists  in  or-
ganization and  technique,  used  it  to  stifle  all  political  sentiment  competitive  or
opposed  to  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.

The  other  Diemist  party  was  an  open,  "mass  party,"  the  National  Revolu-
tionary Movement  {Phong  Trao  Cach  Mang  Quoc  Gia).  Diem  himself  was  the  '
honorary  leader  of  the  Party,  and  it  was  the  official  vehicle  for  his  political  '
movement.  The  Party  claimed  to  have  grown  from  10,000  members  in  1955  to
1,500,000  in  1959.  In  that  time  it  acquired  a  majority  in  the  National  Assembly,
and  amassed  strong  voting  records  for  Diem  and  NRM  candidates  in  elections  at
all  levels.  The  Party  claims  to  have  originated  in  "clandestine  struggle  for  the
revolution  of  national  independence  and  human  emancipation"  at  the  time  Diem
resigned  from  Bao  Dai's  government  in  1933,  but  properly  it  came  into  being  in  '
October,  1954.  The  NRM  was  closely  associated  with  the  National  Revolution-
ary Civil  Servants  League  {Lien  Doan  Cong  Chuc  Mang  Quoc  Gia),  and  since
membership  in  the  latter  was  a  concomitant  of  government  employment,  the
civil  service  became  the  core  of  the  NRM.  The  relationship  also  established  a  ;
NRM-League  hierarchy  parallel  to,  and  in  most  instances  identical  with,  the
government  hierarchy  down  to  the  village  level.  Obviously,  too,  the  arrangement
equated  a  party  membership  with  distinct  advantages  in  dealing  with  the  govern-
ment. NRM  strength  figures  were  probably  exaggerated,  and  its  active  members
— those  who  attended  party  functions  and  political  indoctrination  sessions —
were  those  in  the  League;  the  NRM  was,  in  effect,  a  party  of  government  em-  •
ployees  or  dependents.

Diem  did  not  involve  himself  directly  in  the  managing  of  either  the  Can  Lao
or  the  NRM.  The  former,  as  mentioned,  was  always  the  creature  of  Nhu.  Nhu  ;
also  controlled  the  southern  branches  of  the  NRM,  but  in  Annam  and  portions
of  the  Central  Highlands  the  NRM  was  the  tightly  held  instrument  of  Ngo  Dinh
Can.  Can  brooked  no  opposition  whatsoever;  Nhu,  more  confident  in  the  regions
where  the  Can  Lao  was  most  efficient,  occasionally  permitted  some  political
activity  by  minority  groups,  such  as  the  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sects,  and  the
Socialists.  But  that  activity  was  tolerated  only  so  long  as  it  was  pro-Diem  and  ;
supporting,  rather  than  opposing,  GVN  policy.

These  were  the  ideas  and  the  political  apparatus  by  which  Ngo  Dinh  Diem
sought  to  weld  together  a  nation  in  the  aftermath  of  Geneva.  Their  narrowness,
their  inappropriateness  for  most  Cochinchinese  and  Annamites,  virtually  assured
that  the  history  of  his  regime,  after  its  initial  successes,  would  become  an  almost
unbroken  record  of  alienation  of  one  portion  after  another  of  the  Vietnamese
body  politic.  This  process  of  alienation  accentuated  the  failures  of  the  Geneva
Settlement,  and  ultimately  led  to  Ngo  Dinh  Diem's  assassination.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  303


C. CONFLICT  WITH  THE  ARMED  SECTS

1. Defeat  of  the  Binh  Xuyen

At  the  time  he  took  office,  Diem  controlled  scarcely  a  few  blocks  of  Saigon,
the  capital  remaining  firmly  in  the  control  of  Bay  Vien  and  the  Binh  Xuyen.  Be-
ginning in  September,  1954,  Diem  tried  to  divide  and  conquer  the  sects.  Four
leaders  from  each  of  the  religious  sects  were  brought  into  his  cabinet  in  an  effort
to  isolate  the  Binh  Xuyen,  and  with  U.S.  assistance  he  sought  to  integrate  the
sect  forces  into  the  national  army.  He  enjoyed  some  initial  success  in  rallying  Cao
Dai  forces,  and  confident  from  assurances  of  direct  American  aid,  he  shut  down,
in  January,  1955,  the  Binh  Xuyen  concessions  in  Saigon  and  Cholon.  In  the
ensuing  confrontation,  the  Binh  Xuyen  swung  the  Cao  Dai  and  the  Hoa  Hao
into  a  United  Front  of  Nationalist  Forces,  and,  although  French  aid  for  their
forces  had  formally  been  withdrawn,  continued  to  draw  on  French  funds  and
advice.  On  March  29,  1955,  fighting  broke  in  Saigon  in  which  sections  of  the
city  were  burned.  Although  a  truce  was  struck,  the  affair  polarized  relations  be-
tween Diem  and  the  sects;  between  Diem  and  General  Collins,  whose  advice  to
conciliate  he  elected  not  to  follow;  and  between  the  Americans  and  the  French,
over  the  viability  of  Diem.  Washington  apparently  decided  at  that  juncture  to
temporize  with  the  sects,  and  to  find  an  alternative  to  Diem.  Before  the  instruc-
tions could  be  sent  to  Saigon,  however,  fighting  was  renewed.  Even  as  the  battle
was  joined,  Bao  Dai  telegraphed  orders  to  Diem  to  travel  to  France.  Diem  dis-
obeyed, and,  convinced  of  his  moral  grounds  in  attacking  the  Binh  Xuyen,  com-
mitted his  forces  to  combat.  His  brother,  Nhu,  coopted  a  "Revolutionary  Com-
mittee" to  confer  emergency  authority  on  Diem.  They  were  immediately  success-
ful, and  by  mid-May,  1955,  the  Binh  Xuyen  had  been  driven  into  the  Rung  Sat
swamp  east  of  Saigon,  and  their  power  in  Saigon  was  broken.  Bay  Vien  escaped
to  Paris.

2. Victory  over  the  Sects

Diem's  forces  then  ranged  out  after  the  other  armed  factions.  Tran  Van  Soai
of  the  Hoa  Hao  surrendered,  and  was  given  asylum.  Another  Hoa  Hao  leader,
Ba  Cut — who  had  cut  off  a  finger  to  remind  himself  to  fight  the  French,  and  had
sworn  not  to  cut  his  hair  until  Vietnam  was  reunited — was  captured  while
negotiating  surrender  in  return  for  a  commission  as  lieutenant  general  in  the
ARVN.  Other  leaders  were  bribed,  and  the  remainder  fled  or  rallied  to  the  GVN.
By  the  end  of  1955,  Diem  appeared  to  have  dealt  finally  with  the  challenge  of
the  sects.

It  was  this  apparent  success  which  enabled  Diem  to  survive  successfully  pres-
sures from  an  even  more  powerful  set  of  opponents:  those  among  his  Western
allies  who  were  determined  to  replace  him.  The  dimensions  of  his  victory  in
Vietnam  were  just  becoming  evident  when  in  May,  1955,  the  North  Atlantic
Treaty  Organization  convened.  There  promptly  developed  a  sharp  division  of
view  between  the  French  and  the  Americans.  Bao  Dai  made  known  his  opposi-
tion to  Diem,  and  the  French  threatened  to  pull  out  of  Vietnam  unless  Diem
were  removed.  From  Paris,  Secretary  Dulles  reported  that  the  French  held  that:

.  .  .  Time  something  to  be  done  to  avoid  civil  war.  France  warned  that
armed  conflict — first  civil  war,  then  guerrilla  warfare,  then  terrorism —
would  result  if  we  failed  to  take  action  .  .  .  New  Revolutionary  Commit-
tee ..  .  is  strongly  under  Viet  Minh  influence  .  .  .  There  is  violent  cam-


304 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

paign  against  French  and  French  Expeditionary  Corps.  Viet  Minh  agents
make  good  use  of  it  and  certain  Americans  do  not  seem  sufficiently  aware
of  this.  French  Govt  does  not  wish  to  have  its  army  act  as  platform  for
Viet  Minh  propaganda.  Army  will  not  be  maintained  in  Vietnam  at  any
cost  .  .  .  Continuing  with  Diem  would  have  three  disastrous  results:

( 1 )  ...  Viet  Minh  victory

(2)  .  .  .  focus  hostility  of  everyone  on  the  French,  and

(3)  ...  begin  a  Franco-U.S.  breach  .  .  .

The  French  then  proposed  to  the  U.S.  that  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  be
withdrawn,  and  asked  if  the  U.S.  were  willing  to  guarantee  French  civilians,  and
the  refugees.  From  Washington,  the  following  instructions  to  Dulles  were  re-
turned promptly:

President's  only  comment  on  Vietnam  section  of  (your  telegram)  was  to  ;
reiterate  position  that  U.S.  could  not  afford  to  have  forces  committed  in
such  undesirable  areas  as  Vietnam.  This,  of  course,  is  JCS  view  in  past.  Am  j
asking  Defense  and  JCS  views  ...

Asked,  the  JCS  took  the  position  that  the  question  was  fundamentally  beyond
their  purview,  that  neither  the  ARVN  nor  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps
seemed  capable  of  preserving  the  integrity  of  South  Vietnam  against  a  Viet  Minh
onslaught,  and  that  being  debarred  from  furnishing  arms  by  the  Geneva  Agree-  i
ment,  the  U.S.  was  in  no  position  to  protect  French  nationals.  They  suggested
that  Secretary  Dulles  be  advised  that:  i

a.  The  government  of  Prime  Minister  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  shows  the  greatest
promise  of  achieving  the  internal  stability  essential  for  the  future  security  ,
of  Vietnam.

b.  The  U.S.  could  not  guarantee  the  security  of  the  French  nationals  should  ,
the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  be  withdrawn.

c.  Possible  United  States  actions  under  the  Southeast  Asia  Collective  De-
fense Treaty  could  ultimately  afford  security  to  Vietnam  equal  to  that
provided  by  the  continued  presence  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps.

In  Paris,  Secretary  Dulles  managed  to  mollify  the  French.  A  key  development
was  a  message  from  Malcolm  MacDonald,  the  British  representative  in  South-
east Asia,  urging  against  Diem's  replacement  at  that  time.  MacDonald,  who  was
among  Diem's  severest  critics — he  once  remarked  of  Diem  that  "He's  the  worst  j
prime  minister  I  have  ever  seen" — aligned  the  British  with  Dulles,  and  eventually  :
the  French  acquiesced  in  further  support  of  Diem.

The  defeat  of  the  sects  also  opened  a  domestic  political  opportunity  for  Diem.
The  Popular  Revolutionary  Committee  his  brother  Nhu  had  formed  during  the
height  of  the  sect  crisis  was  a  "front"  of  broad  political  complexion — the  mem-
bership included  prominent  nationalists  and,  as  the  French  had  pointed  out,  two
former  Viet  Minh  leaders;  it  therefore  had  some  substance  as  what  Nhu  termed
the  "democratic  revolutionary  forces  of  the  nation."  The  Revolutionary  Com-  '
mittee  urged  the  dissolution  of  the  Bao  Dai  government,  and  the  organizing  of
general  elections  for  a  National  Assembly.  Nhu  acted  under  its  mandate,  setting
up  a  popular  referendum  in  which,  on  October  23,  1955,  an  overwhelming  vote
for  Diem  in  preference  to  Bao  Dai  was  recorded.  The  Revolutionary  Committee
dissolved  itself  on  31  October,  apparently  under  some  pressure  from  Diem  and
his  brother.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  305


3. The  Triumph  Reappraised

But  it  is  important  to  note  that  Diem's  military  victory  over  the  sects,  while
impressive,  was  by  no  means  complete,  and  was  certainly  not  as  decisive  as  some
Americans  were  led  to  believe.  For  example,  an  NSC  report  of  1958  mentioned
that  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  were  still  operating  against  the  sects,  and  had
"succeeded  in  practically  eliminating  the  Binh  Xuyen  and  Cao  Dai  forces.  .  .  ."
The  Deputy  Chief,  MA  AG,  Vietnam,  stated  in  April,  1959,  that:  "The  Binh
Xuyen  group  was  completely  eliminated  as  a  menace.  The  Cao  Dai  group  was
pacified  or  reoriented.  .  .  .  The  Hoa  Hao  had  been  reduced  to  a  handful  of  the
diehards.  .  .  ."  These  estimates  notwithstanding,  Binh  Xuyen  remnants  fought
off  an  ARVN  force  north  of  Bien  Hoa,  in  1956,  and  marauded  along  the  Saigon
River  north  of  Saigon  in  Binh  Duong  province  throughout  1957  and  1958.  In
1958,  an  insurgent  force,  among  whom  Binh  Xuyen  were  identified,  sacked  the
Michelin  rubber  plantations  near  Dau  Tieng,  and  in  March,  1959,  ARVN  had  a
number  of  encounters  with  Binh  Xuyen  elements  in  the  Binh  Duong-Bien  Hoa
area.  There  is  evidence,  though  scanty,  which  indicates  that  the  Binh  Xuyen
survivors  joined  with  "communist"  groups  for  their  depredations;  for  example,
in  the  1958  Michelin  attack  the  combined  gangster-communist  strength  was  re-
ported to  be  300-400.  ARVN  General  Nguyen  Chanh  Thi,  who  fought  these
particular  forces,  has  told  of  capturing  a  Binh  Xuyen  soldier  who  died  under
torture  without  admitting  more  than  that  his  band  had  been  communicating  with
communist  forces  from  Tay  Ninh  province.  The  general  also  described  capturing
in  March,  1959,  in  the  same  operations,  flags  identical  to  that  raised  in  late  1960
by  the  "National  Liberation  Front."

In  1956,  the  Cao  Dai  Pope,  Pham  Cong  Tac,  crossed  the  frontier  of  Tay  Ninh
into  Cambodia  with  a  number  of  his  followers,  thence  to  remain  in  opposition  to
Diem.  Bay  Dom,  who  had  been  the  deputy  of  the  captured  Hoa  Hao  leader,  Ba
Cut,  also  took  his  forces  to  the  Cambodian  border.  In  1956,  Diem  sent  Ba  Cut,
his  hair  still  uncut,  to  the  guillotine.  Bay  Dom  and  another  Hoa  Hao  leader,
Muoi  Tri,  then  took  an  oath  to  avenge  Ba  Cut,  and  opened  guerrilla  warfare
against  Diem.  Some  four  Hoa  Hao  battalions  are  reported  to  have  conducted
operations  against  the  GVN  continuously  through  1962.  Muoi  Tri  in  later  years
openly  embraced  the  Viet  Cong  cause.

In  brief,  while  Diem's  victory  over  the  sects  was  impressive,  it  was  not  wholly
conclusive,  and  the  very  obduracy  and  determination  which  won  him  early
tactical  success  seemed  to  impede  his  inducing  the  remaining  sect  dissidents  to
perform  a  constructive  role  in  the  nation.  Rather,  his  policy  invited  a  Viet  Cong-
sect  alliance  against  him.  That  some  of  the  more  startling  early  defeats  of  Diem's
ARVN  forces  by  Viet  Cong  in  1959  and  1960  occurred  in  the  regions  north  of
Saigon,  where  lurked  Cao  Dai  and  Binh  Xuyen  remnants,  is  more  than  co-
incidental.

D. RURAL  PACIFICATION
1 .  Strategy

Americans  tended  to  look  at  Diem's  skein  of  military  and  political  successes
in  1955  with  satisfaction,  and  to  regard  thereafter  Vietnam's  internal  security
with  growing  complacency.  But  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  did  not.  To  the  contrary.  Diem
seemed,  if  anything,  over-conscious  of  the  fact  that  his  test  with  the  Viet  Minh


306 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

lay  ahead,  and  that  they  posed  a  threat  more  dangerous  than  the  sects  could
ever  have  been,  not  only  because  they  were  politically  more  pervasive,  and  not
only  because  they  had  taught  a  generation  of  Vietnamese  peasants  the  techniques
of  armed  conspiracy,  but  also  because  their  tenets  offered  competing  solutions  to
the  most  pressing  problems  of  the  Vietnamese  people:  land  and  livelihood.
Diem's  counter  is  difficult  to  fault  as  a  broad  concept:  ARVN  forces  would
reclaim  for  the  GVN  regions  formerly  held  by  the  Viet  Minh;  political  in-
doctrination teams  moving  with  the  troops  would  carry  the  message  of  Diem's
revolution  to  the  people;  and  then  a  broad  follow-up  program  of  Civic  Action —
political  and  social  development,  land  reform,  and  agricultural  improvements
would  be  inaugurated  to  meet  fully  the  aspirations  of  the  people.  That  these
plans  miscarried  was  due  in  part  to  the  resistance  of  the  farmers  they  were  in-
tended to  benefit,  reacting  sometimes  under  Viet  Cong  leadership,  sometimes
simply  out  of  peasant  conservatism.  But  a  principal  portion  of  the  blame  for
failure  must  be  attributed  to  Diem's  inept,  overbearing,  or  corrupt  officials,  to
Diem's  own  unremitting  anti-communist  zeal,  and  to  the  failure  of  both  he  and
his  American  advisers  to  appreciate  the  magnitude  of  the  tasks  they  set  for  them-
selves, or  the  time  required  to  enact  meaningful  reform.

2.  Reoccupying  Viet  Minh  Territory

The  first  steps  were  faltering.  In  early  1955,  ARVN  units  were  sent  to  estab-
lish the  GVN  in  the  Camau  Peninsula  in  the  southernmost  part  of  the  country.
Poorly  led,  ill-trained,  and  heavy-handed,  the  troops  behaved  towards  the  people
very  much  as  the  Viet  Minh  had  led  the  farmers  to  expect.  Accompanying  GVN
propaganda  teams  were  more  effective,  assailing  communism,  colonialism,  and
feudalism — meaning  the  rule  of  Francophile  Vietnamese,  such  as  Bao  Dai's — and
distributing  pictures  of  Diem  to  replace  the  omnipresent  tattered  portraits  of  Ho.
A  subsequent  operation  in  Quang  Nai  and  Binh  Dinh,  Operation  Giai  Phong,
reportedly  went  off  more  smoothly.  Under  ARVN  Colonel  Le  Van  Kim,  the
troops  behaved  well  toward  the  people,  and  the  propagandists  exploited  Viet
Minh  errors  to  the  extent  that,  as  the  last  Viet  Minh  soldiers  marched  down
toward  their  ships,  the  populace  jeered  them.  American  advisers  were  active,  and
Diem  himself  visited  this  operation  a  week  after  the  last  Viet  Minh  had  left,
receiving  what  the  Americans  present  considered  a  spontaneous  welcome  by  the
peasants.  Nonetheless,  the  Cau  Mau  experience  became  more  typical  of  the
ARVN  than  the  Binh  Dinh  affair.  Foreign  observers  frequently  expressed  opinion
of  the  ARVN  in  terms  similar  to  the  1957  view  of  correspondent  David  Hotham,
who  wrote  that  "far  from  giving  security,  there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that
the  army,  buttressed  by  the  Civil  Guard  ...  is  regarded  by  the  Southern  peasant
as  a  symbol  of  insecurity  and  repression."

3.  Civic  Action

Nor  were  the  follow-up  Civic  Action  teams  significantly  more  effective.  These
were  patterned  after  the  GAM's  (Groupes  Administratifs  Mobiles)  with  which
the  French  had  experimented,  modified  to  incorporate  U.S.-Filipino  experience.
In  theory,  they  were  to  have  been  drawn  from  the  urban  elite,  to  help  the  govern-
ment establish  communications  with  the  rural  folk.  Acting  on  the  doctrine  of
"Three  Withs:  eat,  sleep,  and  work  with  the  people" — some  1400  to  1800  "cadre"
undertook:  census  and  surveys  of  the  physical  needs  of  villages;  building  schools,
maternity  hospitals,  information  halls;  repairing  and  enlarging  local  roads;  dig-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  307

ging  wells  and  irrigation  canals;  teaching  personal  and  public  hygiene;  distributing
medicine;  teaching  children  by  day,  and  anti-illiteracy  classes  by  night;  forming
village  militia;  conducting  political  meetings;  and  publicizing  agrarian  reform
legislation.

Colonel  Lansdale  described  their  origins  and  operations  as  follows:

One  of  the  most  promising  ideas  of  this  period  came  from  Kieu  Cong
Cung,  who  was  sponsored  by  Defense  Minister  Minh.  Cung's  idea  was  to
place  civil  service  personnel  out  among  the  people,  in  simple  dress,  where
they  would  help  initially  by  working  alongside  the  people,  getting  their
hands  dirty  when  necessary.  The  Vietnamese  functionaries  were  aghast,  since
they  cherished  their  desk  work  in  Saigon  and  their  dignified  white-collar
authority,  and  they  fought  hard  within  the  government  machine  to  kill  the
idea.  It  took  some  months,  with  the  personal  intervention  and  insistence  of
President  Diem,  to  get  a  pilot  Civic  Action  program  initiated.  It  was  given
administrative  support  by  the  Ministry  of  Defense,  at  first,  simply  because
no  other  Ministry  would  help,  although  it  was  established  as  an  entity  of  the
Presidency  and  its  policy  decisions  were  made  in  Cabinet  meetings.

With  80%  of  the  civil  service  personnel  stationed  in  the  national  capital,
provincial  administrators  were  so  under-staffed  that  few  of  them  could  func-
tion with  even  minimum  effectiveness.  A  French  colonial  administrative
system,  super-imposed  upon  the  odd  Vietnamese  imperial  system  was  still
the  model  for  government  administration.  It  left  many  gaps  and  led  to  un-
usually complex  bureaucratic  practices.  There  was  no  uniform  legal  code,
no  uniform  procedures  for  the  most  basic  functions  of  government.  The
Communists  continued  their  political  dominance  of  many  villages,  secretly.

Cung  established  a  training  center  in  Saigon  and  asked  for  civil  service
volunteers,  for  field  duty.  With  none  forthcoming,  he  then  selected  a  small
group  of  young  university  trained  men  from  among  the  .  .  .  refugees  from
Communist  North  Vietnam  after  security  screening.  His  training  had  added
realism  in  the  form  of  rough  living  quarters,  outdoor  classes,  and  students
learning  to  work  with  their  hands  by  constructing  school  faciUties.  All
students  had  to  dress  in  the  "calico  noir"  of  farmers  and  laborers,  which
became  their  "uniform"  later  in  the  villages.  (Provincial  authorities  originally
refused  to  recognize  Civic  Action  personnel  as  government  officials,  due  to
the  plebian  dress;  Cung,  dressed  in  the  same  manner,  and  as  a  high  function-
ary close  to  the  President,  made  a  rapid  tour  of  the  provinces  and  gained
grudging  acceptance  of  this  new  style  of  government  employee.)

Originally,  four-man  teams  were  formed;  during  training,  the  members  of
each  team  were  closely  observed,  to  judge  their  abilities,  with  the  weak  and
unwilling  being  weeded  out.  After  graduation,  each  team  was  assigned  to  a
district  of  a  province,  with  responsibility  for  a  number  of  villages.  When
the  team  finished  its  work  in  the  first  village,  it  would  move  to  a  second
village,  revisiting  the  first  village  periodically  to  check  on  local  progress.
This  would  continue  until  all  villages  in  a  district  were  covered,  at  which
time  the  civic  action  team  directly  under  the  government  in  the  provincial
capital  would  take  over  district  work,  now  organized  and  ready  for  ad-
ministration.

When  a  team  entered  a  village,  they  would  call  a  village  meeting,  explain
their  presence  and  plans.  The  following  morning,  they  would  set  to  work  to
build  three  community  buildings  with  local  materials;  if  they  had  been  suc-
cessful in  winning  over  the  population,  the  villagers  pitched  in  and  helped.


308 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

One  building  was  a  village  hall,  for  meetings  of  village  officials.  Another
was  a  primary  school.  The  third  was  a  combination  information  hall  (news,
information  about  the  government,  etc.)  and  dispensary  (using  the  village
medical  kits  developed  by  ICA).  Following  up  was  the  building  of  roads  or
paths  to  link  the  village  with  provincial  roads,  if  in  a  remote  area,  build
pit  latrines,  undertake  malaria  control,  put  in  drainage,  and  undertake  similar
community  projects.  Villagers  were  trained  to  take  over  these  tasks,  includ-
ing primary  education  and  first  aid.

The  work  of  Civic  Action  teams,  at  the  same  grass-roots  level  as  that  of
Communist  workers,  proved  effective.  They  became  the  targets  of  Commu-
nist agents,  with  political  attacks  (such  as  stirring  up  local  Cochin-Chinese
against  Tonkinese  Civic  Action  personnel)  and  then  murders.  Even  while
the  field  work  was  in  its  early  development  stage.  President  Diem  ordered
the  teams  to  start  working  directly  with  Army  commands  in  pacification
campaigns,  as  the  civil  government  "troops"  in  what  were  essentially  combat
zones.  As  Civic  Action  proved  itself,  it  was  extended  to  all  provinces  south
of  the  17th  Parallel.

Had  the  cadres  been  able  to  confine  themselves  to  these  missions,  and  had  the
several  Saigon  ministries,  whose  field  responsibilities  they  had  assumed,  been
content  to  have  them  continue  to  represent  them,  matters  might  have  developed
differently.  As  it  happened,  the  cadres  became  preoccupied  with  Diem's  Anti-
Communist  campaign,  and  their  operations  came  under  bureaucratic  attack  from
Saigon  agencies  unwilling  to  allow  the  Civic  Action  teams  to  carry  their  programs
to  the  people.  Both  influences  converted  the  cadre  into  exclusively  propagandistic
and  political  instruments,  and  drew  them  away  from  economic  or  social  activities;
in  late  1956,  Civic  Action  was  cut  back  severely.  In  1957,  Kieu  Cong  Cung  died,
and  Nhu  absorbed  the  remnants  into  his  organization.

4. Land  Reform

But  the  salesmen  were  less  at  fault  than  the  product.  Diem  had  to  promise
much  and  deliver  well  to  best  the  Viet  Minh.  However,  his  promises  were  mod-
erate, his  delivery  on  them  both  slow  and  incomplete.  The  anarchy  prevalent  in
the  countryside  during  the  First  Indochina  War  had  benefited  the  peasant  by
driving  off  the  French  and  Vietnamese  large  landlords.  When  the  Viet  Minh
"liberated"  an  area,  they  distributed  these  lands  free  to  the  farmers,  and  generally
won  their  allegiance  thereby.  Columnist  Joseph  Alsop  visited  one  such  Viet  Minh
controlled  region  in  December,  1954,  just  before  they  withdrew  their  military
forces,  and  reported  that :

It  was  difficult  for  me,  as  it  is  for  any  Westerner,  to  conceive  of  a  Com-
munist government's  genuinely  "serving  the  people."  I  could  hardly  imagine
a  Communist  government  that  was  also  a  popular  government  and  almost  a
democratic  government.  But  this  was  just  the  sort  of  government  the  palm-
hut  state  actually  was  while  the  struggle  with  the  French  continued.  The
Viet  Minh  could  not  possibly  have  carried  on  the  resistance  for  one  year,
let  alone  nine  years,  without  the  people's  strong,  untied  support.

One  of  Diem's  primary  failures  lay  in  his  inability  similarly  to  capture  loyalties
among  his  90  percent  agricultural  people.  The  core  of  rural  discontent  was  the
large  land  holdings:  in  1954  one  quarter  of  one  percent  of  the  population  owned


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  309

forty  percent  of  the  rice  growing  land.  The  Diem  program  to  ameliorate  this
situation  for  the  land-hungry  peasants  took  the  form  of:  (1)  resettlement  of
refugees  and  others  on  uncultivated  land,  begun  in  1955;  (2)  expropriation  of
all  rice  land  holdings  above  247  acres,  and  redistribution  of  these  to  tenant  farm-
ers, a  program  announced  in  1956,  but  delayed  in  starting  until  1958;  and  (3)
regulation  of  landlord-tenant  relations,  effected  in  1957,  which  fixed  rents  within
the  range  15-25  percent  of  crop  yield,  and  guaranteed  tenant  tenure  for  3  to  5
years.  Both  the  resettlement  and  redistribution  programs  guaranteed  payments  to
former  owners  of  the  appropriated  land;  although  the  land  was  reasonably  priced,
and  payment  allowed  over  an  extended  period,  the  farmers  faced  payments,  and
these  immediately  aroused  opposition.  Settlers  moved  into  a  wilderness,  required
to  clear  and  irrigate  theretofore  unused  land,  could  not  see  why  they  should  pay
for  their  holdings.  Tenant  farmers  were  also  disaffected,  for  though  rents  of  40
percent  of  crop  had  been  common  before  the  way,  many  farmers,  after  eight  or
so  rent-free  years,  could  see  no  justice  in  resuming  payments  to  a  long  absent
owner,  particularly  since  the  Viet  Minh  had  assured  them  the  land  was  theirs  by
right.  Nor  were  many  mollified  by  redistributed  land.  Land  redistribution  suffered
according  to  one  American  expert,  from  a  "lack  of  serious,  interested  adminis-
trators and  topside  command.  Government  officials,  beginning  with  the  Minister
for  Agrarian  Reform,  had  divided  loyalties,  being  themselves  landholders."  But
even  if  the  goals  of  the  program  had  been  honestly  fulfilled — which  they  were
not — only  20%  of  rice  land  would  have  passed  from  large  to  small  farmers.
Ultimately  only  10%  of  all  tenant  farmers  benefited.  A  bolder  program,  with  a
maximum  holding  of  124  acres,  could  have  put  33  percent  of  rice  land  up  for
transfer.  As  it  happened,  however,  the  distribution  program  was  not  only  of
limited  scope,  but,  by  1958  or  1959,  it  was  virtually  inoperative.  Bernard  Fall
has  reported  that  despite  Diem's  land  reforms,  45%  of  the  land  remained  con-
centrated in  the  hands  of  2%  of  landowners,  and  75%  in  the  hands  of  15%.
Moreover,  since  the  immediate  beneficiaries  were  more  often  than  not  Northern-
ers, refugees,  and  Catholics,  the  programs  acquired  an  aura  of  GVN  favoritism,
and  deepened  peasant  alienation.  In  time  there  were  also  rumors  of  corruption,
with  widespread  allegations  that  the  Diem  family  had  enriched  itself  through  the
manipulation  of  the  land  transfers.

As  an  example  of  Diem's  rural  programs  in  action  at  the  village  level  which
serves  to  demonstrate  how  they  fell  wide  of  the  mark  of  meeting  rural  expecta-
tions, that  of  the  village  communal  land  is  instructive.  After  the  long  period  of
disrupted  public  administration  during  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  land  records
were  chaotic.  Under  Diem,  the  GVN  seized  outright  nearly  half  a  million  acres
of  land  whose  title  was  unclear.  Some  of  this  land  was  rented,  the  GVN  acting
as  the  landlord;  some  was  farmed  by  ARVN  units;  and  some  was  converted  into
communal  land  and  the  title  passed  to  village  councils.  The  village  councils  were
then  supposed  to  hold  an  annual  auction  of  communal  land,  in  which  farmers
wishing  to  use  certain  plots  submitted  sealed  bids.  Although  this  seemed  to  the
casual  western  observer  an  equitable  system,  in  actuality  it  was  quite  vicious.
The  bidding  farmers  were  usually  seeking  to  rent  land  they  had  been  farming
free  for  years.  Whether  this  were  the  case  or  not,  however,  rice  growing  is  a
labor  intensive  process  which  requires  of  the  farmer  a  substantial  capital  invest-
ment year  by  year  to  build  up  dikes  and  ditches.  To  assure  himself  that  he
would  not  lose  this  investment,  a  man  farming  a  plot  declared  communal  land
felt  compelled  to  raise  his  bid  each  succeeding  year  to  avoid  loss  of  that  capital,
and  to  preclude  losing  his  hard  work.  The  consequent  competition,  however
modern,  shook  the  roots  of  traditional  Asian  farming  communities,  for  the


310 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

arrangement  had  the  major  disadvantage  of  creating  uncertainty  over  land  from
year  to  year — the  antithesis  of  security  for  the  rice-growing  peasant.  To  cap
these  disadvantages,  village  councils  were  often  less  than  honest,  and  tended  to
be  considerably  less  willing  than  a  paternal  landlord  to  tide  the  farmer  over  after
a  bad  crop  year;  if  his  subsequent  bid  were  low,  he  lost  his  land.

There  is  another  chapter  in  the  history  of  GVN-farmer  relationships  which
illustrates  similar  clumsiness.  In  1956,  as  the  GVN  launched  its  land  reform
program,  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  enlisted  the  aid  of  the  Confederation  of  Vietnamese
Labor,  which  had  been  organizing  tenant  farmers  in  promoting  the  government's
policies  through  its  rural  representatives.  The  GVN  then  proceeded  to  form  its
own,  NRM-connected,  Farmers'  Associations.  The  latter,  interconnected  with
province  officials  and  with  landowners,  actively  opposed  the  union  organizers,
with  the  result  that  many  of  the  latter  were  jailed.  Within  a  year  or  two,  the
union  was  destroyed  for  all  practical  purposes.  Few  of  the  NRM  Farmers'  Asso-
ciations ever  did  function  on  behalf  of  the  farmers;  of  288  associations  reported
in-being  by  the  GVN,  a  USOM  study  in  1961  could  find  only  35  which  repre-
sented peasant  interersts  in  any  active  sense.


5. Village  Government

A  further  example  of  Diem's  maladroitness  was  his  abolishing  elections  for
village  councils,  a  step  he  took  in  June,  1956,  apparently  out  of  concern  that
large  numbers  of  former  Viet  Minh  might  win  office  at  the  village  level.  The
Vietnamese  village  had  traditionally,  even  under  the  French,  enjoyed  administra-
tive autonomy,  and  the  village  council  was  a  coterie  of  prominent  residents  who
were  the  government  in  most  simple  civic  matters,  adjudicating  disputes,  collect-
ing taxes,  and  managing  public  funds.  Under  the  national  regulation  of  1956,
members  of  council  and  the  village  chief  became  appointive  officials,  and  their
offices  subject  to  scrutiny  by  the  Diemist  apparatus.  The  results  were  again  a
thrusting  forward  of  Northern  Catholics,  city  dwellers,  or  other  non-local  trustees
of  the  GVN,  to  assume  control  at  the  key  political  level  of  South  Vietnam,  to
handle  fiscal  matters,  and  to  manage  the  communal  lands.  For  the  same  reasons
that  the  villagers  had  mistrusted  the  Civic  Action  cadre,  they  found  the  GVN
officials  strange,  and  not  a  little  incomprehensible.  Also,  since  these  officials  were
the  creatures  of  the  province  chiefs,  corruption  at  the  province  level — then,  as  in
recent  years,  not  uncommon — was  transmitted  directly  to  the  village.  Dang  Due
Khoi,  a  young  nationalist  who  rose  to  become  Diem's  press  officer,  and  then
turned  against  him,  regarded  Diem's  decision  to  abolish  the  village  councils  his
vital  error:

Even  if  the  Viet  Minh  had  won  some  elections,  the  danger  of  doing
away  with  the  traditional  system  of  village  election  was  even  greater.  This
was  something  that  was  part  of  the  Vietnamese  way  of  life,  and  the  concept
should  have  been  retained  without  interfering  with  Diem's  legitimate  desire
— indeed,  his  need — for  a  strong  central  government.  The  security  problem
existed,  but  it  wouldn't  have  made  much  difference  if  the  Viet  Minh  had
elected  some  village  chiefs — they  soon  established  their  own  underground
governments  anyway.  Diem's  mistake  was  in  paralyzing  himself.  He  should
have  adopted  a  more  intelligent  and  persuasive  poUcy  and  concentrated  at
the  outset  on  obtaining  the  support  of  the  people.  In  that  way,  he  could  have
properly  challenged  the  Viet  Minh.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  311

Thus,  Ngo  Dinh  began,  in  1956,  to  place  the  "security  problem"  ahead  of  rural
revolution.

6. The  Anti-Communist  Campaign

Indeed,  vocal  anti-communism  became  more  central  to  Diem's  rural  programs
than  land  reform.  Like  the  Can  Lao  Party,  the  GVN  borrowed  heavily  from
communist  technique  in  combating  the  Viet  Minh  and  their  residual  influence —
urged  on,  in  some  instances  at  least,  by  their  American  advisers.  In  the  summer
of  1955,  the  government  launched  an  Anti-Communist  Denunciation  Campaign,
which  included  a  scheme  for  classifying  the  populace  into  lettered  political  groups
according  to  attitude  toward  the  Viet  Minh,  and  village  ceremonies  similar  to
community  self-criticism  sessions.  Viet  Minh  cadres  and  sympathizers  would  ap-
pear before  the  audience  to  swear  their  disavowal  of  communism.  The  peni-
tents would  tell  tales  of  Viet  Minh  atrocities,  and  rip  or  trample  a  suitable  Viet
Minh  symbol.  In  February,  1956,  tens  of  thousands  of  Saigon  citizens  assembled
to  witness  the  "conversion"  of  2,000  former  Viet  Minh  cadres.  Tran  Chanh
Tanh,  head  of  the  GVN  Department  of  Information  and  Youth,  announced  in
May,  1956,  that  the  campaign  had  "entirely  destroyed  the  predominant  commu-
nist influence  of  the  previous  nine  years."  According  to  his  figures,  94,041
former  communist  cadres  had  rallied  to  the  GVN,  5,613  other  cadres  had  sur-
rendered to  government  forces,  119,954  weapons  had  been  captured,  75  tons  of
documents,  and  707  underground  arms  caches  had  been  discovered.  One  Saigon
newspaper  boldly  referred  to  Tanh's  proceedings  as  a  "puppet  show" — for  which
it  was  closed  down.  What  relationship  GVN  statistics  bore  to  reality  is  not
known.

However,  for  many  peasants  the  Anti-Communist  Campaign  was  considerably
more  than  theatrics.  Diem,  in  a  Presidential  Ordinance  of  January  11,  1956,
expanded  upon  an  existing  system  of  political  re-education  centers  for  com-
munists and  active  communist  supporters.  The  1956  order  authorized  the  arrest
and  detention  of  anyone  deemed  dangerous  to  the  safety  of  the  state,  and  their
incarceration  in  one  of  several  concentration  camps.  The  Secretary  of  State  for
Information  disclosed  in  1956  that  15,000  to  20,000  communists  had  been  in
these  centers  since  1954,  a  figure  probably  low  at  the  time,  and  undoubtedly
raised  thereafter.  On  May  6,  1959,  the  GVN  promulgated  Law  10/59,  which
stiffened  penalties  for  communist  affiliations,  and  permitted  trial  of  accused  by
special  military  tribunals.  That  year  Anti-Communist  Denunciation  was  also
stepped  up.  In  1960,  a  GVN  Ministry  of  Information  release  stated  that  48,250
persons  had  been  jailed  between  1954  and  1960,  but  a  French  observer  estimates
the  numbers  in  jail  at  the  end  of  1956  alone  at  50,000.  P.  J.  Honey,  who  was
invited  by  Diem  to  investigate  certain  of  the  reeducation  centers  in  1959,  re-
ported that  on  the  basis  of  his  talks  with  former  inmates,  "the  consensus  of  the
opinions  expressed  by  these  people  is  that  .  .  .  the  majority  of  the  detainees
are  neither  communists  nor  pro-communists."

The  Anti-Communist  Campaigns  targeted  city-dwellers,  but  it  was  in  the  rural
areas,  where  the  Viet  Minh  had  been  most  strong,  that  it  was  applied  most
energetically.  For  example,  in  1959  the  Information  Chief  of  An  Xuyen  Province
(Cau  Mau  region)  reported  that  a  five  week  Anti-Communist  Campaign  by  the
National  Revolutionary  Movement  had  resulted  in  the  surrender  of  8,125  com-
munist agents,  and  the  denunciation  of  9,806  other  agents  and  29,978  sympa-
thizers. To  furnish  the  organization  and  spark  enthusiasm  for  such  undertakings,
Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  organized  in  1958  the  Republican  Youth,  which  with  Madame


312 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Nhu's  Solidarity  Movement,  became  a  vehicle  for  rural  paramilitary  training,
political,  and  intelligence  activities.  Nhu  saw  the  Republican  Youth  as  a  means
for  bringing  "controlled  liberty"  to  the  countryside,  and  it  seems  certainly  to  have
assisted  in  extending  his  control.

The  GVN  also  tried  to  reorganize  rural  society  from  the  family  level  up  on
the  communist  cellular  model.  Each  family  was  grouped  with  two  to  six  others
into  a  Mutual  Aid  Family  Group  {lien  gia),  and  a  like  number  of  lien  gia  com-
prised a  khom.  There  was  an  appointed  chief  for  both,  serving  as  a  chain  of
command  for  the  community,  empowered  to  settle  petty  disputes,  and  obligated
to  pass  orders  and  information  down  from  the  authorities.  Each  lien  gia  was
held  responsible  for  the  political  behavior  of  its  members,  and  was  expected  to
report  suspicious  behavior  (the  presence  of  strangers,  unusual  departures,  and
like  events).  Each  house  was  required  to  display  on  a  board  outside  a  listing  of
the  number  and  sex  of  its  inhabitants.  These  population  control  measures  were
combined  with  improved  systems  of  provincial  police  identification  cards  and
fingerprinting.  The  central  government  thus  became  visible — and  resented — at
the  village  level  as  it  had  never  been  before  in  Vietnam.

7. Population  Relocation

Security  and  control  of  the  populace  also  figured  in  GVN  resettlement  plans.
Even  the  refugee  relief  programs  had  been  executed  with  an  eye  to  national
security.  Diem  visualized  a  "living  wall"  of  settlers  between  the  lowland  populace
and  the  jungle  and  mountain  redoubts  of  dissidents.  From  flying  trips,  or  from
military  maps,  he  personally  selected  the  sites  for  resettlement  projects  {Khu
Dinh  Dien) — often  in  locales  deprived  of  adequate  water  or  fertile  soil — to
which  were  moved  pioneering  communities  of  Northern  refugees,  or  settlers
from  the  over-crowded  Annam  coast.  Between  April  1957  and  late  1961,  one
GVN  report  showed  210,000  persons  resettled  in  147  centers  carved  from  220,-
000  acres  of  wilderness.  Some  of  the  resentments  over  payments  for  resettled
virgin  land  were  mentioned  above.  More  importantly,  however,  these  "strategic"
programs  drew  a  disproportionate  share  of  foreign  aid  for  agriculture;  by  U.S.
estimates,  the  2%  of  total  population  affected  by  resettlement  received  50%  of
total  aid.

The  resettlements  precipitated  unexpected  political  reactions  from  the  Mon-
tagnard  peoples  of  the  Central  Vietnam  Highlands.  The  tribes  were  traditionally
hostile  to  the  Vietnamese,  and  proved  to  be  easily  mobilized  against  the  GVN.
In  1959  the  GVN  began  to  regroup  and  consolidate  the  tribes  into  defensible
communities  to  decrease  their  vulnerability  to  anti-government  agents,  and  to
ease  the  applying  of  cultural  uplift  programs.  By  late  1961  these  relocations  were
being  executed  on  a  large  scale.  In  Kontum  Province,  for  instance,  35,000  tribes-
men were  regrouped  in  autumn  1961,  about  50  percent  of  its  total  Montagnard
population.  Some  of  the  hill  people  refused  to  remain  in  their  new  communities,
but  the  majority  stayed.  In  the  long  run,  the  relocations  probably  had  the  effect
of  focusing  Montagnard  discontent  against  the  GVN,  and  facilitating,  rather
than  hindering,  the  subversion  of  the  tribes.

But  the  relocations  which  catalyzed  the  most  widespread  and  dangerous  anti-
GVN  sentiment  were  those  attempted  among  the  South  Vietnamese  farmers
beginning  in  1959.  In  February,  1959,  a  pilot  program  of  political  bifurcation
was  quietly  launched  in  the  areas  southwest  of  Saigon  which  had  been  controlled
by  the  Viet  Minh.  Its  objective  was  to  resetde  peasants  out  of  areas  where  GVN
police  or  military  forces  could  not  operate  routinely,  into  new,  policed  communi-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  313

ties  of  two  distinct  political  colorations.  Into  one  type  of  these  "rural  agglomera-
tions," called  qui  khu,  where  grouped  families  with  relatives  among  the  Viet
Minh  or  Viet  Cong,  or  suspected  of  harboring  pro-Viet  Cong  sentiments.  Into
another  type,  called  qui  ap,  where  grouped  GVN-oriented  families.  Security  was
the  primary  reason  for  selecting  the  sites  of  these  communities,  which  meant
that  in  many  instances  the  peasants  were  forced  to  move  some  distance  from
their  land.  The  French  had  attempted,  on  a  small  scale,  such  peasant  relocations
in  1953  in  Tonkin;  Diem  encountered  in  1959,  as  had  they,  stiff  resistance  from
the  farmers  over  separation  from  their  livelihood  and  ancestral  landhold.  But
Diem's  plan  also  aroused  apprehensions  during  qui  khu  designates  over  the  Anti-
Communist  Campaign.  With  a  rare  sensitivity  to  rural  protest,  the  GVN  sus-
pended the  program  in  March,  1959,  after  only  a  month.

In  July,  1959,  however.  Diem  announced  that  the  GVN  was  undertaking  to
improve  rural  standards  of  living  through  establishing  some  80  "prosperity  and
density  centers"  {khu  tru  mat).  These  "agrovilles"  were  to  be  located  along  a
"strategic  route  system" — key  roads,  protected  by  the  new  towns.  Some  80  agro-
villes were  to  be  built  by  the  end  of  1963,  each  designed  for  400  families  (2,000
to  3,000  people),  and  each  with  a  surrounding  cluster  of  smaller  agrovilles  for  120
families.  The  GVN  master  plan  provided  for  each  community  defense,  schools,
dispensary,  market  center,  public  garden — even  electricity.  The  new  communities
seemed  to  offer  the  farmers  many  advantages,  and  the  GVN  expected  warm  sup-
port. But  the  peasants  objected  to  the  agrovilles  even  more  sharply  than  they  had
the  earlier  experiment.  The  agrovilles  were  supposed  to  be  constructed  by  peas-
ants themselves;  Corvee  labor  was  resorted  to,  and  thousands  of  Republican
Youth  were  imported  to  help.  For  example,  at  one  site — Vi  Thanh  near  Can
Tho — 20,000  peasants  were  assembled  from  four  districts,  many  more  than  the
number  who  could  expect  to  profit  directly  from  the  undertaking.  Moreover,
even  most  of  those  who  were  selected  to  move  into  agrovilles  they  had  helped
build,  did  so  unwillingly,  for  it  often  meant  abandoning  a  cherished  ancestral
home,  tombs,  and  developed  gardens  and  fields  for  a  strange  and  desolate  place.
The  settler  was  expected  to  tear  down  his  old  house  to  obtain  materials  for  the
new,  and  received  GVN  aid  to  the  extent  of  a  grant  of  $5.50,  and  an  agricul-
tural loan  to  assist  him  in  paying  for  his  allotted  1.5  acres  of  land  near  the  agro-
ville.  Peasant  resistance,  and  then  insurgent  attacks  on  the  agrovilles,  caused
abandonment  of  the  program,  with  only  22  out  of  80  communities  completed.

The  agroville  program  was  eventually  superseded  by  the  GVN  strategic  hamlet
program,  formally  launched  by  President  Diem  in  February,  1962,  which  avoided
the  mistake  of  trying  to  erect  whole  new  communities  from  the  ground  up.
Rather,  the  plan  aimed  at  fortifying  existing  villages,  but  did  include  provisions
for  destroying  indefensible  hamlets,  and  relocation  of  the  inhabitants  into  more
secure  communities.  The  strategic  hamlet,  ap  chien  luoc,  also  eschewed  elaborate
social  or  economic  development  schemes,  concentrating  on  civil  defense  through
crude  fortifications  and  organizing  the  populace  to  improve  its  military  capability
and  political  cohesiveness.  In  some  exposed  sites,  "combat  hamlets"  were  estab-
lished, with  a  wholly  militarized  population.  High  goals  were  established,  the
GVN  announcing  that  by  1963  some  11,000  of  the  country's  16,000-17,000
hamlets  would  be  fortified.  In  this  instance,  as  before,  the  GVN  encountered  op-
position from  the  peasants,  and  as  before,  the  insurgents  attacked  it  vigorously.
Despite  its  relative  sophistication,  the  strategic  hamlet  program,  like  its  predeces-
sors, drove  a  wedge  not  between  the  insurgents  and  the  farmers  but  between  the
farmers  and  the  GVN,  and  eventuated  in  less  rather  than  more  security  in  the
countryside.


314 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I


8. Rural  Security  Forces  |

Security  was  the  foremost  consideration  of  the  GVN's  rural  programs,  and
American  aid  was  lavished  on  the  GVN  security  apparatus  in  general.  It  is  sur-
prising, therefore,  that  the  GVN  tolerated  so  ineffective  a  security  apparatus  at
the  village  level.  The  Self-Defense  Corps  (SDC)  and  the  Civil  Guard  (CG),
charged  with  rural  security,  were  poorly  trained  and  equipped,  miserably  led,
and  incapable  of  coping  with  insurgents;  they  could  scarcely  defend  themselves,
much  less  the  peasantry.  Indeed,  they  proved  to  be  an  asset  to  insurgents  in  two
respects:  they  served  as  a  source  of  weapons;  and  their  brutality,  petty  thievery,
and  disorderliness  induced  innumerable  villagers  to  join  in  open  revolt  against
the  GVN.  Nor  was  the  ARVN  much  better,  although  its  conduct  improved  over
the  years;  in  any  event,  the  ARVN  seldom  was  afield,  and  its  interaction  with
the  rural  populace  through  1959  was  relatively  slight.  It  should  be  noted  that  the
SDC  and  the  CG,  the  security  forces  at  the  disposal  of  the  provincial  administra-
tion, were  often  no  more  venal  nor  offensive  to  the  peasants  than  the  local
officials  themselves.  Corrupt,  arrogant,  and  overbearing,  the  men  the  people  knew
as  the  GVN  were  among  the  greatest  disadvantages  of  the  GVN  in  its  rural
efforts,

E. URBAN  POLITICAL  ALIENATION

The  rigidity  of  GVN  rural  political  policy  was  mirrored  in  the  cities:  the
regime  became  preoccupied  with  security  to  the  exclusion  of  other  concerns,  with
the  result  that  step  by  step  it  narrowed  its  active  or  potential  supporters,  aroused
increasing  fears  among  its  critics,  and  drove  them  toward  extremism.  In  a  step
similar  to  that  he  took  on  village  council  elections.  Diem  abolished  elections  for
municipal  councils  in  1956.  The  Anti-Communist  Denunciation  Campaign  had
its  urban  counterpart,  but  communist  strength  in  the  French-occupied  cities  had
been  less  than  in  the  countryside.  Opposition  to  Diem  formed  around  the  old
nationalist  movements,  including  the  pro-Bao  Dai  groups  Diem  labeled  "feudal-
ists," around  intellectual  and  individual  professional  politicians,  and  eventually
around  military  leaders.  Diem's  policies  successively  alienated  each.

1.  "Feudalists"

The  Civic  Action  teams  which  Diem  projected  into  the  former  Viet  Minh  areas
in  1955  trumpeted  against  "Communism,  Colonialism,  and  Feudalism,"  the  last
inveighing  against  Bao  Dai,  who  was,  at  the  time,  still  Head  of  state.  "Feudalist"
was  one  epithet  applied  sweepingly  to  the  religious  sects,  and  to  all  those  whose
position  or  fortune  depended  upon  Bao  Dai,  from  the  Binh  Xuyen  who  had
purchased  its  control  over  Saigon-Cholon  from  the  Emperor,  to  civil  servants
and  army  officers  loyal  to  Bao  Dai.  The  label  was  virtually  as  damning  as  "Com-
munist" in  incurring  the  ungentle  attentions  of  Nhu  or  Can.  In  the  early  years
"feudalists"  and  "communists"  were  often  tarred  by  the  same  brush.  For  example,
the  Anti-Communist  Denunciation  Campaign  got  underway  in  Quang  Tri  Prov-
ince in  1955,  under  Ngo  Dinh  Can.  But  Can  was  also  in  pursuit  of  the  anti-
communist  Dai  Viet  (Great  Vietnam)  Party  there,  which  had  armed  units  and,
for  a  time,  an  anti-government  radio  station.  As  with  the  communists,  many  Dai
Viet  were  killed,  imprisoned,  or  driven  into  exile.  Diem's  defeat  of  Bao  Dai  at
the  polls  in  October,  1955,  strengthened  his  hand  against  pro-Bao  Dai  groups.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  315

With  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  the  following  spring,  it  became  imprudent
for  any  politician  or  group  who  wished  to  avoid  Can  Lao  and  NRM  scrutiny  to
maintain  ties  with  "feudalists"  in  hiding  in  Vietnam,  or  operating  from  abroad.
Despite  the  fact  that  opposition  Vietnamese  nationalist  parties  had  been  strongly
influenced  in  their  organization  and  methods  by  the  Kuomintang,  they  had  never
developed  sufficient  internal  discipline,  cohesion  or  following  to  admit  of  chal-
lenging Diem  after  1956.  Such  opposition  political  forces  as  developed  centered
around  individuals.  (Only  two  non-Diem,  non-communist  political  parties  sur-
vived the  Diem  era:  the  Nationalist  Party  of  Greater  Vietnam  {Dai  Viet  Qhoc
Dan  Dang,  the  Dai  Viet)  and  the  Vietnamese  Nationalist  Party  {Viet  Nam  Quoc
Dan  Dang,  the  VNQDD) ).

2. Dr.  Dan

Until  November,  1960,  Diem's  most  prominent  political  opponent  was  Doctor
Phan  Quang  Dan.  Dr.  Dan  was  a  northern  physician  who  had  been  caught  up  in
nationalist  politics  in  1945,  and  lived  in  exile  after  1947.  He  returned  to  Vietnam
in  September,  1955,  to  head  up  a  coalition  of  opposition  to  the  GVN  arrange-
ments for  the  March,  1956,  elections  for  the  National  Assembly.  He  was  arrested
on  the  eve  of  those  elections,  accused  of  communist  and  colonialist  activities,  and
though  released,  deprived  of  his  position  at  the  University  of  Saigon  Medical
School.  His  subsequent  political  career  underscores  the  astringent  nature  of
Diem's  democracy.  In  May,  1957  Dr.  Dan  formed  another  opposition  coalition,
the  Democratic  bloc,  which  acquired  a  newspaper  called  Thoi  Luan.  Thoi  Luan
became  the  best-selling  newspaper  in  South  Vietnam  (all  papers  were  published
in  Saigon,  except  Can's  government  paper  in  Hue),  with  a  circulation  of  about
80,000  copies.  After  a  series  of  statements  critical  of  the  GVN,  Thoi  Luan  was
sacked  by  a  mob  in  September,  1957.  Unheeding  of  that  warning,  the  paper
continued  an  opposition  editorial  policy  until  March,  1958,  when  the  GVN
closed  the  paper,  and  gave  the  editor  a  stiff  fine  and  a  suspended  prison  sentence
for  an  article  including  the  following  passage:

What  about  your  democratic  election?

During  the  city-council  and  village  council  elections  under  the  "medieval
and  colonialist"  Nguyen  Van  Tam  Administration  [under  Bao-Dai,  in  1953],
constituents  were  threatened  and  compelled  to  vote;  but  they  were  still
better  than  your  elections,  because  nobody  brought  soldiers  into  Saigon  by
the  truckload  "to  help  with  the  voting."

What  about  your  presidential  regime?

You  are  proud  for  having  created  for  Viet-Nam  a  regime  that  you  think
is  similar  to  that  of  the  United  States.  If  those  regimes  are  similar,  then  they
are  as  related  as  a  skyscraper  is  to  a  tin-roofed  shack,  in  that  they  both  are
houses  to  live  in.

In  the  U.S.A.,  Congress  is  a  true  parliament  and  Congressmen  are  legis-
lators, i.e.,  free  and  disinterested  men  who  are  not  afraid  of  the  government,
and  who  know  their  duties  and  dare  to  carry  them  out.  Here  the  deputies
are  political  functionaries  who  make  laws  like  an  announcer  in  a  radio  sta-
tion, by  reading  out  loud  texts  that  have  been  prepared  [for  them]  before-
hand. .  .  .

A  month  later,  the  Democratic  Bloc  collapsed.  Dr.  Dan  attempted  to  obtain
GVN  recognition  for  another  party,  the  Free  Democratic  Party,  and  permission


316 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Voi  I

to  publish  another  paper.  No  GVN  action  was  ever  taken  on  either  application,
but  a  number  of  Dr.  Dan's  followers  in  the  new  party  were  arrested.  When  in
March,  1959,  the  newspaper  Tin  Bac  published  an  article  by  Dr.  Dan,  it  was
closed  down.  In  June,  1959,  the  newspaper  Nguoi  Viet  Tu  Do  was  similarly  in-
discreet, and  met  the  same  fate.  In  August,  1959,  Dr.  Dan  ran  for  a  seat  in  the
National  Assembly,  was  elected  by  a  six-to-one  margin  over  Diem's  candidate
unning  against  him,  but  was  disqualified  by  court  action  before  he  could  take  his
lat.  Dr.  Dan's  career  of  opposition  to  Diem  ended  in  November,  1960,  when
..e  became  the  political  adviser  to  the  group  who  attempted  a  coup  d'etat.  Dan
was  arrested  and  jailed,  and  remained  there  until  the  end  of  the  Diem  regime
three  years  later.

3. The  Caravelle  Group,  1960

But  Dr.  Dan  was  an  exceptionally  bold  antagonist  of  Diem.  No  other  politician
dared  what  he  did.  Even  he,  however,  was  unable  to  bring  any  unity  to  the
opposition.  Such  other  leaders  as  there  were  distrusted  Dan,  or  feared  the  GVN.
There  was,  however,  one  occasion  in  the  spring  of  1960  when  opposition  to  Diem
did  coalesce.  There  was  change  in  the  international  political  winds  that  year — a
students'  revolt  in  Korea,  an  army  revolt  in  Turkey,  demonstrations  in  Japan
which  resulted  in  cancellation  of  President  Eisenhower's  planned  visit.  Diem
remembered  1960  well,  as  a  "treasure  chest  for  the  communists."

The  United  States  press  and  the  world  press  started  saying  that  democracy
was  needed  in  the  under-developed  countries.  This  came  just  in  time  for  the
communists.  Some  of  the  United  States  press  even  incited  people  to  rebellion.

That  year  was  the  worst  we  have  ever  had  .  .  .  We  had  problems  on  all
fronts.  On  the  one  hand  we  had  to  fight  the  communists.  On  the  other,  we
had  to  deal  with  the  foreign  press  campaign  to  incite  rebellion  vis-a-vis
Korea.  These  were  sore  anxieties,  for  some  unbalanced  people  here  thought
it  was  time  to  act.  Teachers  in  the  private  secondary  schools  began  to  incite
the  students  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Korean  students.  And  then  there
were  our  amateur  politicians  who  were  outdated  and  thought  only  of  taking
revenge.  .  .  .

The  last  reference  was  to  the  Caravelle  Group,  who  issued  at  the  Caravelle  Hotel
in  late  April,  1960,  a  "manifesto"  of  grievances  against  the  GVN.  The  eighteen
signers  were  all  old-time  politicans,  leaders  of  the  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sects,
the  Dai  Viet  and  the  VNQDD  parties,  and  dissenting  Catholic  groups.  Eleven
had  been  Cabinet  ministers;  four  had  been  in  other  high  government  positions.
They  organized  themselves  as  the  Bloc  for  Liberty  and  Progress,  with  a  platform
of  constitutional  revision  toward  greater  power  for  the  National  Assembly  against
the  Presidency.  Dr.  Dan  could  not  be  induced  to  join  the  Caravelle  Group,  but  in
the  Diem  cleanup  after  the  November,  1960  coup  attempt,  the  GVN  arrested
most  of  the  eighteen,  and  their  Bloc  disintegrated.  The  Caravelle  Manifesto  is
reproduced  below:

MANIFESTO  OF  THE  EIGHTEEN

The  President  of  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam
Saigon

Mr.  President:

We  the  undersigned,  representing  a  group  of  eminent  citizens  and  person-
alities, intellectuals  of  all  tendencies,  and  men  of  good  will,  recognize  in  the


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  317

face  of  the  gravity  of  the  present  political  situation  that  we  can  no  longer
remain  indifferent  to  the  realities  of  life  in  our  country.

Therefore,  we  officially  address  to  you  today  an  appeal  with  the  aim  of
exposing  to  you  the  whole  truth  in  the  hope  that  the  government  will  accord
it  all  the  attention  necessary  so  as  to  urgently  modify  its  policies,  so  as  to
remedy  the  present  situation  and  lead  the  people  out  of  danger.

Let  us  look  toward  the  past,  at  the  time  when  you  were  abroad.  For  eight
or  nine  years,  the  Vietnamese  people  suffered  many  trials  due  to  the  war:
They  passed  from  French  domination  to  Japanese  occupation,  from  revolu-
tion to  resistance,  from  the  nationalist  imposture  behind  which  hid  commu-
nism to  a  pseudo-independence  covering  up  for  colonialism;  from  terror  to
terror,  from  sacrifice  to  sacrifice — in  short,  from  promise  to  promise,  until
finally  hope  ended  in  bitter  disillusion.

Thus,  when  you  were  on  the  point  of  returning  to  the  country,  the  people
as  a  whole  entertained  the  hope  that  it  would  find  again  under  your  guidance
the  peace  that  is  necessary  to  give  meaning  to  existence,  to  reconstruct  the
destroyed  homes,  put  to  the  plow  again  the  abandoned  lands.  The  people
hoped  no  longer  to  be  compelled  to  pay  homage  to  one  regime  in  the  morn-
ing and  to  another  at  night,  not  to  be  the  prey  of  the  cruelties  and  oppres-
sion of  one  faction;  no  longer  to  be  treated  as  coolies;  no  longer  to  be  at  the
mercy  of  the  monopolies;  no  longer  to  have  to  endure  the  depredations  of
corrupt  and  despotic  civil  servants.  In  one  word,  the  people  hoped  to  live  in
security  at  last,  under  a  regime  which  would  give  them  a  little  bit  of  justice
and  liberty.  The  whole  people  thought  that  you  would  be  the  man  of  the  sit-
uation and  that  you  would  implement  its  hopes.

That  is  the  way  it  was  when  you  returned.  The  Geneva  Accords  of  1954
put  an  end  to  combat  and  to  the  devastations  of  war.  The  French  Expedi-
tionary Corps  was  progressively  withdrawn,  and  total  independence  of  South
Viet  Nam  had  become  a  reality.  Furthermore,  the  country  had  benefited
from  moral  encouragement  and  a  substantial  increase  of  foreign  aid  from
the  free  world.  With  so  many  favorable  political  factors,  in  addition  to  the
blessed  geographic  conditions  of  a  fertile  and  rich  soil  yielding  agricultural,
forestry,  and  fishing  surpluses.  South  Viet  Nam  should  have  been  able  to
begin  a  definitive  victory  in  the  historical  competition  with  the  North,  so  as
to  carry  out  the  will  of  the  people  and  to  lead  the  country  on  the  way  to
hope,  liberty,  and  happiness.  Today,  six  years  later,  having  benefited  from
so  many  undeniable  advantages,  what  has  the  government  been  able  to  do?
Where  has  it  led  South  Viet  Nam?  What  parts  of  the  popular  aspirations
have  been  implemented?

Let  us  try  to  draw  an  objective  balance  of  the  situation,  without  flattery
or  false  accusations,  stricdy  following  a  constructive  line  which  you  your-
self have  so  often  indicated,  in  the  hope  that  the  government  shall  modify
its  policies  so  as  to  extricate  itself  from  a  situation  that  is  extremely  danger-
ous to  the  very  existence  of  the  nation.

Policies

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  bastard  regime  created  and  protected  by  colo-
nialism has  been  overthrown  and  that  many  of  the  feudal  organizations  of
factions  and  parties  which  oppress  the  population  were  destroyed,  the  people
do  not  know  a  better  life  or  more  freedom  under  the  republican  regime
which  you  have  created.  A  constitution  has  been  established  in  form  only;


18 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

a  National  Assembly  exists  whose  deliberations  always  fall  into  line  with  the
government;  antidemocratic  elections — all  those  are  methods  and  "com-
edies" copied  from  the  dictatorial  Communist  regimes,  which  obviously  can-
not serve  as  terms  of  comparison  with  North  Viet  Nam.

Continuous  arrests  fill  the  jails  and  prisons  to  the  rafters,  as  at  this  precise
moment;  public  opinion  and  the  press  are  reduced  to  silence.  The  same  ap-
plies to  the  popular  will  as  translated  in  certain  open  elections,  in  which  it  is
insulted  and  trampled  (as  was  the  case,  for  example,  during  the  recent  elec-
tions for  the  Second  Legislature).  All  these  have  provoked  the  discourage-
ment and  resentment  of  the  people.

Political  parties  and  religious  sects  have  been  eliminated.  "Groups"  or
"movements"  have  replaced  them.  But  this  substitution  has  only  brought
about  new  oppressions  against  the  population  without  protecting  it  for  that
matter  against  Communist  enterprises.  Here  is  one  example:  the  fiefs  of  reli-
gious sects,  which  hitherto  were  deadly  for  the  Communists,  now  not  only
provide  no  security  whatever  but  have  become  favored  highways  for  Viet
Minh  guerrillas,  as  is,  by  the  way,  the  case  of  the  rest  of  the  country.

This  is  proof  that  the  religious  sects,  though  futile,  nevertheless  constitute
effective  anti-Communist  elements.  Their  elimination  has  opened  the  way  to
the  Viet  Cong  and  unintentionally  has  prepared  the  way  for  the  enemy,
whereas  a  more  realistic  and  more  flexible  policy  could  have  amalgamated
them  all  with  a  view  to  reinforcing  the  anti-Communist  front.

Today  the  people  want  freedom.  You  should,  Mr.  President,  liberalize
the  regime,  promote  democracy,  guarantee  minimum  civil  rights,  recognize
the  opposition  so  as  to  permit  the  citizens  to  express  themselves  without
fear,  thus  removing  grievances  and  resentments,  opposition  to  which  now
constitutes  for  the  people  their  sole  reason  for  existence.  When  this  occurs,
the  people  of  South  Viet  Nam,  in  comparing  their  position  with  that  of  the
North,  will  appreciate  the  value  of  true  liberty  and  of  authentic  democracy.
It  is  only  at  that  time  that  the  people  will  make  all  the  necessary  efforts  and
sacrifices  to  defend  that  liberty  and  democracy.

Administration

The  size  of  the  territory  has  shrunk,  but  the  number  of  civil  servants  has
increased,  and  still  the  work  doesn't  get  done.  This  is  because  the  govern-
ment, like  the  Communists,  lets  the  political  parties  control  the  population,
separate  the  elite  from  the  lower  echelons,  and  sow  distrust  between  those
individuals  who  are  "affiliated  with  the  movement"  and  those  who  are  "out-
side the  group."  Effective  power,  no  longer  in  the  hands  of  those  who  are
usually  responsible,  is  concentrated  in  fact  in  the  hands  of  an  irresponsible
member  of  the  "family,"  from  whom  emanates  all  orders;  this  slows  down
the  administrative  machinery,  paralyzes  all  initiative,  discourages  good  will.
At  the  same  time,  not  a  month  goes  by  without  the  press  being  full  of  stories
about  graft  impossible  to  hide;  this  becomes  an  endless  parade  of  illegal
transactions  involving  millions  of  piastres.

The  administrative  machinery,  already  slowed  down,  is  about  to  become
completely  paralyzed.  It  is  in  urgent  need  of  reorganization.  Competent  peo-
ple should  be  put  back  in  the  proper  jobs;  discipline  must  be  re-established
from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  hierarchy;  authority  must  go  hand  in  hand
with  responsibility;  efficiency,  initiative,  honesty,  and  the  economy  should
be  the  criteria  for  promotion;  professional  qualifications  should  be  re-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  319

spected.  Favoritism  based  on  family  or  party  connections  should  be  ban-
ished; the  selling  of  influence,  corruption  and  abuse  of  power  must  be
punished.

Thus,  everything  still  can  be  saved,  human  dignity  can  be  reestablished;
faith  in  an  honest  and  just  government  can  be  restored.

Army

The  French  Expeditionary  Corps  has  left  the  country,  and  a  republican
army  has  been  constituted,  thanks  to  American  aid,  which  has  equipped  it
with  modern  materiel.  Nevertheless,  even  in  a  group  of  the  proud  elite  of
the  youth  such  as  the  Vietnamese  Army — where  the  sense  of  honor  should
be  cultivated,  whose  blood  and  arms  should  be  devoted  to  the  defense  of  the
country,  where  there  should  be  no  place  for  clannishness  and  factions — the
spirit  of  the  "national  revolutionary  movement"  or  of  the  "personalist  body"
divides  the  men  of  one  and  the  same  unit,  sows  distrust  between  friends  of
the  same  rank,  and  uses  as  a  criterion  for  promotion  fidelity  toward  the
party  in  blind  submission  to  its  leaders.  This  creates  extremely  dangerous
situations,  such  as  the  recent  incident  of  Tay-Ninh.*

The  purpose  of  the  army,  pillar  of  the  defense  of  the  country,  is  to  stop
foreign  invasions  and  to  eliminate  rebel  movements.  It  is  at  the  service  of
the  country  only  and  should  not  lend  itself  to  the  exploitation  of  any  faction
or  party.  Its  total  reorganization  is  necessary.  Clannishness  and  party  obedi-
ence should  be  eliminated;  its  moral  base  strengthened;  a  noble  tradition  of
national  pride  created;  and  fighting  spirit,  professional  conscience,  and  brav-
ery should  become  criteria  for  promotion.  The  troops  should  be  encouraged
to  respect  their  officers,  and  the  officers  should  be  encouraged  to  love  their
men.  Distrust,  jealousy,  rancor  among  colleagues  of  the  same  rank  should
be  eliminated.

Then  in  case  of  danger,  the  nation  will  have  at  its  disposal  a  valiant  army
animated  by  a  single  spirit  and  a  single  aspiration:  to  defend  the  most  pre-
cious possession — our  country,  Viet  Nam.

Economic  and  Social  Affairs

A  rich  and  fertile  country  enjoying  food  surpluses;  a  budget  which  does
not  have  to  face  military  expenditures,  important  war  reparations;  sub-
stantial profits  from  Treasury  bonds;  a  colossal  foreign-aid  program;  a  de-
veloping market  capable  of  receiving  foreign  capital  investments — those  are
the  many  favorable  conditions  which  could  make  Viet  Nam  a  productive
and  prosperous  nation.  However,  at  the  present  time  many  people  are  out
of  work,  have  no  roof  over  their  heads,  and  no  money.  Rice  is  abundant  but
does  not  sell;  shop  windows  are  well-stocked  but  the  goods  do  not  move.
Sources  of  revenue  are  in  the  hands  of  speculators — who  use  the  [govern-
ment] party  and  group  to  mask  monopolies  operating  for  certain  private  in-
terests. At  the  same  time,  thousands  of  persons  are  mobilized  for  exhausting
work,  compelled  to  leave  their  own  jobs,  homes  and  families,  to  participate
in  the  construction  of  magnificent  but  useless  "agrovilles"  which  weary  them
and  provoke  their  disaffection,  thus  aggravating  popular  resentment  and
creating  an  ideal  terrain  for  enemy  propaganda.
*  This  refers  to  the  penetration  of  the  compound  of  the  3 2d  ARVN  Regiment  in
January,  1960,  when  communist  forces  killed  23  soldiers  and  captured  hundreds  of
weapons.

  The  military  expenditures  of  the  Vietnamese  budget  are  paid  out  of  U.S.  economic
and  military  aid.


320 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

The  economy  is  the  very  foundation  of  society,  and  public  opinion  en-
sures the  survival  of  the  regime.  The  government  must  destroy  all  the  ob-
stacles standing  in  the  way  of  economic  development;  must  abolish  all  forms
of  monopoly  and  speculation;  must  create  a  favorable  environment  for  in-
vestments coming  from  foreign  friends  as  well  as  from  our  own  citizens;
must  encourage  commercial  enterprises,  develop  industry,  and  create  jobs
to  reduce  unemployment.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  put  an  end  to  all  forms
of  human  exploitation  in  the  work  camps  of  the  agrovilles.

Then  only  the  economy  will  flourish  again;  the  citizen  will  find  again  a
peaceful  life  and  will  enjoy  his  condition;  society  will  be  reconstructed  in  an
atmosphere  of  freedom  and  democracy.

Mr.  President,  this  is  perhaps  the  first  time  that  you  have  heard  such  se-
vere and  disagreeable  criticism — so  contrary  to  your  own  desires.  Neverthe-
less, sir,  these  words  are  stricdy  the  truth,  a  truth  that  is  bitter  and  hard,
that  you  have  never  been  able  to  know  because,  whether  this  is  intended  or
not,  a  void  has  been  created  around  you,  and  by  the  very  fact  of  your  high
position,  no  one  permits  you  to  perceive  the  critical  point  at  which  truth
shall  burst  forth  in  irresistible  waves  of  hatred  on  the  part  of  a  people  sub-
jected for  a  long  time  to  terrible  suffering  and  a  people  who  shall  rise  to
break  the  bonds  which  hold  it  down.  It  shall  sweep  away  the  ignominy  and
all  the  injustices  which  surround  and  oppress  it.

As  we  do  not  wish,  in  all  sincerity,  that  our  Fatherland  should  have  to
live  through  these  perilous  days,  we — without  taking  into  consideration  the
consequences  which  our  attitude  may  bring  upon  us — are  ringing  today  the
alarm  bell,  in  view  of  the  imminent  danger  which  threatens  the  government.

Until  now,  we  have  kept  silent  and  preferred  to  let  the  Executive  act  as  it
wished.  But  now  time  is  of  the  essence;  we  feel  that  it  is  our  duty — and  in
the  case  of  a  nation  in  turmoil  even  the  most  humble  people  have  their  share
of  responsibility — to  speak  the  truth,  to  awaken  public  opinion,  to  alert  the
people,  and  to  unify  the  opposition  so  as  to  point  the  way.  We  beseech  the
government  to  urgently  modify  its  policies  so  as  to  remedy  the  situation,  to
defend  the  republican  regime,  and  to  safeguard  the  existence  of  the  nation.
We  hold  firm  hope  that  the  Vietnamese  people  shall  know  a  brilliant  future
in  which  it  will  enjoy  peace  and  prosperity  in  freedom  and  progress.

Yours  respectfully,

1.  TRAN  VAN  VAN,  Diploma  of  Higher  Commercial  Studies,  former
Minister  of  Economy  and  Planning

2.  PHAN  KHAC  SUU,  Agricultural  Engineer,  former  Minister  of  Agri-
culture, former  Minister  of  Labor

3.  TRAN  VAN  HUONG,  Professor  of  Secondary  Education,  former  Pre-
fect of  Saigon-Cholon

4.  NGUYEN,  LUU  VIEN,  M.D.,  former  Professor  at  the  Medical  School,
former  High  Commissioner  of  Refugees

5.  HUYNH-KIM  HUU,  M.D.,  former  Minister  of  Public  Health

6.  PHAN  HUY  QUAT,  M.D.,  former  Minister  of  National  Education,
former  Minister  of  Defense

7.  TRAN  VAN  LY,  former  Governor  of  Central  Viet-Nam

8.  NGUYEN  TIEN  HY,  M.D.

9.  TRAN  VAN  DO,  M.D.,  former  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Chairman
of  Vietnamese  Delegation  to  the  1954  Geneva  Conference


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954^1960  321

10.  LE  NGOC  CHAN,  Attorney  at  Law,  former  Secretary  of  State  for
National  Defense

11.  LE  QUANG  LUAT,  Attorney  at  Law,  former  Government  Delegate
for  North  Viet-Nam,  former  Minister  of  Information  and  Propaganda

12.  LUONG  TRONG  TUONG,  Public  Works  Engineer,  former  Secretary
of  State  for  National  Economy

13.  NGUYEN  TANG  NGUYEN,  M.D.,  former  Minister  of  Labor  and
Youth

14.  PHAM  HUU  CHUONG,  M.D.,  former  Minister  of  Public  Health  and
Social  Action

15.  TRAN  VAN  TUYEN,  Attorney  at  Law,  former  Secretary  of  State  for
Information  and  Propaganda

16.  TA  CHUONG  PHUNG,  former  Provincial  Governor  for  Binh-Dinh

17.  TRAN  LE  CHAT,  Laureate  of  the  Triennial  Mandarin  Competition  of
1903

18.  HO  VAN  VUI,  Reverend,  former  Parish  Priest  of  Saigon,  at  present
Parish  Priest  of  Tha-La,  Province  of  Tay-Ninh

The  November,  1960,  coup  marked  the  end  of  opposition  by  professional  poli-
ticians against  Diem.  In  fact,  all  the  Caravelle  group  were  arrested  and  jailed.
Such  political  activity  among  them  as  occurred  in  1962  and  1963  was  perforce
subdued  to  the  point  that  it  captured  attention  neither  from  opponents  of  Diem,
nor  Diem  himself.  But  1960  was  altogether  too  late  for  effective  "loyal  opposi-
tion" to  form.  By  that  time  the  GVN's  ability  to  control  the  press,  to  manage
demonstrations,  to  limit  travel,  and  to  imprison  (and  worse)  at  will,  had  virtually
paralyzed  the  intellectual  elite  of  Vietnam.  Nor  were  labor  unions  politically
active,  despite  their  power  potential.  As  early  as  1956  the  GVN  had  become
alarmed  over  Communist  influence  in  rubber  workers'  unions  in  Binh  Duong
Province,  and  had  arrested  union  leaders.  Farmers'  unions  were  crippled  by
arrests  of  union  cadre,  and  the  Can  Lao  proved  itself  quite  capable  of  engineer-
ing elections  within  the  unions  as  effectively  as  it  rigged  those  for  the  National
Assembly.  The  threat  to  Diem,  when  it  came,  arose  from  more  traditional  sources
of  power — the  religious  sects  and  the  armed  forces.

4. Religious  Dissenters

Diem's  clash  with  the  armed  sects  in  1954  and  1955  had  the  unfortunate
political  consequence  of  casting  his  regime  in  religious  overtones  which  deepened
as  the  Ngo  Dinh  Catholicism  became  more  widely  known.  Together  with  Diem's
obvious  U.S.  backing,  these  had  the  effect  of  accentuating  his  Occidental,  and
especially  American,  identity.  The  British  Catholic  writer  and  commentator  on
Vietnam,  Graham  Greene,  observed  in  1955  that:

It  is  Catholicism  which  has  helped  to  ruin  the  government  of  Mr.  Diem,
for  his  genuine  piety  has  been  exploited  by  his  American  advisers  until  the
Church  is  in  danger  of  sharing  the  unpopularity  of  the  United  States.  An
unfortunate  visit  by  Cardinal  Spellman  .  .  .  has  been  followed  by  those  of
Cardinal  Gillroy  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canberra.  Great  sums  are  spent
on  organized  demonstrations  for  visitors,  and  an  impression  is  given  that
the  Catholic  Church  is  occidental  and  an  ally  of  the  United  States  in  the  cold
war.  .  .  .

In  the  whole  of  Vietnam  the  proportion  of  Catholics  to  the  population  is
roughly  the  same  as  in  England — one  in  ten,  a  ratio  insufficient  to  justify  a
Catholic  government.  Mr.  Diem's  ministers  are  not  all  Catholic,  but  Mr.


322 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Diem,  justifiably  suspicious  of  many  of  his  supporters,  has  confined  the
actual  government  to  himself  and  members  of  his  family.  He  undertakes
personally  the  granting  of  exit  and  entry  visas.  .  .  .  The  south,  instead  of
confronting  the  totalitarian  north  with  evidences  of  freedom,  had  slipped
into  an  inefficient  dictatorship:  newspapers  suppressed,  strict  censorship,
men  exiled  by  administrative  order  and  not  by  judgment  of  the  courts.  It  is
unfortunate  that  a  government  of  this  kind  should  be  identified  with  one
faith.  Mr.  Diem  may  well  leave  his  tolerant  country  a  legacy  of  anti-Cathol-
icism. .  .  .

While  Vietnam  has  an  ample  record  of  religious  intolerance — especially  intoler-
ance for  Catholics — calling  into  question  Mr.  Greene's  contrary  characterization,
his  prediction  of  Diem's  impact  proved  correct.  Open  opposition  to  his  govern-
ment by  civilians  finally  manifested  itself  on  the  issue  of  "religous  freedom"  in
Hue  and  Saigon  in  1963,  coalescing  around  militant  Buddhists  and  students — two
groups  that  were,  theretofore,  for  all  practical  purposes  politically  mute.  There
is  no  doubt,  however,  that  Diem's  Catholicism  from  1954  on  acted  to  his  dis-
advantage among  the  non-Catholic  masses,  and  enhanced  the  My-Diem  image  of
his  government's  being  an  instrument  of  alien  power  and  purpose.

F. TENSIONS  WITH  THE  ARMED  FORCES

The  soldiers  of  Vietnam  presented  Diem  with  his  first,  and  his  last  political
challenges.  Part  of  the  Army's  political  involvement  stemmed  from  patent  mili-
tary inefficiency  in  Diem's  tight  control,  for  which  RVNAF  leaders  correctly
held  Diem  responsible.  Part  also  correctly  can  be  attributed  to  vaulting  ambition
and  venality  among  certain  of  Diem's  officers.  And  since  the  United  States  paid,
schooled,  and  advised  the  RVNAF,  it  would  also  be  correct  to  consider  the  U.S.
involved,  if  not  responsible.  The  record  of  Diem's  relations  with  RVNAF,  like
his  relations  with  other  parts  of  Vietnamese  society,  is  a  history  of  increasing
tensions,  and  of  lowering  mutual  understanding  and  support.

1. Clashes  with  Francophiles,  1954-1955

Diem's  first  interactions  with  his  army  were  inauspicious.  From  September  to
November,  1954,  Army  Chief  of  Staff  General  Nguyen  Van  Hinh — a  French
citizen  who  held  a  commission  in  the  French  Air  Force  seemed  on  the  verge  of
overthrowing  Diem.  Diem  ordered  Hinh  out  of  the  country;  Hinh  defied  him.  An
apparent  coup  d'etat  in  late  October  was  blocked  by  adroit  maneuvering  by
Colonel  Landsdale,  and  by  assurance  from  General  Collins  to  Hinh  that  Ameri-
can support  would  be  promptly  withdrawn  from  Vietnam  were  his  plot  to  suc-
ceed. As  Hinh  recalled  it:

I  had  only  to  lift  my  telephone  and  the  coup  d'etat  would  have  been
over.  .  .  .  Nothing  could  have  opposed  the  army.  But  the  Americans  let
me  know  that  if  that  happened,  dollar  help  would  be  cut  off.  That  would
not  matter  to  the  military.  If  necessary,  we  soldiers  could  go  barefoot  and
eat  rice  but  the  country  cannot  survive  without  American  help.

Diem  removed  Hinh  on  29  November  1954.  The  Acting  Chief  of  Staff,  General
Nguyen  Van  Vy,  Diem  found  "insufficiently  submissive,"  and  replaced  him  on
12  December  1954  with  General  Le  Van  Ty,  kicking  Vy  upstairs  to  be  Inspector


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  323

General.  In  April  1955,  during  the  turmoil  of  the  sect  rebellion,  Bao  Dai  at-
tempted to  appoint  Vy  as  Chief  of  Staff  with  full  military  powers,  and  to  recall
Diem  to  France.  As  Diem  committed  his  army  to  battle  with  the  sects,  Vy  an-
nounced that,  in  the  name  of  Bao  Dai,  and  with  the  backing  of  all  but  ten  percent
of  the  Army,  he  had  assumed  control  of  the  government.  However,  General  Ty,
Diem's  Chief  of  Staff,  remained  loyal,  rallied  key  local  commanders  around
Diem,  and  Vy  fled.  Within  weeks  both  Generals  Hinh  and  Vy  were  afield  against
Diem  in  the  Mekong  Delta,  maneuvering  a  disparate  army  of  Hoa  Hao,  French
"deserters,"  and  others — Diem's  forces  again  beat  them,  and  both  then  went  into
exile.

2.  Militarizing  Public  Administration

What  Diem  remembered  from  these  experiences  was  that  personal  loyalty
was  the  prime  requisite  for  high  command.  As  a  result,  he  took  an  intense  and
direct  interest  in  the  appointments  of  military  officers,  and — as  in  other  endeavors
— found  it  easier  to  place  his  trust  in  Northerners  and  Catholics.  Before  long,
the  upper  echelons  of  the  officer  corps  were  preponderantly  from  these  groups,
and  closely  netted  to  the  Diem  family  web  of  preferment.  As  GVN  demands
for  loyal  civil  servants  willing  to  forego  the  advantages  of  Saigon  multiplied.
Diem  was  impelled  to  shift  trusted  military  officers  into  his  civil  administration.
The  head  of  the  General  Directorate  of  Police  and  Security  was  a  military  officer
from  1956  forward;  his  subordinates  in  the  police  apparatus  included  a  growing
number  of  military  officers — for  example,  all  the  Saigon  district  police  chiefs
appointed  in  the  year  1960  were  soldiers.  The  government  in  the  provinces  re-
flected similar  moves  toward  militarization:

TRENDS  TOWARD  MILITARY  OFFICERS  AS  PROVINCE  CHIEFS

No.  Provinces  No.  Military  Chiefs  %  Military  Chiefs
1958 36 13  36
1960 36 21  58
1962 41 36  88

There  was  a  coextensive  militarization  of  public  administration  at  district  and
lower  levels.

3.  Dissatisfaction  in  the  Officer  Corps

But  if  Vietnam's  soldiers  found  the  Diem  family  a  way  to  political  power,
wealth,  and  social  prominence,  they  had  ample  reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with
Diem's  intervention  in  their  professional  concerns.  The  propensity  of  Ngo  Dinh
Diem  to  control  his  military  with  a  tight  rein  extended  to  deciding  when  and
where  operations  would  be  conducted,  with  what  forces,  and  often  how  they
would  be  used.  Moreover,  he  involved  himself  with  the  arming  and  equipping
of  the  forces,  showing  a  distinct  proclivity  to  heavy  military  forces  of  the  con-
ventional type,  even  for  the  Civil  Guard,  which  reinforced  American  military
leanings  in  the  same  direction.  There  were  a  few  soldiers,  like  General  Duong
Van  Minh,  who  sharply  disagreed  with  the  President  on  both  points.  And  there
was  a  growing  number  of  young  officers  who  resented  the  Catholic-Northern
dominant  clique  within  the  military,  who  were  dissatisfied  with  Diem's  familial
interference  in  military  matters,  and  who  were  willing  to  entertain  notions  that


324 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

the  GVN  had  to  be  substantially  modified.  Nonetheless,  until  1963,  there  was
little  apparent  willingness  to  concert  action  against  Diem.

4. The  Early  Coup  Attempts,  1960  and  1962

On  November  11,  1960,  three  paratroop  battalions  stationed  in  Saigon — con-
sidered by  Diem  among  his  most  faithful — cooperated  in  an  attempted  coup
d'etat.  The  leadership  consisted  of  a  small  group  of  civilians  and  military  officers:
Hoang  Co  Thuy,  a  Saigon  Lawyer;  Lt  Colonel  Nguyen  Trieu  Hong,  Thuy's
nephew;  Lt  Colonel  Vuong  Van  Dong,  Hong's  brother  in  law;  and  Colonel
Nguyen  Chanh  Thi,  the  commander  of  the  paratroops,  who  was  apparently
brought  into  the  cabal  at  the  last  moment.  The  coup  failed  to  arouse  significant
general  pro-coup  sentiment,  either  among  the  armed  forces,  or  among  the  popu-
lace. Troops  marched  on  Saigon,  and  rebels  surrendered.  In  February,  1962,  two
Vietnamese  air  force  planes  bombed  the  Presidential  palace  in  an  unsuccessful
attempt  on  President  Diem  and  the  Nhus — properly,  an  assassination  attempt
rather  than  a  coup  d'etat.

But  the  abortive  events  of  1960  and  1962  had  the  effect  of  dramatizing  the
choices  open  to  those  who  recognized  the  insolvency  of  Diem's  political  and  mili-
tary policies.  When  Diem  was  overthrown  in  November,  1963,  he  was  attacked
by  an  apparatus  that  had  been  months  in  preparation.  Unlike  the  earlier  inci-
dent, the  1963  coup  was  actively  supported  by  virtually  all  the  generals  of
RVNAF,  and  was  openly  condoned  by  large  sectors  of  the  populace.

G. THE  VIET  CONG

1. Diem  and  Communists

Ngo  Dinh  Diem  presided  over  a  state  which,  for  all  the  lip  service  it  paid  to
individual  freedom  and  American  style  government,  remained  a  one  party,  highly
centralized  familial  oligarchy  in  which  neither  operating  democracy,  nor  the
prerequisites  for  such  existed.  On  11  January,  1956,  in  GVN  Ordinance  Number
6,  President  Diem  decreed  broad  governmental  measures  providing  for  "the
defense  of  the  state  and  public  order,"  including  authority  to  detain  "individuals
considered  a  danger  to  the  state"  or  to  "national  defense  and  common  security"
at  re-education  centers.  One  month  after  the  date  of  the  scheduled  Geneva
plebescite,  on  21  August  1956,  the  Government  of  Vietnam  proclaimed  Ordi-
nance Number  47,  which  defined  as  a  breach  of  law  punishable  by  death  any
deed  performed  in  or  for  any  organization  designated  as  "Communist."  More-
over, the  GVN  was  forced  to  use  violence  to  establish  itself  in  its  own  rural
areas.  In  July,  1956,  the  month  the  Geneva  elections  were  scheduled  to  have
been  held,  the  U.S.  Army  attache  in  Saigon  noted  in  his  monthly  report  that:

Orders  have  reportedly  been  issued  to  all  Viet  Minh  cadres  in  Free  Viet
Nam  to  increase  their  efforts  to  reorganize  and  revitalize  the  military  units
in  their  zones  of  responsibility.  These  cadres  have,  however,  encountered
considerable  difficulty  in  motivating  their  adherents  to  work  for  the  Com-
munist cause.  The  military  and  political  cadres  are  making  little  progress
due  to  the  Communist  Denunciation  Campaigns  promoted  by  the  Govern-
ment of  the  Republic  of  Viet  Nam.  .  .  .

The  same  report  submitted  an  ARVN  estimate  of  4,300  armed  Viet  Minh  in
all  of  Free  Viet  Nam,  and  recorded  small  ARVN  skirmishes  with  Viet  Minh


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  325

south  of  Saigon,  clashes  with  10  Hoa  Hao  battalions,  8  Cao  Dai  battalions  north
and  west  of  Saigon,  and  incidents  of  banditry  north  of  Bien  Hoa  by  Binh  Xuyen.
But,  in  a  relatively  short  time,  the  fighting  subsided,  the  Vietnamese  Army  was
withdrawn  from  the  countryside  for  retraining,  reorganization,  and  moderniza-
tion under  the  US  MAAG,  and  South  Vietnam  ostensibly  settled  into  the  first
peace  it  had  known  in  a  decade.  Peace  rested,  however,  or  strong  central  gov-
ernment. In  an  article  published  in  the  January,  1957,  Foreign  Affairs,  an  Ameri-
can analyst  stated  that:

South  Viet  Nam  is  today  a  quasi-police  state  characterized  by  arbitrary  ar-
rests and  imprisonment,  strict  censorship  of  the  press  and  the  absence  of  an
effective  political  opposition.  .  .  .  All  the  techniques  of  political  and  psycho-
logical warfare,  as  well  as  pacification  campaigns  involving  extensive  mili-
tary operations  have  been  brought  to  bear  against  the  underground.

Police  states,  efficiently  organized  and  operated,  have  historically  demonstrated
much  greater  ability  at  countering  insurgency  than  other  sorts  of  governments.
South  Vietnam  in  fact  succeeded  in  1955  and  1956  in  quelling  rural  dissidence
through  a  comprehensive  political  and  military  assault  on  sect  forces  and  other
anti-government  armed  bands  using  its  army,  the  civic  action  cadre,  the  Com-
munist Denunciation  campaign,  and  a  broad  range  of  promised  reforms.  More-
over, at  its  worst,  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam  compared  favorably  with
other  Asian  regimes  with  respect  to  its  degree  of  repressiveness.  Nor  did  it  face
endemic  violence  markedly  different  from  that  then  prevalent  in  Burma,  Indo-
nesia, South  Korea.  And  its  early  "counterinsurgency"  operations  were  as  sophis-
ticated as  any  being  attempted  elsewhere  in  Asia.  In  1957,  the  Government  of
Viet  Nam  claimed  that  its  pacification  programs  had  succeeded:

We  believe  that  with  clear,  even  elementary  ideas  based  upon  facts  .  .  .
we  can  imbue  .  .  .  first  the  youth  and  ultimately  the  entire  population
with  the  spirit  and  essential  objectives  of  .  .  .  civic  humanism.  We  believe
that  this  above  all  is  the  most  effective  antidote  to  Communism  (which  is
but  an  accident  of  history).  .  .  .

.  .  .  We  can  see  that  the  Viet-Minh  authorities  have  disintegrated  and
been  rendered  powerless.

P.  J.  Honey,  the  British  expert  on  Vietnam,  agreed;  his  evaluation  as  of  early
1958  was  as  follows:

.  .  .  The  country  has  enjoyed  three  years  of  relative  peace  and  calm  in
which  it  has  been  able  to  carry  on  the  very  necessary  work  of  national
reconstruction.  The  most  destructive  feature  in  the  national  life  of  Vietnam
throughout  recent  years  has  been  the  lack  of  security  in  the  countryside,
which  obliged  farmers  and  peasants  to  abandon  the  ricefields  and  to  flee  to
the  large  cities  for  safety.  Today  it  is  possible  to  travel  all  over  South
Vietnam  without  any  risk.  The  army  and  security  forces  have  mopped  up
most  of  the  armed  bands  of  political  opponents  of  the  Government,  of  Com-
munists and  of  common  bandits.  One  stiff  hears  of  an  isolated  raid,  but  the
old  insecurity  is  fast  vanishing.  .  .  .

After  a  1959  trip,  however.  Honey  detected  dangerous  unease  in  the  countryside:

For  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  Vietnamese,  heirs  to  experience
of  a  century  of  French  colonial  rule,  the  Government  is  a  remote  body
which  passes  laws,  collects  taxes,  demands  labour  corvees,  takes  away  able-


326 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

bodied  men  for  military  service,  and  generally  enriches  itself  at  the  expense
of  the  poor  peasant.  "Government"  is  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  villagers
with  exactions,  punishments,  unpaid  labour,  and  other  unpleasant  matters.
These  people  are  members  of  families  and  members  of  villages,  and  their
loyalties  to  both  are  strong.  But  these  loyalties  do  not  extend  beyond  the
village,  nor  has  any  past  experience  taught  the  peasants  why  they  should.
The  idea  that  the  peasants  should  assume  any  responsibility  for  the  [extra-
village]  government  themselves  would  be  so  alien  to  their  thinking  as  to  be
comic.  Educated  Vietnamese  are  well  aware  of  this,  as  many  of  their  actions
show.  .  .  .

Such  political  parties  as  existed  in  Vietnam  before  the  advent  of  inde-
pendence were  all  clandestine,  so  that  any  political  experience  acquired  from
these  by  the  Vietnamese  peasants  will  have  been  of  secret  plotting  for  the
overthrow  of  the  Government.  Since  independence,  they  will  probably  have
been  subjected  to  attempted  Communist  indoctrination  by  the  Viet  Cong,
but  this  too  will  have  had  an  anti-Government  slant.  Since  1954,  the  peasants
have  been  fed  on  a  diet  of  puerile,  and  frequently  offensive  slogans  by  the
Ministry  of  Information.  These  serve,  if  indeed  they  serve  any  purpose  at
all,  to  make  the  peasant  distrust  the  Government  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.  The
peasants,  for  all  their  naivete,  are  far  from  foolish  and  they  are  not  deceived
by  slogans  alleging  to  be  true  things  which  they  know,  from  their  own  per-
sonal experience,  to  be  untrue.  Any  political  experience  among  the  peasan-
try, then,  is  more  likely  to  prove  a  liability  than  an  asset  to  any  Govern-
ment.

Diem  knew  that  his  main  political  dissent  was  centered  not  among  his  fellow
mandarins,  in  his  press,  or  among  his  military  officers,  but  in  the  peasantry.  And
the  prime  challenge  was,  as  Diem  saw  it,  communism,  precisely  because  it  could
and  did  afford  the  peasants  political  experience.

Communism  was,  from  the  outset  of  Diem's  rule,  his  bete  noire.  In  1955,  after
the  victory  over  the  sects,  and  just  before  General  John  W.  O'Daniel  ended  his
tour  as  Chief,  MAAG  Vietnam,  Diem  talked  to  the  General  about  Vietnam's
future:

He  spoke  about  the  decentralization  of  government  that  he  had  been
advised  to  undertake,  but  felt  that  the  time  was  not  yet  right.  He  felt  that,
since  his  country  was  involved  in  a  war,  warlike  control  was  in  order.  He
remarked  that  the  Vietminh  propaganda  line  never  mentioned  Communism,
but  only  land  reform.  .  .  .  Diem  wants  land  reform  too.  .  .  .

In  his  message  to  the  American  Friends  of  Vietnam  in  June,  1956,  Diem  ac-
knowledged progress,  but  warned  that:

We  have  arrived  at  a  critical  point.  .  .  .  We  must  now  give  meaning  to
our  hard  sought  liberty.  ...  To  attain  that  goal  we  need  technicians  and
machines.  Our  armed  forces  which  are  considerably  reduced  must  however
undertake  an  immense  task  from  the  military  as  well  as  the  cultural  and
social  point  of  view.  It  is  indispensable  that  our  army  have  the  wherewithal
to  become  increasingly  capable  of  preserving  the  peace  which  we  seek.
There  are  an  infinite  number  of  tasks  in  all  fields  to  complete  before  the
year's  end.

Diem's  preoccupation  with  security  paradoxically  interfered  with  his  ability  to
compete  with  the  communists  in  the  countryside.  In  effect,  he  decided  on  a


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  327

strategy  of  postponing  the  politicizing  of  the  peasants  until  he  had  expunged  his
arch-foes.  Diem's  official  biography  underscores  this  point:

The  main  concern  of  President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  is  therefore  to  destroy  the
sources  of  demoralization,  however  powerful,  before  getting  down  to  the
problem  of  endowing  Vietnam  with  a  democratic  apparatus  in  the  Western
sense  of  the  word.

Madame  Nhu,  his  sister-in-law,  was  vehement  that  any  political  liberalization
would  have  operated  to  Viet  Cong  advantage:  "If  we  open  the  window,  not  only
sunlight,  but  many  bad  things  will  fly  in,  also."  To  hold  a  contrary  view  does
not  necessarily  argue  that  democratization  was  the  only  way  Diem  could  have
met  his  political  opposition  in  the  villages;  it  does  seem,  however,  that  in  failing
to  meet  aspirations  there  by  some  departure  from  inefficiently  repressive
course  he  adopted.  Diem  erred.  In  concluding  that  he  did  not  have  to  reckon
with  peasant  attitudes.  Diem  evidently  operated  from  two  related  misapprehen-
sions: that  somehow  the  peasants  would  remain  politically  neutral  while  he
eliminated  the  communists,  and  that  the  Viet  Cong  were  essentially  a  destructive
force.  It  was  not  that  Diem  could  not  vocalize  a  sound  estimate  of  the  communist
political  threat;  his  own  description  of  communist  operations  to  an  Australian
journalist  was  quite  accurate:

In  China,  during  the  Indo-China  war  and  now  here,  the  Communists
have  always  sheltered  in  open  base  areas  of  difficult  access,  in  areas  where
there  are  no  roads.  They  have  made  their  headquarters  in  the  jungle.  Cau-
tiously, sometimes  only  one  man  at  a  time,  they  move  into  a  village  and  es-
tablish a  contact,  then  a  cell  until  the  village  is  theirs  to  command.  Having
got  one  village,  they  move  to  a  second  village  and  from  a  second  to  third,
until  eventually  they  need  not  live  in  any  of  these  villages,  but  merely  visit
them  periodically.  When  this  stage  is  reached,  they  are  in  a  position  to  build
training  camps  and  even  start  crude  factories  and  produce  home-made  guns,
grenades,  mines,  and  booby  traps.

This  is  all  part  of  the  first  phase.  The  second  phase  is  to  expand  control
and  link  up  with  Communist  groups  in  other  bases.  To  begin  with,  they  start
acts  of  violence  through  their  underground  organizations.  They  kill  village
chiefs,  headmen,  and  others  working  for  the  government  and,  by  so  doing,
terrorize  the  population,  not  necessarily  by  acts  of  violence  against  the
people  but  by  demonstrating  that  there  is  no  security  for  them  in  accepting
leadership  from  those  acknowledging  the  leadership  of  the  government.
Even  with  much  smaller  numbers  of  troops  than  the  constituted  authority,
it  is  not  difficult  now  for  the  Communists  to  seize  the  initiative.  A  govern-
ment has  responsibility  for  maintaining  supply  to  the  civil  population  of
keeping  railways,  rivers,  and  canals  open  for  traffic,  of  ensuring  that  rural
crops  reach  the  markets  and  that  in  turn  commodity  goods  are  distributed
throughout  the  country.  The  Communists  have  no  such  responsibility.  They
have  no  roads  and  bridges  to  guard,  and  no  goods  to  distribute.

Diem  failed  to  perceive  that  the  "first  phase"  was  crucial,  or  that  the  VC  were,
from  the  very  outset,  constructing  while  they  destroyed,  building  a  state  within
South  Vietnam  with  more  effective  local  government  than  his  own.

Like  many  another  issue  in  Vietnam,  the  problem  was  in  part  semantics.
"Communists"  during  this  period  formally  recanted  for  the  GVN  by  the  thou-


328 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

sands;  thousands  more  "communists"  were  incarcerated  by  the  GVN  for  "political
reeducation."  But  Ordinance  47  of  1956  notwithstanding,  "communist"  is  a
term  which  has  not  been  used  since  the  1940's  by  Vietnamese  serving  the  Marx-
ist-Leninist Party  headed  by  Ho  Chi  Minh  of  the  DRV.  These  referred  to  them-
selves as  members  of  the  Vietnam  Workers  Party  (Dang  Lao  Dong),  as  members
of  one  Front  or  another,  or  as  resistance  fighters,  or  fighters  for  national  libera-
tion. Nor  was  "Viet  Minh"  a  useful  name,  since  Viet  Minh,  a  nationalist  front,
included  numerous  non-communist,  or  at  least  non-party  members.  In  1956,  the
Saigon  press  began  to  distinguish  between  the  Viet  Minh  and  communists  by  re-
ferring to  the  latter  as  "Viet  Cong,"  a  fairly  precise,  and  not  necessarily  dis-
paraging, rendition  of  "Viet  Nam  Cong-San,"  which  means  "Vietnamese  Com-
munist." The  National  Liberation  Front  of  South  Vietnam  (NLF)  much  later
condemned  the  term  as  "contemptuous,"  and  pointed  out  that  the  GVN  had
applied  it  indiscriminately  to  all  persons  or  groups  "who  are  lukewarm  toward
the  pro-U.S.  policy  even  on  details."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Diem  and  his
government  applied  the  term  somewhat  loosely  within  South  Vietnam,  and  meant
by  it  North  as  well  as  South  Vietnamese  communists,  whom  they  presumed  acted
in  concert.

2. The  Viet  Minh  Residue

At  the  close  of  the  Franco-Viet  Minh  War,  some  60,000  men  were  serving
in  organized  Viet  Minh  units  in  South  Viet  Nam.  For  the  regroupments  to
North  Vietnam,  these  units  were  augmented  with  large  numbers  of  untrained
young  men — who  were  later  known  among  the  regroupees  in  North  Vietnam  as
"soldiers  of  Geneva."  A  reported  90,000  soldiers  were  taken  to  North  Vietnam
in  the  evacuated  units,  while  the  U.S.  and  the  GVN  estimated  that  5,000  to
10,000  trained  men  were  left  behind  as  "cadre."  If  French  estimates  are  correct
that  in  1954  the  Viet  Minh  controlled  over  60  to  90  percent  of  South  Vietnam's
villages  outside  the  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  regions,  those  5,000  to  10,000  cadre
must  have  represented  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  remaining  Viet  Minh  ap-
paratus— cadre,  local  workers,  sympathizers — in  the  countryside.  GVN  figures
themselves  attest  to  this.  In  1955  and  1956  alone,  the  GVN  claimed  100,000
communist  "cadre"  rallied  or  surrendered.

Neither  Diem's  GVN  nor  the  U.S.  knew  a  great  deal  about  the  Viet  Minh  in
the  period  1954-1960.  By  1967,  however,  new  information  had  begun  to  ac-
cumulate from  interrogations  of  prisoners  and  defectors,  and  captured  docu-
ments. For  example,  in  March,  1967,  a  study  was  published  of  23  Viet  Minh
who  stayed  behind  during  the  regroupment  of  1954-1955.  All  the  men  of  the
sample  told  consistent  stories,  and  although  an  admittedly  narrow  basis  for
generalization,  the  stories  ring  true.  Upon  departure,  the  Viet  Minh  leaders
assigned  some  of  these  stay-behinds  active  roles;  others  were  simply  told  to
return  to  their  homes  as  inactives,  and  wait  for  further  instructions.  It  is  quite
clear  that  even  the  activists  were  not  instructed  to  organize  units  for  guerrilla
war,  but  rather  to  agitate  politically  for  the  promised  Geneva  elections,  and  the
normalization  of  relations  with  the  North.  They  drew  much  reassurance  from
the  presence  of  the  ICC,  and  up  until  mid- 1956,  most  held  on  to  the  belief  that
the  elections  would  take  place.  They  were  disappointed  in  two  respects:  not  only
were  the  promised  elections  not  held,  but  the  amnesty  which  had  been  assured
by  the  Geneva  Settlement  was  denied  them,  and  they  were  hounded  by  the
Anti-Communist  campaign.  After  1956,  for  the  most  part,  they  went  "under-
ground." They  were  uniformly  outraged  at  Diem's  practices,  particularly  the


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954^1960  329

recurrent  GVN  attempts  to  grade  the  populace  into  lettered  categories  ac-
cording to  previous  associations  with  the  Viet  Minh.  Most  of  them  spoke  of
terror,  brutality  and  torture  by  GVN  rural  officials  in  carrying  out  the  Com-
munist Denunciation  campaigns,  and  of  the  arrest  and  slaying  of  thousands  of
old  comrades  from  the  "resistance."  Their  venom  was  expended  on  these  local
officials,  rather  than  on  Diem,  or  the  central  government,  although  they  were
prepared  to  hold  Diem  ultimately  responsible.  A  veteran  who  had  been  a  Party
member  since  1936  characterized  the  years  1955-1959  as  the  most  difficult  years
of  the  entire  revolution.

What  these  cadre  did  in  those  years  is  revealing.  Only  four  of  the  23  were
engaged  in  military  tasks.  Most  spent  their  time  in  preparation  for  a  future
uprising,  in  careful  recruitment  in  the  villages — concentrating  on  the  very
families  with  Viet  Minh  ties  who  were  receiving  priority  in  the  GVN's  atten-
tions— and  in  constructing  base  areas  in  the  mountains  or  jungles.  The  Viet
Minh  activists  sought  out  the  inactives,  brought  them  back  into  the  organization,
and  together  they  formed  the  framework  of  an  expanding  and  increasingly  in-
tricate network  of  intelligence  and  propaganda.  Few  spoke  of  carrying  weapons,
or  using  violence  before  1959,  although  many  boasted  of  feats  of  arms  in  later
years.  They  felt  that  they  lacked  the  right  conditions  to  strike  militarily  before
1959;  their  mission  was  preparation.  In  several  instances,  the  Viet  Cong  used
terror  to  recruit  former  Viet  Minh  for  the  new  movement,  threatening  them
with  "treason"  and  elimination;  caught  between  the  GVN  and  the  VC,  many  old
Resistance  members  joined  the  "New  Resistance."  But  most  spoke  of  making
person-to-person  persuasion  to  bring  in  new  members  for  the  movement,  relying
mainly  on  two  appeals:  nationalism  and  social  justice.  They  stressed  that  the
Americans  had  merely  substituted  a  new,  more  pernicious  form  of  tyranny  for
that  of  the  French,  and  that  the  My-Diem  combine  was  the  antithesis  of  humane
and  honest  government.  One  respondent  spoke  of  this  activity  in  these  terms:

From  1957  to  1960  the  cadres  who  had  remained  in  the  South  had  almost
all  been  arrested.  Only  one  or  two  cadres  were  left  in  every  three  to  five
villages.  What  was  amazing  was  how  these  one  or  two  cadres  started  the
movement  so  well.

The  explanation  is  not  that  these  cadres  were  exceptionally  gifted  but  the
people  they  talked  to  were  ready  for  rebellion.  The  people  were  like  a  mound
of  straw,  ready  to  be  ignited.  .  .  .

If  at  that  time  the  government  in  the  South  had  been  a  good  one,  if  it
had  not  been  dictatorial,  if  the  agrarian  reforms  had  worked,  if  it  had
established  control  at  the  village  level,  then  launching  the  movement  would
have  been  difficult.

These  interviews  underscored  three  points  on  which  the  GVN  was  apparently
in  error.  First,  with  respect  to  the  stay-behinds  themselves,  by  no  means  were
all  dedicated  communists  in  the  doctrinaire  sense.  Many  reported  that  they  re-
sented and  feared  the  communists  in  the  Viet  Minh,  and  apparently  might  have
been  willing  to  serve  the  GVN  faithfully  had  it  not  hounded  them  out  of  the
society.  There  were  several  among  the  group,  for  example,  who  had  entered
Saigon,  and  there  found  a  degree  of  freedom  which  kept  them  off  the  Viet  Cong
roles  for  years.  Second,  with  regard  to  the  peasants  in  general,  the  Viet  Minh
were  widely  admired  throughout  the  South  as  national  heroes,  and  the  GVN
therefore  committed  a  tactical  error  of  the  first  magnitude  in  damning  all  Viet
Minh  without  qualification  as  communists.  Third,  the  GVN  created  by  its  rural
policy  a  climate  of  moral  indignation  which  energized  the  peasants  politically,


330 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


turned  them  against  the  government,  sustained  the  Viet  Cong,  and  permitted
"communists"  to  outlast  severe  GVN  repressions  and  even  to  recruit  during  it.

The  foregoing  precis  of  the  1967  study  presents  views  which  are  paralleled  in
a  captured  Viet  Cong  history,  written  around  1963,  which  describes  the  years
after  1954  as  follows:


EXPERIENCES  OF  THE  SOUTH  VIETNAM  REVOLUTIONARY
MOVEMENT  DURING  THE  PAST  SEVERAL  YEARS

During  the  past  nine  years,  under  the  enlightened  leadership  of  the  Party
Central  Committee,  the  people  and  the  Party  of  South  Vietnam  have  ex-
perienced many  phases  along  the  difficult  and  complicated  path  of  struggle
but  they  have  also  gained  many  victories  and  experiences  while  pushing  the
South  Vietnam  liberation  revolution  and  creating  the  conditions  for  peace-
ful reunification  of  the  country.  .  .  .

After  the  armistice,  the  South  Vietnam  people  reverted  to  political  strug-
gle through  peaceful  means  by  demanding  personal  rights,  freedom  and
negotiations  concerning  general  elections  in  accordance  with  the  stipulations
of  the  Geneva  Agreement  so  that  the  country  could  be  peacefully  reunified
.  .  .  The  Party  [words  illegible]  party  were  changed  in  order  to  guarantee
the  leadership  and  forces  of  the  Party  under  the  new  struggle  condi-
tions. .  .  .

From  the  end  of  1954  until  1956  several  important  changes  occurred  in
the  South  Vietnam  situation.  Imperialist  America  ousted  and  replaced  im-
perialist France,  turning  South  Vietnam  into  a  colony  (a  new  type  of
colony)  based  on  U.S.  military  power.  The  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  government
was  clearly  shown  to  be  a  government  composed  of  bureaucratic,  dictatorial
and  family-controlled  feudalists  and  capitalists  who  committed  crimes  for
the  American  imperialists  and  massacred  the  people,  massacred  revolution-
aries and  massacred  the  oppositionists.  Both  the  Americans  and  Diem  made
every  effort  to  oppose  the  implementation  of  the  Geneva  Agreement  and
made  every  effort  to  subvert  the  peaceful  reunification  of  our  father-
land. .  .  .

Immediately  after  the  re-establishment  of  peace,  the  responsibility  of
South  Vietnam  was  to  use  the  political  struggle  to  demand  the  implementa-
tion of  the  Geneva  Agreement.  The  struggle  responsibilities  and  procedures
were  appropriate  for  the  situation  at  that  time  and  corresponded  with  the
desires  of  the  great  majority  of  the  masses  who  wished  for  peace  after
nearly  10  years  of  difficult  resistance.

At  that  time,  although  the  Americans-Diemists  used  cruel  force  to  oppose
the  people  and  the  revolution,  and  the  masses  struggled  decisively  against
this  repression  in  many  places  and  at  many  times,  the  contradictions  had
not  yet  developed  to  a  high  degree  and  the  hatred  had  not  yet  developed
to  a  point  where  the  use  of  armed  struggle  could  become  an  essential  and
popular  struggle  tactic.  In  South  Vietnam  since  1955,  thanks  to  the  armed
movement  of  the  sects,  we  were  able  to  avoid  the  construction  of  an  armed
propaganda  force,  since  we  only  had  a  few  former  bases  which  were  needed
in  the  political  struggle  and  for  the  creation  of  a  reserve  force.

From  1957  to  1958,  the  situation  gradually  changed.  The  enemy  persist-
ently sabotaged  the  implementation  of  the  Geneva  Agreement,  actively
consolidated  and  strengthened  the  army,  security  service,  and  adminis-


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  331

trative  apparatus  from  the  central  to  the  hamlet  level,  crudely  assassinated
the  people,  and  truly  and  efficiently  destroyed  our  Party.  By  relying  on
force,  the  American-Diemist  regime  was  temporarily  able  to  stabilize  the
situation  and  increase  the  prestige  of  the  counterrevolutionaries.  At  this
time,  the  political  struggle  movement  of  the  masses,  although  not  defeated,
was  encountering  increasing  difficulty  and  increasing  weakness;  the  Party
bases,  although  not  completely  destroyed,  were  significantly  weakened,  and
in  some  areas,  quite  seriously;  the  prestige  of  the  masses  and  of  the  revolu-
tion suffered.  But  in  reality,  the  years  during  which  the  enemy  increased  his
terrorism  were  also  the  years  in  which  the  enemy  suffered  major  political
losses  [words  illegible]  The  masses  became  more  deep  seeded  and  many
individuals  who  formerly  supported  the  enemy  now  opposed  them.  The
masses,  that  is  to  say,  the  peasants,  now  realized  that  it  was  impossible  to
live  under  such  conditions  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  rise  up  in  drastic
struggle.  Faced  with  the  fact  that  the  enemy  was  using  guns,  assassinations
and  imprisonment  to  oppose  the  people  in  their  political  struggle,  many
voices  among  the  masses  appealed  to  the  Party  to  establish  a  program  of
armed  resistance  against  the  enemy.  Within  the  Party,  on  the  one  hand,  the
members  were  saturated  with  the  responsibility  to  lead  the  revolution  to  a
successful  overthrow  of  the  enemy,  but  on  the  other  hand,  the  majority  of
the  party  members  and  cadres  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to  immediately
launch  an  armed  struggle  in  order  to  preserve  the  movement  and  protect  the
forces.  In  several  areas  the  party  members  on  their  own  initiative  had  organ-
ized armed  struggle  against  the  enemy  .  .  .

Up  to  1959,  in  South  Vietnam,  the  Americans-Diemists  had  fully  con-
structed a  large  army,  equipped  with  modern  weapons,  along  with  a  large
and  well  armed  administrative,  police  and  security  apparatus.  During  the
years  in  which  the  masses  were  only  using  political  struggle,  the  Americans-
Diemists  used  the  military,  security  and  administrative  apparatus  to  launch
various  campaigns  to  terrorize,  mop  up  and  oppress  the  movement,  no
different  from  during  the  period  of  warfare.  Because  they  were  determined
to  crush  the  revolution  and  control  the  people  at  every  moment,  they  could
not  avoid  using  every  type  of  repression.

In  opposing  such  an  enemy,  simple  political  struggle  was  not  possible.  It
was  necessary  to  use  additional  armed  struggle,  but  not  merely  low  level
armed  struggle,  such  as  only  armed  propaganda,  which  was  used  to  support
the  political  struggle.  The  enemy  would  not  allow  us  any  peace,  and  in  the
face  of  the  enemy  operations  and  destructive  pursuit,  the  armed  propaganda
teams,  even  if  they  wished  to  avoid  losses,  would  never  be  able  to  engage
the  enemy  in  warfare  and  would  never  be  able  to  become  an  actual  revolu-
tionary army.  This  is  an  essential  fact  of  the  movement  and  the  actual  move-
ment in  South  Vietnam  illustrates  this  fact.  Therefore,  at  the  end  of  1959,
when  we  launched  an  additional  armed  struggle  in  coordination  with  the
political  struggle  against  the  enemy,  it  immediately  took  the  form  in  South
Vietnam  of  revolutionary  warfare,  a  long  range  revolutionary  warfare.
Therefore,  according  to  some  opinions  at  the  beginning  of  1959,  we  only
used  heavy  armed  propaganda  and  later  developed  "regional  guerril-
las. .  .  ."

This  version  of  events  from  1954  through  1959  is  further  supported  by  the
report  of  interrogation  of  one  of  the  four  members  of  the  Civilian  Proselyting


332 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Section  of  the  Viet  Cong  Saigon/Gia  Dinh  Special  Zone  Committee,  captured  in
November,  1964;  the  prisoner  stated  that:

The  period  from  the  Armistice  of  1954  until  1958  was  the  darkest  time
for  the  VC  in  South  Vietnam.  The  political  agitation  policy  proposed  by
the  Communist  Party  could  not  be  carried  out  due  to  the  arrest  of  a  num-
ber of  party  members  by  RVN  authorities.  The  people's  agitation  movement
was  minimized.  However,  the  organizational  system  of  the  party  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest  echelons  survived,  and  since  the  party  remained  close
to  the  people,  its  activities  were  not  completely  suppressed.  In  1959  the
party  combined  its  political  agitation  with  its  military  operations,  and  by
the  end  of  1959  the  combined  operations  were  progressing  smoothly.

Viet  Cong  "political  agitation"  was  a  cunning  blend  of  the  Viet  Minh  nation-
alist charisma,  exploitation  of  GVN  shortcomings,  xenophobia,  and  terror.  Draw-
ing on  the  years  of  Viet  Minh  experience  in  subversive  government  and  profiting
from  Viet  Minh  errors,  the  Viet  Cong  appealed  to  the  peasants  not  as  Marxist
revolutionaries  proposing  a  drastic  social  upheaval,  but  quite  to  the  contrary,  as
a  conservative,  nationalist  force  wholly  compatible  with  the  village-centered
traditionalism  of  most  farmers,  and  as  their  recourse  against  "My-Diem"  mod-
ernization. One  American  authority  summed  the  Viet  Minh  experience  evident
in  Viet  Cong  operations  as  ten  political  precepts:

1.  Don't  try  for  too  much;  don't  smash  the  existing  social  system,  use  it;
don't  destroy  opposition  organizations,  take  them  over.

2.  Use  the  amorphous  united  front  to  attack  opposition  political  forces
too  large  or  too  powerful  for  you  to  take  over;  then  fragment  their  leader-
ship, using  terror  if  necessary,  and  drown  their  followers  in  the  front  or-
ganization.

3.  At  all  times  appear  outwardly  reasonable  about  the  matter  of  sharing
power  with  rival  organizations  although  secretly  working  by  every  means  to
eliminate  them.  Don't  posture  in  public.

4.  Divide  your  organization  rigidly  into  overt  and  covert  sections  and
minimize  traffic  between  the  two.  The  overt  group's  chief  task  is  to  generate
broad  public  support;  the  covert  group  seeks  to  accumulate  and  manipulate
political  power.

5.  Use  communism  as  dogma,  stressing  those  aspects  that  are  well  re-
garded by  the  people;  don't  hesitate  to  interpret  Marxism-Leninism  in  any
way  that  proves  beneficial.  Soft-pedal  the  class-struggle  idea  except  among
cadres.

6.  Don't  antagonize  anyone  if  it  can  be  helped:  this  avoids  the  formation
of  rival  blocs.

7.  Bearing  in  mind  that  in  Vietnam  altruism  is  conspicuous  by  its  ab-
sence, blend  the  proper  mixture  of  the  materialistic  appeals  of  communism
and  the  endemic  feelings  of  nationalism.  Win  small  but  vital  gains  through
communism,  large  ones  through  nationalism.  Plan  to  win  in  the  end  not  as
Communists  but  as  nationalists.

8.  Use  the  countryside  as  the  base  and  carry  the  struggle  to  the  cities  later;
in  rural  areas  political  opportunities  are  greater  and  risks  smaller.  Avoid  the
lure  of  the  teahouse.

9.  But  forge  a  city  alliance.  Mobilization  of  the  farmer  must  create  a
strong  farmer-worker  bond.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  333

10.  Work  from  the  small  to  the  large,  from  the  specific  to  the  general;
work  from  small  safe  areas  to  large  liberated  areas  and  then  expand  the
liberated  areas;  begin  with  small  struggle  movements  and  work  toward  a
General  Uprising  during  which  state  power  will  be  seized.

The  same  expert  termed  General  Uprising  "a  social  myth  in  the  Sorelian  sense,
perhaps  traceable  back  to  the  Communist  myth  of  the  general  strike,"  and  cited
Viet  Cong  documents  which  describe  how  the  2500  villages  of  Vietnam  will  be
led  toward  a  spontaneous  final  and  determinant  act  of  revolution:

The  Revolution,  directed  toward  the  goal  of  the  General  Uprising,  has
these  five  characteristics:  ...  It  takes  place  in  a  very  favorable  worldwide
setting.  ...  It  is  against  the  neocolonialism  of  the  U.S.A.  .  .  .  The  gov-
ernment of  Vietnam  is  unpopular  and  growing  weaker.  .  .  .  The  people
have  revolutionary  consciousness  and  are  willing  to  struggle.  ...  It  is  led
by  the  Party,  which  has  great  experience.

Ho  and  Giap  thus  coated  Marx  and  Mao  with  French  revolutionary  romanticism.
Diem,  the  moral  reformer,  also  drew  heavily  upon  the  same  traditions  for  "per-
sonalism."  One  of  the  tragedies  of  modern  Vietnam  is  that  the  political  awaken-
ing of  its  peasants  was  to  these,  the  most  virulent,  and  vicious  social  theories  of
the  era.

But  doctrine  was  not  the  sole  heritage  the  Viet  Cong  received  from  the  Viet
Minh.  Perhaps  more  important  was  the  "Resistance"  organization:  the  hierarchy
extending  upward  from  hamlet  and  village  through  provincial  to  regional  au-
thorities capable  of  coordinating  action  on  a  broad  scale.  The  Viet  Minh  com-
plied with  military  regroupments  under  the  Geneva  Accords  but  were  not  obli-
gated to  withdraw  the  "political"  apparatus;  in  fact,  the  Settlement  provided
guarantees  for  it  in  its  provisions  against  reprisals  (Armistice,  Article  14c,  and
Conference  Final  Declaration,  Article  9),  and  for  liberation  of  political  prisoners
(Armistice,  Article  21).  Knowledge  of  the  techniques  of  clandestine  politics,  ap-
preciation for  the  essentiality  of  tight  discipline,  and  trained  personnel  constituting
a  widespread,  basic  organizational  framework  were  all  conferred  on  the  Viet  Cong.

3. Rural  Violence  and  GVN  Counters,  1957-1960

By  early  1958,  Saigon  was  beginning  to  sense  that  pacification  had  eluded  the
GVN  even  as  it  had  the  French.  In  December,  1957,  the  ill-fated  newspaper,
Thoi  Luan,  pointed  out  that  terrorism  was  on  the  rise,  and  that:

Today  the  menace  is  heavier  than  ever,  with  the  terrorists  no  longer  limit-
ing themselves  to  the  notables  in  charge  of  security.  Everything  suits  them,
village  chiefs,  chairmen  of  liaison  committees,  simple  guards,  even  former
notables.  ...  In  certain  areas,  the  village  chiefs  spend  their  nights  in  the
security  posts,  while  the  inhabitants  organize  watches.

.  .  .  The  most  urgent  need  for  the  population  today  is  security — a  ques-
tion to  which  we  have  repeatedly  drawn  the  attention  of  the  authorities.

Spectacular  assassinations  have  taken  place  in  the  provinces  of  An  Giang
and  Phong-Dinh  [in  the  Mekong  Delta].  In  the  village  of  Than-My-Tay,
armed  men  appeared  in  the  dead  of  night,  awakened  the  inhabitants,  read
a  death  sentence,  and  beheaded  four  young  men  whose  heads  they  nailed  to
the  nearest  bridge.  .  .  .


334 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


The  security  question  in  the  provinces  must  be  given  top  priority:  the  re-
gime will  be  able  to  consolidate  itself  only  if  it  succeeds  in  finding  a  solution
to  this  problem.

Besides  the  incidents  cited,  there  had  been  a  mass  murder  of  17  in  Chau-Doc
in  July,  1957;  in  September  the  District  Chief  at  My  Tho  with  his  whole  family
was  gunned  down  in  daylight  on  a  main  highway;  on  10  October  a  bomb  thrown
into  a  Cholon  cafe  injured  13  persons,  and  on  22  October,  in  three  bombings  in
Saigon,  13  Americans  were  wounded.

Also  in  October  a  clandestine  radio  in  Vietnam  purporting  to  speak  for  the
"National  Salvation  Movement"  was  backing  armed  insurgents  against  Diem.
In  Washington,  U.S.  intelligence  indicated  that  the  "Viet  Minh  underground"
had  been  directed  to  conduct  additional  attacks  on  U.S.  personnel  "whenever
conditions  are  favorable."  U.S.  intelligence  also  noted  a  total  of  30  armed  "ter-
rorist incidents  initiated  by  Communist  guerillas"  in  the  last  quarter  of  1957,  as
well  as  a  "large  number"  of  incidents  carried  out  by  "Communist-lead  [sic]  Hoa
Hao  and  Cao  Dai  dissident  elements,"  and  reported  "at  least"  75  civilians  or
civil  officials  assassinated  or  kidnapped  in  the  same  period.

Robert  Shaplen  wrote  that:

By  1958,  the  Vietminh  had  fully  resumed  its  campaign  of  terror  in  the
countryside,  kidnapping  government  officials  and  threatening  villagers  .  .  .
in  an  average  month  the  local  and  regional  units  were  becoming  involved
in  a  score  of  engagements.  Usually,  these  were  hit-and-run  Communist  at-
tacks on  Self-Defense  Corps  or  Civil  Guard  headquarters,  the  purpose  of
which  was  both  to  seize  weapons  and  to  heighten  the  atmosphere  of  terror.

Guns  should  have  been  plentiful  in  the  countryside  of  Vietnam.  The  Japanese,
the  French  and  even  the  GVN  armed  the  sect  forces.  And  both  the  sects  and  the
Viet  Minh  had  operated  small  arms  factories — for  instance.  General  Lansdale
visited  a  Cao  Dai  weapons  factory  at  Nui  Ba  Den  in  Tay  Ninh  in  1955.  The  Viet
Minh  cached  arms  as  they  withdrew  from  their  "liberated  areas"  in  1954  and
1955.  ARVN  veterans  and  deserters  from  the  force  reductions  of  1954  and  1955
carried  weapons  into  the  hinterland.  The  VC  attacked  for  weapons  to  make  up
for  losses  to  the  GVN,  and  to  equip  units  with  similar  types  to  simplify  logistics.

In  January,  1958,  a  "large  band"  of  "communist"  guerrillas  attacked  a  planta-
tion north  of  Saigon,  and  in  February,  an  ARVN  truck  was  ambushed  on  the
outskirts  of  the  capital.  In  March,  the  Saigon  newspaper  Dan-Cung  complained
that:  "our  people  are  fleeing  the  villages  and  returning  to  the  cities  for  fear  of
communist  guerrillas  and  feudalistic  officials.  .  .  ."  Bernard  Fall  published  an
article  in  July,  1958,  in  which  he  mapped  the  pattern  of  assassinations  and  other
incidents  from  April  1957  to  April  1958,  and  announced  the  onset  of  a  new  war:
Fall's  thesis  was  challenged  by  a  senior  U.S.  adviser  to  the  GVN,  who  argued
that  the  increasing  casualty  figures  represented  not  a  structured  attempt  to  over-
throw the  GVN,  but  were  simply  a  product  of  police  reporting  in  the  hinterlands.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  latter  view  was  partially  correct:  neither  the  U.S.
nor  the  GVN  knew  what  was  "normal"  in  the  rural  areas,  and  police  reporting,
with  U.S.  aid,  had  been  improved.  But  the  deadly  figures  continued  to  mount.
George  A.  Carver  of  the  CIA,  in  his  1966  Foreign  Affairs  article,  agreed  with
Fall:

A  pattern  of  politically  motivated  terror  began  to  emerge,  directed  against
the  representatives  of  the  Saigon  government  and  concentrated  on  the  very
bad  and  the  very  good.  The  former  were  liquidated  to  win  favor  with  the


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  335


peasantry;  the  latter  because  their  effectiveness  was  a  bar  to  the  achievement
of  Communist  objectives.  The  terror  was  directed  not  only  against  officials
but  against  all  whose  operations  were  essential  to  the  functioning  of  organ-
ized political  society,  school  teachers,  health  workers,  agricultural  officials,
etc.  The  scale  and  scope  of  this  terrorist  and  insurrectionary  activity  mounted
slowly  and  steadily.  By  the  end  of  1958  the  participants  in  this  incipient  in-
surgency, whom  Saigon  quite  accurately  termed  the  "Viet  Cong,"  constituted
a  serious  threat  to  South  Viet  Nam's  political  stability.


Like  most  other  statistics  concerning  Vietnam,  figures  on  the  extent  of  the
terrorism  varied  widely.  The  GVN  reported  to  the  ICC  that  in  1957,  1958,  and
the  first  half  of  1959,  Viet  Cong  murdered  65  village  officials,  51  civilians,  28
Civil  Guardsmen,  and  10  soldiers.  GVN  official  reports  provided  the  U.S.  Em-
bassy in  Saigon  recorded  a  significantly  greater  toll  of  civilians :


336 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


CIVILIAN  ASSASSINATIONS  AND
KIDNAPPINGS  IN  SOUTH  VIETNAM

By  Quarter,  From  GVN  Reports  to  U.S.  Embassy

1958  1959  1960

1 2 3 4  Total  1  2  3 4 Total  First  5  Months

Murders 72  51 26  44  193  52  34  46 97  233  780

Abductions 73  32  66  65  236  44  53  67  179  343  282

Journalists  and  scholars,  studying  open  sources,  put  the  figures  even  higher.  Doug-
las Pike  reported  1700  assassinations  and  2000  abductions  in  the  years  1957-
1960.  Bernard  Fall  estimated  murders  of  low-level  GVN  officials  as  follows:

May  1957  to  May  1958 to  May  1959 to  May  1960 to  May  1961
700  1200  2500  4000


Fall  reported  that  the  GVN  lost  almost  20%  of  its  village  chiefs  through  1958,
and  that  by  the  end  of  1959,  they  were  becoming  casualties  at  the  rate  of  more
than  2%  per  month.  Through  1963,  Fall  calculated,  13,000  petty  officials  were
eliminated  by  the  VC.  The  New  York  Times  estimated  that  3,000  local  govern-
ment officials  were  killed  or  captured  during  1960,  and  Time  magazine  reported
in  the  fall  of  1960  that  the  GVN  was  losing  250  to  300  per  month  to  a  "new
Communist  offensive":  The  U.S.  "White  Paper"  of  1961  cited  losses  of  1400  local
officials  and  civilians  during  1960.  But  if  there  was  disparity  among  numerical
estimates,  most  reports,  public  or  private,  concluded  that  the  violence  was  real,
anti-government,  rising  in  intensity,  and  increasingly  organized.

In  mid- 195  8  Bernard  Fall  correlated  the  locus  of  rural  violence  reported  in


I


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  337

South  Vietnam  with  complaints  lodged  with  the  ICC  in  Hanoi  by  the  DRV  on
behalf  of  "Former  Resistance  members,"  alleging  GVN  violations  of  the  "no
reprisals"  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Accords  (Armistice,  Article  14c).  The  detail
in  these  complaints  indicated  an  intelligence  apparatus  in  South  Vietnam.

"The  conclusion  is  inescapable,"  he  wrote,  "that  there  must  be  some  coordina-
tion between  the  rebels  and  the  North  Vietnamese  Government."  About  that
same  time,  U.S.  intelligence  reported  that  Viet  Cong-bandit  operations  north  of
Saigon  seemed  to  be  part  of  a  calculated  campaign  of  economic  sabotage.  Ac-
cording to  one  description  of  the  village  near  My  Tho  which  was  studied  very
intensively  around  mid- 1958:

.  .  .  For  the  first  time  [the  village]  experienced  the  activities  of  a  rela-
tively new  political  movement — Mat  Tran  Dan  Toe  Giai  Phong  Mien  Nam
Viet  Nam  (National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  Vietnam)  referred  to  by
the  South  Vietnamese  government  as  the  Viet  Cong  or  Vietnamese  Com-
munists .  .  .  and  invariably  called  the  Viet  Minh  by  the  villagers.  In  the
vicinity  of  [the  village]  the  initial  efforts  of  the  Viet  Cong  were  largely  con-
fined to  anti-government  propaganda.

One  VC  pamphlet  of  late  1958  from  the  Mekong  Delta  reads  as  follows:

Support  the  just  struggle  of  the  people  to  overthrow  the  government  of
the  Americans  and  Diem  [My-Diem],  to  establish  a  democratic  regime  in  the
South,  and  to  work  for  general  elections  which  will  unify  the  country  by
peaceful  means.

But,  if  "struggle"  sounds  innocuous  enough  in  English,  the  word  fails  to  carry
the  intensity  of  the  Vietnamese  equivalent,  dan  tranh.  A  VC  rallier  put  it  this
way:

Dau  tranh  is  all  important  to  a  revolutionist.  It  marks  his  thinking,  his
attitudes,  his  behavior.  His  life,  his  revolutionary  work,  his  whole  world  is
dau  tranh.  The  essence  of  his  existence  is  dau  tranh.

And,  the  term  "just  struggle  of  the  people"  sheathed  the  terror  integral  to  Viet
Cong  operations.  In  Pike's  estimate:

Insurgency  efforts  in  the  1958-1960  period  involved  violence  such  as  as-
sassinations but  few  actual  armed  attacks.  This  was  so  partly  because  the
cadres  had  little  military  capability  but  chiefly  because  doctrine  counseled
against  violence.  .  .  .

For  the  true  believers  operating  throughout  the  South  this  was  a  time  of
surreptitious  meetings,  cautious  political  feelers,  the  tentative  assembling  of
a  leadership  group,  and  the  sounding  out  of  potential  cadres  whose  names
went  into  a  file  for  future  reference.  It  meant  working  mainly  with  non-
Communists  and,  in  many  cases,  keeping  one's  Communist  identity  a
secret.  .  .  .

Diem's  own  party  newspaper,  the  NRM's  Cach  Mang  Quoc  Gia,  published  an
article  in  February,  1959  which  reported  that  "the  situation  in  the  rural  areas
is  rotten,"  and  described  communist  cells  established  in  the  villages  collecting
taxes  and  conducting  "espionage,"  supporting  local  guerrilla  forces  responsive  to
a  hierarchy  of  provincial  and  regional  committees.

From  mid- 1959  onward,  there  was  a  definite  upsurge  in  Viet  Cong  activity.


338 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

marked  not  only  by  the  increase  in  terrorism  noted  in  the  statistics  presented
above,  but  also  by  the  fielding  of  large  military  units  which  sought,  rather  than
avoided,  engagement  with  units  of  Diem's  regular  army.  On  26  September  1959
two  companies  of  the  ARVN  23d  Division  were  ambushed  by  a  well-organized
force  of  several  hundred  identified  as  the  "2d  Liberation  Battalion";  the  ARVN
units  lost  12  killed,  14  wounded,  and  most  of  their  weapons.

On  25  January  1960  the  same  Viet  Cong  battalion  launched  an  attack  coordi-
nated with  four  guerrilla  companies — a  total  force  of  300  to  500  men — which
penetrated  the  compound  of  the  32d  Regiment,  21st  ARVN  Division  at  Tay
Ninh,  killed  23  ARVN  soldiers,  and  netted  a  large  haul  of  arms  and  ammunition.
On  29  January  1960  an  insurgent  band  seized  the  town  of  Dong  Xoai,  some  sixty
miles  north  of  Saigon,  held  the  place  for  several  hours,  and  robbed  a  French
citizen  of  200,000  piasters.  In  the  same  month,  large  VC  forces  opened  operations
in  the  Camau  peninsula  and  the  Mekong  Delta.  In  Kien  Hoa  province  VC  units
numbering  hundreds  effectively  isolated  the  province  capital  from  six  of  its
eight  districts.  Bernard  Fall,  in  his  continuing  study  of  Viet  Cong  operations,
detected  a  new  strategy  operating:  a  shift  during  1959  and  early  1960  from  base
development  in  the  Delta  to  isolation  of  Saigon.  Whether  or  not  the  incidents
plotted  by  Fall  constituted  a  strategy  as  he  thought,  they  were  patently  more
coherent.  A  U.S.  intelligence  assessment  submitted  7  March  1960  described  VC
plans,  confirmed  from  a  variety  of  U.S.  and  GVN  sources,  to  launch  large  scale
guerrilla  warfare  that  year  "under  the  flag  of  the  People's  Liberation  Movement,"
which  was  identified  as  "red,  with  a  blue  star."  The  VC  were  reportedly  moving
into  position  to  exercise  one  or  more  of  three  strategic  options  by  the  end  of
1960:  (1)  incite  an  ARVN  revolt;  (2)  set  up  a  popular  front  government  in
the  lower  Delta;  (3)  force  the  GVN  into  such  repressive  countermeasures  that
popular  uprisings  will  follow.

An  ARVN  coup  d'etat  did  ensue,  although  it  was  neither  VC  incited  nor  suc-
cessful; nor  was  there  any  general  revolt  in  the  ranks.  No  popular  front  govern-
ment was  set  up.  But  the  GVN  was  prompted  to  a  succession  of  repressive  coun-
termeasures which  may  have  aided  the  Viet  Cong  much  as  they  had  expected.
Prodded  by  the  rural  violence,  Diem  began  his  "counterinsurgency"  in  early  1959
with  the  reintensification  of  population  classification  and  relocation  programs.  On
6  May  1959,  the  GVN  promulgated  Law  10/59,  which  set  up  three  military  tri-
bunals which  could,  without  appeal,  adjudge  death  for  crimes  under  Ordinance
47  of  1956 — the  anti-communist  law.  In  actuality,  these  tribunals  were  used
sparingly,  usually  for  show-case  trials  of  terrorists.  But  the  existence  of  Law
10/59  furnished  grist  for  VC  propaganda  mills  for  years.

On  7  July,  1959,  the  GVN  launched  its  "prosperity  and  density  centers" — the
"agroville"  program — and  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu  and  his  wife  plunged  into  organizing
rural  youth,  women,  and  farmers'  organizations.  However,  just  as  the  VC  Tet
offensive  of  1968  attenuated  "Revolutionary  Development,"  the  VC  upsurge  of
late  1959  and  early  1960  disrupted  the  new  GVN  organizational  efforts,  and
reinforced  Diem's  conviction  that  security  was  the  paramount  consideration.  The
U.S.  assessment  of  March  1960  cited  widespread  abuse  of  police  powers  by  local
officials  for  extortion  and  vendetta,  and  pointed  out  that  arbitrary  and  corrupt
local  officials  compromised  GVN  efforts  to  root  out  the  VC  "undercover  cadres."
Moreover:

.  .  .  While  the  GVN  has  made  an  effort  to  meet  the  economic  and  so-
cial needs  of  the  rural  populations  through  community  development,  the
construction  of  schools,  hospitals,  roads,  etc.,  these  projects  appear  to  have
enjoyed  only  a  measure  of  success  in  creating  support  for  the  government


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  339

and,  in  fact,  in  many  instances  have  resulted  in  resentment.  Basically,  the
problem  appears  to  be  that  such  projects  have  been  imposed  on  the  people
without  adequate  psychological  preparation  in  terms  of  the  benefits  to  be
gained.  Since  most  of  these  projects  call  for  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the
population  (in  the  form  of  allegedly  "volunteer"  labor  in  the  case  of  con-
struction, time  away  from  jobs  or  school  labor  in  the  case  of  rural  youth
groups,  leaving  homes  and  lands  in  the  case  of  regrouping  isolated  peasants),
they  are  bound  to  be  opposed  unless  they  represent  a  partnership  effort  for
mutual  benefit  on  the  part  of  the  population  and  the  government.  .  .  .

The  situation  may  be  summed  up  in  the  fact  that  the  government  has
tended  to  treat  the  population  with  suspicion  or  to  coerce  it  and  has  been
rewarded  with  an  attitude  of  apathy  or  resentment.

4. The  Founding  of  the  National  Liberation  Front

Despite  their  expanding  military  effort,  the  Viet  Cong  remained  a  formless,
"faceless"  foe  until  late  in  1960,  when  the  National  Liberation  Front  was  an-
nounced as  the  superstructure  of  the  insurgent  apparatus,  and  the  political  voice
of  the  rebellion.  Thereafter,  the  Viet  Cong  sought  publicity,  and  thereby  acquired
identity  as  a  South  Vietnam-wide  organization  of  three  major  components:  the
NLF  itself,  the  Liberation  Army  of  South  Vietnam,  and  the  People's  Revolu-
tionary Party.

a. Organization  and  Objectives

The  precise  dates  of  the  forming  of  the  NLF  constitutes  one  of  the  puzzles
of  the  war.  As  mentioned  above,  in  the  years  1954  to  1960,  peasants,  captured
documents  and  prisoners  referred  frequently  to  "the  Front,"  meaning  the  insur-
gent movement,  and  "Front"  flags  had  been  captured  as  early  as  1959.  These
were  probably  references  to  Viet  Minh  carry-over  organizations,  such  as  they
were,  rather  than  a  specific  leadership  group  or  structure,  with  a  set  of  defined
objectives.  Nguyen  Huu  Tho,  the  first  Chairman  of  the  NLF,  stated  in  a  1964
interview  over  Radio  Hanoi  that :

Although  formally  established  in  December  1960,  the  Front  had  existed
as  a  means  of  action  without  by-laws  or  program  since  1954  when  we
founded  the  Saigon-Cholon  Peace  Committee.  .  .  .  Many  of  the  members
of  the  [NLF]  Central  Committee  were  also  members  of  the  Peace  Com-
mittee. .  .  .

Huynh  Tan  Phat,  Tho's  Vice  Chairman  in  the  NLF,  was  reported  in  late  1955
serving  on  the  "Executive  Committee  of  the  Fatherland  Front"  (Mat  Tren  To
Quoc),  controlling  joint  Viet  Minh-Hoa  Hoa  operations  against  the  GVN  in  the
Plain  of  Reeds.  Communists  have  been  joining  front  organizations  linking  anti-
government  minorities.  .  .  .  [Examples  are]  the  'Vietnamese  Peoples'  Libera-
tion Movement  Forces'  [and]  .  .  .  ,  the  'Vietnam-Cambodian  Buddhist  Associa-
tion.'

A  number  of  authorities,  mainly  French,  have  lent  credence  to  an  assertion  that
the  NLF  was  formed  by  a  group  of  Viet  Minh  veterans  in  March,  1960,  some-
where in  Cochinchina;  but  the  NLF,  as  such,  received  no  international  publicity
until  after  December  20,  1960.  On  January  29,  1961,  Hanoi  Radio  broadcast
in  English  to  Europe  and  Asia  its  first  announcement  concerning  the  NLF:

A  "National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Vietnam"  was  recently
formed  in  South  Vietnam  by  various  forces  opposing  the  fascist  Ngo  Dinh


340 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Diem  regime.  This  was  revealed  by  Reuters  in  Saigon  and  by  different  papers
published  in  .  .  .  Phnom  Penh,  capital  of  Cambodia.  This  Front  was  cre-
ated after  a  period  of  preparation  and  after  a  conference  of  representatives
of  various  forces  opposing  the  fascist  regime  in  South  Vietnam.  According
to  these  forces,  the  "National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South  Vietnam"
on  December  20,  1960,  issued  a  political  program  and  a  manifesto  .  .  .
[the  manifesto]  reads:  "For  a  period  of  nearly  a  hundred  years,  the  Vietna-
mese people  repeatedly  rose  up  to  fight  against  foreign  aggression  for  na-
tional independence  and  freedom.  .  .  .  When  the  French  colonialists  in-
vaded our  country  for  the  second  time,  our  compatriots — determined  not
to  return  to  the  former  slavery — made  tremendous  sacrifices  to  defend  na-
tional sovereignty  and  independence.  The  solidarity  and  heroic  struggle  of
our  compatriots  during  nine  years  led  the  resistance  war  to  victory.  The
1954  Geneva  Agreements  reinstalled  peace  in  our  country  and  recognized
the  sovereignty,  independence,  unity  and  territorial  integrity  of  Vietnam.
Under  these  circumstances,  our  compatriots  in  South  Vietnam  would  have
been  able  to  live  in  peace,  earn  their  livelihood  in  security  and  build  a  life
of  plenty  and  happiness.  However,  American  imperialists  who  had  in  the
past  helped  the  French  colonialists  massacre  our  people  have  now  replaced
the  French  in  subjugating  the  southern  part  of  our  country  through  a  dis-
guised colonial  regime.  .  .  .  The  National  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  South
Vietnam  calls  on  the  entire  people  to  unite  and  heroically  rise  up  and  strug-
gle with  the  following  program  of  action :

"NORTH  VIETNAM
"Jan.  31,  1961

'1.  To  overthrow  the  disguised  colonial  regime  of  the  imperialists  and
the  dictatorial  administration,  and  to  form  a  national  and  democratic  coali-
tion administration.

'2.  To  carry  out  a  broad  and  progressive  democracy,  promulgate  the  free-
dom of  expression,  of  the  press,  of  belief,  reunion,  association  and  of  move-
ment and  other  democratic  freedoms;  to  carry  out  general  amnesty  of  po-
litical detainees,  dissolve  the  concentration  camps  dubbed  "prosperity  zones"
and  "resettlement  centers,"  abolish  the  fascist  law  10-59  and  other  anti-
democratic laws.

'3.  Abolish  the  economic  monopoly  of  the  United  States  and  its  hench-
men, protect  homemade  products,  encourage  the  home  industry,  expand
agriculture,  and  build  an  independent  and  sovereign  economy;  to  provide
jobs  to  unemployed  people,  increase  wages  for  workers,  armymen,  and
office  employees;  to  abolish  arbitrary  fines  and  apply  an  equitable  and  ra-
tional tax  system;  to  help  forced  evacuees  from  North  Vietnam  who  now
desire  to  rejoin  their  native  places;  and  to  provide  jobs  to  those  who  want  to
remain.

'4.  To  carry  out  land  rent  reduction,  guarantee  the  peasants'  right  to  till
their  present  plots  of  land,  and  redistribute  communal  land  in  preparation
for  land  reform.

'5.  To  eliminate  the  U.S. -style  culture  of  enslavement  and  depravation;  to
build  a  national  and  progressive  culture  and  education,  eliminate  illiteracy,
open  more  schools,  and  carry  out  reform  in  the  educational  and  examina-
tion system.

'6.  To  abolish  the  system  of  American  military  advisers,  eliminate  foreign
military  bases  in  Vietnam,  and  to  build  a  national  army  defending  the
fatherland  and  the  people.


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954—1960  341

'7.  To  realize  equality  between  men  and  women,  and  among  different
nationalities,  and  realize  the  right  to  autonomy  of  the  national  minorities
in  the  country;  to  protect  the  legitimate  interests  of  foreign  residents  in
Vietnam;  to  protect  and  take  care  of  the  interests  of  overseas  Vietnamese.

'8.  To  carry  out  a  foreign  policy  of  peace  and  neutrality;  to  establish
diplomatic  relations  with  all  the  countries  which  respect  the  independence
and  sovereignty  of  Vietnam.

'9.  To  reestablish  normal  relations  between  the  two  zones  of  Vietnam  for
the  attainment  of  peaceful  reunification  of  the  country.

'10.  To  oppose  aggressive  wars,  actively  defend  world  peace.

"The  manifesto  concludes  by  calling  on  various  strata  of  the  people  to
close  their  ranks  and  to  carry  out  the  above  program.  The  appeal  was  ad-
dressed to  the  workers,  peasants,  and  other  working  people,  to  the  intel-
lectuals, the  industrialists,  and  trades,  national  minorities,  religious  com-
munities, democratic  personalities,  patriotic  armymen,  and  young  men  and
women  in  South  Vietnam.

"Addressing  the  Vietnamese  living  abroad,  the  manifesto  called  on  them
'to  turn  their  thoughts  to  the  beloved  motherland  and  actively  contribute
to  the  sacred  struggle  for  national  emancipation.'  "

It  is  clear  that  the  NLF  was  not  intended  as  an  exclusively  communist  enter-
prise. Rather  it  was  designed  to  encompass  anti-GVN  activists,  and  to  exploit  the
bi-polar  nature  of  politics  within  South  Vietnam.  In  the  period  1954-1960,  prior
to  the  NLF's  "creation,"  the  objectives  of  insurgents  in  the  South,  other  than
overthrow  of  My-Diem,  were  vague.  Communists  in  the  South  no  doubt  shared
the  overall  objectives  of  the  DRV,  and  were  aiming  at  unification  of  all  Vietnam
under  the  Hanoi  government.  Some  rebel  nationalists  were  no  doubt  aware  of
the  communists'  ambitions,  but  would  have  regarded  such  an  outcome  as  ac-
ceptable, if  not  desirable.  Others,  disillusioned  by  the  actions  of  the  Diem  regime
after  1956,  simply  looked  toward  the  establishment  of  a  genuine  democratic
government  in  the  South.  Some  peasants  may  have  been  fighting  to  rid  them-
selves of  government,  or  to  oppose  modernization,  looking  only  to  village
autonomy.  The  sects,  if  not  struggling  for  a  democratic  regime,  were  fighting
for  their  independence,  as  were  some  of  the  tribal  groups  who  chose  to  join  the
NLF.  The  National  Liberation  Front  formulated  and  publicly  articulated  objec-
tives for  all  these.

George  Carver  reported  that:

On  February  11,  1961,  Hanoi  devoted  a  second  broadcast  to  the  N.L.F.'s
manifesto  and  program,  blandly  changing  the  language  of  both  to  tone  down
the  more  blatant  Communist  terminology  of  the  initial  version.  However,
even  the  milder  second  version  (which  became  the  "official"  text)  borrowed
extensively  from  Le  Duan's  September  speech  [at  the  Third  National  Con-
gress of  the  Lao  Dong  Party  in  Hanoi]  and  left  little  doubt  about  the  Front's
true  sponsors  or  objectives.

The  "tone  down"  of  communism  was  fairly  subtle,  if  Hanoi  so  intended  its  re-
vision, since  the  alterations  consisted  mainly  in  additions  to  the  Ten  Points  of
phraseology  drawn  from  the  preamble  of  the  Manifesto;  references  to  "agrarian
reform,"  in  those  terms,  were,  however,  cut.  There  was  a  marked  increase  in
condemnatory  citations  of  "My-Diem,"  so  that,  in  eight  of  ten  points  in  the
action  program,  expelling  the  U.S.  was  clearly  identified  as  the  way  the  desired
goal  would  be  reached.


342 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

Pike  refers  to  an  "organizing  congress"  of  the  NLF  held  in  December,  1960,
of  60  participants,  at  which  plans  were  announced  for  convening  the  first  regular
NLF  congress  within  a  year.  Several  postponements  obtruded,  and  the  meeting
did  not  take  place  until  February-March  1962.  Nonetheless,  a  Central  Commit-
tee continued  in  the  interim  to  further  define  NLF  purposes;  the  subsequent
statements  differed  from  the  1960  Manifesto  mainly  on  points  of  emphasis.  For
example,  "reunification  of  the  country"  (Point  9  of  the  Manifesto)  was  down-
played from  1960  through  1962.  On  the  first  anniversary  of  the  NLF  Manifesto,
20  December  1961,  its  leaders  issued  a  supplementary  series  of  interim  or  "im-
mediate action"  demands.  These  called  for:

1.  Withdrawal  of  all  U.S.  military  personnel  and  weapons  from  South  Vietnam
and  abolition  of  the  Staley  Plan.

2.  An  end  to  hostilities.

3.  Establishment  of  political  freedoms.

4.  Release  of  political  prisoners.

5.  Dissolution  of  the  National  Assembly  and  election  of  a  new  assembly  and
president.

6.  Ending  the  resettlement  program.

7.  Solution  of  Vietnam's  economic  problems.

8.  Establishment  of  a  foreign  policy  of  non-alignment.

Although  "immediate  action"  was  probably  intended  to  open  the  way  toward
formation  of  a  coalition  government  and  thence  to  ties  with  Hanoi,  there  was  no
mention  of  reunification;  nonetheless,  Hanoi  in  December,  1961,  listed  NLF
objectives  as  "peace,  independence,  democracy,  a  comfortable  life,  and  the  peace-
ful unification  of  the  Fatherland."  One  likely  reason  for  the  NLF's  omission  of
reunification  from  "immediate  action"  was  its  desire  to  broaden  its  base  on  anti-
Diem,  anti-U.S.  grounds — without  alienating  anti-Communists  who  might  other-
wise support  the  movement.  Again,  when  the  first  regular  NLF  congress  met
from  February  16  to  March  3,  1962,  the  earlier  basic  objectives  of  the  Front  were
endorsed,  excepting  reunification.  The  Radio  Hanoi  broadcast  on  the  congress
added  "advancing  to  peaceful  unification  of  the  Fatherland"  to  a  list  from  which
this  objective  was  conspicuously  absent  in  the  NLF  releases.  On  July  20,  1962,
the  anniversary  of  the  Geneva  Accords,  the  NLF  issued  a  declaration  that:

The  Central  Committee  of  the  National  Liberation  Front  of  South  Viet-
nam believes  that  in  the  spirit  of  Vietnamese  dealing  with  Vietnamese  solv-
ing their  own  internal  affairs,  with  the  determination  to  put  the  Fatherland's
interest  above  all  else,  the  forces  that  oppose  U.S.  imperialism  in  South
Vietnam  will,  through  mutual  concessions,  be  able  to  reach  a  common  agree-
ment for  united  action  to  serve  the  people.

The  same  statement  contained  a  new  "four  point  manifesto" :

1.  The  U.S.  government  must  end  its  armed  aggression  against  South
Vietnam,  abolish  its  military  command,  withdraw  all  its  troops  and  person-
nel, as  well  as  the  troops  and  personnel  of  U.S.  satellites  and  allies,  and
withdraw  all  weapons  and  other  war  equipment  from  South  Vietnam.

2.  Concerned  parties  in  South  Vietnam  must  stop  the  war,  re-establish
peace,  and  establish  conditions  throughout  South  Vietnam  to  enable  the
South  Vietnamese  to  solve  their  own  internal  affairs.  The  South  Vietnam
authority  [that  is,  government]  must  end  its  terror  operations.

3.  There  must  be  established  a  national  coalition  government,  to  include


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  343

representatives  of  all  political  parties,  cliques,  groups,  all  political  tendencies,
social  strata,  members  of  all  religions.  This  government  must  guarantee
peace.  It  must  organize  free  general  elections  in  South  Vietnam  to  choose
a  democratic  National  Assembly  that  will  carry  out  the  urgently  needed
policies.  It  must  promulgate  democratic  liberties  to  all  political  parties,
groups,  religions;  it  must  release  all  political  prisoners,  abolish  all  internment
camps  and  all  other  forms  of  concentration  [camps],  and  stop  the  forced
draft  of  soldiers  and  the  military  training  of  youth,  v^^omen,  public  servants,
and  enterprise,  economic  independence.  It  must  abolish  monopolies  and  im-
prove the  living  conditions  of  all  people.

4.  South  Vietnam  must  carry  out  a  foreign  policy  of  peace  and  neutrality.
It  must  establish  friendly  relations  with  all  nations,  especially  with  her
neighbors.  It  must  not  enter  any  military  bloc  or  agree  to  let  any  country
establish  military  bases  on  her  soil.  It  must  accept  aid  from  all  countries
[if]  free  of  political  conditions.  A  necessary  international  agreement  must
be  signed  in  which  the  big  powers  of  all  blocs  pledge  to  respect  the  sov-
ereignty, independence,  territorial  integrity,  and  neutrality  of  South  Vietnam.
South  Vietnam,  together  with  Cambodia  and  Laos,  will  form  a  neutral  area,
all  three  countries  retaining  full  sovereignty.

As  the  anticipated  fall  of  the  Diem  government  drew  near  in  1963,  NLF  state-
ments of  goals  increasingly  stressed  the  anti-American,  probably  to  shift  the
focus  of  NLF  attack  away  from  a  disappearing  objective — the  defeat  of  Diem,
and  possibly  because  the  NLF  could  not  manipulate  or  adapt  to  the  Buddhist
struggle  movement.  Demands  issued  by  the  NLF  five  days  following  Diem's  fall
in  November,  1963,  were  probably  intended  to  take  credit  for  changes  in  GVN
policy  then  underway,  since,  except  for  halting  conscription,  the  Duong  Van
Minh  government  was  undertaking  every  reform  the  NLF  called  for.  However,
the  first  extensive  official  statement  of  the  NLF  Central  Committee  following
Diem's  downfall,  issued  November  17,  1963,  did  reassert  the  reunification  objec-
tive:

Concerning  the  reunification  of  Vietnam,  as  was  expounded  many  times
by  the  South  Vietnam  National  Liberation  Front,  the  Vietnam  Fatherland
Front  and  the  DRV  government,  it  will  be  realized  step  by  step  on  a  volun-
tary basis,  with  consideration  given  to  the  characteristics  of  each  zone,  with
equality,  and  without  annexation  of  one  zone  by  the  other.

Concerning  coalition  government  there  was  less  vacillation  in  NLF  emphasis,
although  there  was  some  detectable  variation  in  the  welcome  extended  from  time
to  time  to  anti-communist  political  movements.  Similarly,  the  objective  of  "neu-
tralization" was  constant.  Cambodia  was  held  up  as  a  model,  and  there  was  some
implication  in  early  NLF  statements  that  it  would  accept  international  supervi-
sion of  "neutralization."  Beginning  in  1963  NLF  statements  were  couched  to
convey  the  notion  that  "reunification"  and  "neutralization"  were  distinct  one  from
the  other,  apparently  out  of  deference  to  DRV  reaction  against  proposals  to  neu-
tralize North  Vietnam.

b.  Leadership

The  NLF  founders  were  shadowy  figures  most  of  whom  had  earned  modest
repute  on  the  murky  fringes  of  Vietnamese  politics.  They  seem  to  have  been


344 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

chosen  with  an  eye  to  avoiding  known  Communists,  and  to  obtaining  wide  repre-
sentation from  South  Vietnam's  compHcated  society.  Although  the  NLF  Central
Committee  reserved  places  for  52  members,  only  31  names  were  publicized  as
founding  members,  indicating  either  a  large  covert  membership,  or,  more  likely,
simple  inability  to  find  eligible  persons  to  fill  the  posts.  A  U.S.  study  of  73  NLF
leaders  in  1965  indicated  that  almost  all  were  born  in  South  Vietnam,  and  almost
all  were  highly  educated.  Most  had  histories  of  anti-French  political  activity,
or  identification  with  religious  movements,  and  it  appears  that  if  many  were  not
themselves  crypto-communists,  they  had  known  and  worked  with  communists  for
years.  The  prime  example  of  the  group  is  Nguyen  Huu  Tho,  who  was  the  first
formally  elected  chairman  of  the  Presidium  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  NLF.
Tho  was  a  Cochinchinese  lawyer,  once  a  socialist,  who  spent  some  months  with
the  Viet  Minh  in  the  Mekong  Delta  in  1947.  He  thereafter  led  anti-French  and
anti-US  demonstrations,  defended  a  number  of  Vietnamese  before  Saigon  courts
for  crimes  related  to  the  "Resistance,"  and  served  some  time  in  French  jails.
He  also  edited  a  clandestine  Viet  Minh  newspaper  aimed  at  Saigon  intellectuals.
In  August,  1954,  he  became  vice  chairman  of  the  leftist  Saigon  Peace  Committee,
or  Movement  for  the  Defense  of  Peace  (MDP).  In  November,  1954,  according
to  CIA  information,  Tho  and  others  in  the  MDP  were  arrested,  and  Tho  spent
the  next  seven  years  in  Diem's  detention  centers.  Mysteriously  released  in  De-
cember, 1961,  the  CIA  reported  him  elected  to  NLF  otfice  at  the  congress  of
March,  1962.  Douglas  Pike's  information  has  Tho  active  in  Saigon  politics
through  1958,  at  which  time  he  was  jailed.  His  NLF  biography  states  that  "he
was  liberated  by  a  daring  guerrilla  raid  on  the  jail  in  1961,"  but  Pike,  unable  to
find  any  record  of  such  a  raid,  concludes  that  Tho  was  provisional  chairman  and
was  selected  Central  Committee  Chairman  at  the  organizing  meeting.

c.  Development

The  NLF  rapidly  took  on  organizational  reality  from  the  Central  Committee
down  through  a  web  of  subordinate  and  associated  groups  to  villages  all  over
Vietnam.  Pike  estimates  that  within  a  few  months  of  its  founding  in  December,
1960,  its  membership  doubled,  doubled  again  by  autumn,  1961,  and  then  re-
doubled by  early  1962,  at  which  time  300,000  Vietnamese  were  on  its  roles.
These  were  members  of  the  "liberation  associations,"  NLF  per  se,  of  which
there  were  administrative  associations  (e.g.,  provincial  headquarters)  and  func-
tional associations  (e.g..  Youth  Liberation  Association);  or,  they  belonged  to  one
of  several  political  parties,  including  the  communist  party,  affiliated  with  the  NLF;
or,  they  served  in  the  Liberation  Army.  Normally,  each  man,  woman  and  child
belonged  to  many  organizations  simultaneously.  A  French  analysis  of  Viet  Minh
organization  aptly  described  the  NLF:

The  individual  is  enchained  in  several  networks  of  independent  hierarchies
...  a  territorial  hierarchy  .  .  .  running  from  the  family  and  the  block
to  the  interprovincial  government,  and  associations  that  incorporate  male
and  female  youth  groups,  groups  of  mothers,  of  farmers,  factory,  and  plan-
tation workers'  syndicates  .  .  .  they  could  just  as  well  include  clubs  of  flute
players  or  bicycle  racers;  the  essential  thing  is  that  no  one  escapes  from  this
enrollment  and  that  the  territorial  hierarchy  is  crossed  by  another  one,  which
supervises  the  first  and  is  in  turn  supervised  by  it,  both  being  overseen  by
police  organizations  and  the  [Communist]  Party.  .  .  .


Origins  of  the  Insurgency  in  South  Vietnam,  1954-1960  345

The  key  operational  components  of  the  NLF  were  the  Liberation  Army  and
the  People's  Revolutionary  Party,  as  the  communists  within  the  NLF  termed
themselves.  The  former  had  a  lien  on  the  services  of  every  NLF  member,  man,
woman  or  child,  although  functionally  its  missions  were  usually  carried  out  by
formally  organized  and  trained  paramilitary  or  full-time  units.  All  "Viet  Cong"
units  were,  from  1961  on,  regarded  as  part  of  the  Liberation  Army.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  communists  played  a  major  role  in  organizing
the  NLF.  Although  Diem's  Communist  Denunciation  campaign  had  foreclosed
"Front"  activity,  the  communists  of  South  Vietnam  possessed  the  leadership,
tight  subordination  and  conspiratorial  doctrine  necessary  for  them  to  survive;
moreover,  they  were,  as  Milton  Sacks  characterized  them,  "the  most  persevering,
most  cohesive,  best-disciplined,  and  most  experienced  political  group  in  Viet-
nam." The  People's  Revolutionary  Party  was  not  formed  until  January,  1962;  it
was  explicitly  the  "Marxist-Leninist  Party  of  South  Vietnam,"  and  it  purported
to  be  the  "vanguard  of  the  NLF,  the  paramount  member."  In  1962,  it  had  some
35,000  members.  The  Lao  Dong  Party  had  continued  low  level  overt  activity,  as
well  as  covert  operations,  in  South  Vietnam  throughout  the  years  1955  to  1962.
For  example,  leaflets  were  distributed  over  the  Lao  Dong  imprimatur.  But  the
PRP  denied  official  links  with  the  Lao  Dong  Party  of  the  DRV  beyond  "fraternal
ties  of  communism."  The  denial  implies  the  question:  What  roles  did  the  DRV
and  the  Lao  Dong  Party  play  in  the  years  of  patient  work  necessary  to  bring  the
NLF  to  flower  in  so  short  a  time  after  1960?  What  role  did  they  play  in  the  in-
surgency overall?

The  official  U.S.  view  has  been  that  the  PRP  is  merely  the  southern  arm  of
the  Lao  Dong  Party,  and  one  instrument  by  which  Hanoi  instigated  and  con-
trolled the  revolt  against  "My-Diem."  Douglas  Pike's  analysis  led  him  to  concur,
with  reservations :

The  Viet  Minh  elements  in  South  Vietnam  during  the  struggle  against  the
French  had  of  course  included  many  non-Communist  elements.  .  .  .  After
1954  many  Viet  Minh  entered  the  ranks  of  the  new  Diem  government,  and
even  a  decade  later  many  of  the  top  military  and  civilian  governmental
figures  in  Saigon  were  former  Viet  Minh.  Nevertheless  the  Viet  Minh  ele-
ments, made  up  chiefly  but  not  entirely  of  Communists,  continued  to  offer
resistance  to  the  Diem  government.  ...  In  terms  of  overt  activity  such  as
armed  incidents  of  the  distribution  of  propaganda  leaflets  the  period  was
quiet  and  the  Communists  within  the  remnant  Viet  Minh  organization
relatively  inactive.  In  addition,  much  of  the  activity  that  did  take  place
apparently  was  the  work  of  impatient  cadres  operating  in  the  South  inde-
pendently of  Hanoi's  orders.  .  .  .

Such  action  on  their  part  and  the  religious  sects  is  understandable,  and
the  emergence  of  a  clandestine  militant  opposition  group  could  be  expected.
.  .  .  such  an  effort  would  be  in  complete  harmony  with  Vietnamese  social
tradition  and  individual  psychology.  But  there  is  a  vast  difference  between
a  collection  of  clandestine  opposition  political  groups  and  the  organizational
weapon  that  emerged,  a  difference  in  kind  and  not  just  degree.  The  National
Liberation  Front  was  not  simply  another  indigenous  covert  group,  or  even  a
coalition  of  such  groups.  It  was  an  organizational  steamroller,  nationally
conceived  and  nationally  organized,  endowed  with  ample  cadres  and  funds,
crashing  out  of  the  jungle  to  flatten  the  GVN.  It  was  not  an  ordinary  secret
society  of  the  kind  that  had  dotted  the  Vietnamese  political  landscape  for


346 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

decades.  It  projected  a  social  construction  program  of  such  scope  and  am-
bition that  of  necessity  it  must  have  been  created  in  Hanoi  and  imported.
A  revolutionary  organization  must  build;  it  begins  with  persons  suffering
genuine  grievances,  who  are  slowly  organized  and  whose  militancy  gradu-
ally increases  until  a  critical  mass  is  reached  and  the  revolution  explodes.
Exactly  the  reverse  was  the  case  with  the  NLF.  It  sprang  full-blown  into
existence  and  then  was  fleshed  out.  The  grievances  were  developed  or  manu-
factured almost  as  a  necessary  afterthought.  The  creation  of  the  NLF  was
an  accomplishment  of  such  skill,  precision,  and  refinement  that  when  one
thinks  of  who  the  master  planner  must  have  been,  only  one  name  comes  to
mind:  Vietnam's  organizational  genius.  Ho  Chi  Minh.


347


Volume  I List  of  Documents


1950

Document  1 {page  361)

The  State  Department  submits  to  the  NSC  a  report  on  "The  Position  of  the
United  States  with  Respect  to  Indochina,"  which  analyzes  the  problem  to  deter-
mine measures  to  protect  U.S.  security  in  Indochina  and  prevent  communist
expansion  in  the  area.  NSC  No.  64,  27  February  1950.

Document  2 (page  363)

The  State  Department  maintains  to  the  Department  of  Defense  that  Indochina
is  subject  to  immediate  danger  and  is  the  "most  strategically  important  area  of
Southeast  Asia."  Dean  Rusk  believes  that  the  resources  of  the  U.S.  should  be
deployed  to  "reserve  Indochina  from  further  Communist  encroachment."  Dean
Rusk,  Deputy  Undersecretary  of  State  to  General  James  H.  Burns,  Defense  Rep-
resentative to  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Committee,  7  March  1950.

Document  3 (page  363)

Department  of  State  requests  an  assessment  of  the  strategic  aspects  of  Indo-
china from  a  military  point  of  view  because  of  the  threat  of  communist  domi-
nation. The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  indicate  that  the  "mainland  states  of  South-
east Asia  also  are  at  present  of  critical  strategic  importance  to  the  United
States,"  because  of  the  requirement  to  stockpile  strategic  materials  acquired
there,  as  well  as  the  threat  to  other  states  on  the  "line  of  containment."  JCS
Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  10  April  1950.

Document  4 {page  367)

Griffin  reconstructs  the  Indochina  situation  for  Secretary  Acheson.  Griffin  indi-
cates that  the  present  status  quo  cannot  be  maintained.  "Time  is  of  the  es-
sence. .  .  ."  if  Bao  Dai  starts  to  slip,  "it  will  be  impossible  to  restore  him."
Given  that  the  French  are  aware  that  a  military  solution  is  unattainable,  "the
U.S.  must  find  out  what  the  French  expect  of  Vietnam."  Griffin  Memorandum
to  Secretary  of  State,  4  May  1950.

Document  5 {page  370)

The  special  survey  mission  headed  by  R.  Allen  Griffin  recommends  a  modest
$60  million  economic  and  technical  assistance  program  for  Southeast  Asia.  State
press  release  485,  11  May  1950.

Document  6 {page  370)

U.S.  formally  announces  intent  to  establish  an  economic  aid  mission  to  the  three
Associated  States  of  Indochina.  State  press  release  545,  25  May  1950.

Document  7 {page  372)

On  the  basis  of  the  Griffin  recommendations,  the  U.S.  publicly  announces  the


348 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

launching  of  a  program  of  rapid  economic  aid  to  Southeast  Asia.  Secretary  of
State  Dean  Acheson  letter  to  R.  Allen  Griffin,  3  June  1950.

Document  8 (page  372)

North  Korea  attacks  South  Korea  and  President  Truman  announces  U.S.  mili-
tary assistance  not  only  to  South  Korea  but  also  an  "acceleration  in  the  furnish-
ing of  military  assistance  to  the  forces  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  in
Indochina  and  the  dispatch  of  a  military  mission.  .  .  ."  Presidential  Statement,
27  June  1950.

Document  9 {page  373)

A  summary  of  existing  policy  on  Indochina  reveals  the  JCS  view  on  NSC  73
that  the  U.S.  give  consideration  to  providing  air  and  naval  assistance  should  the
Chinese  provide  overt  support  to  the  Viet  Minh.  Consultants'  Meeting,  25  July
1950.

1952

Document  10 {page  375)

The  NSC  considers  the  consequences  to  the  United  States  of  communist  domi-
nation of  Southeast  Asia.  Loss  of  Southeast  Asia  is  seen  as  putting  economic
and  political  pressures  on  Japan,  opening  sources  of  strategic  materials  to  the
Soviet  Bloc,  rendering  the  U.S.  position  in  the  Pacific  precarious  and  jeopardiz-
ing lines  of  communication  and  trade  routes  to  South  Asia.  If  Red  China  inter-
venes, the  U.S.  should  take  appropriate  military  action  as  part  of  a  U.N.  action
or  in  conjunction  with  others  but  not  unilaterally.  Annex  to  NSC  124,  13
February  1952.

Document  11 {page  381)

If  the  Chinese  invade  Indochina,  "he  [Acheson]  said  it  was  clear  that  it  was
futile  and  a  mistake  to  defend  Indochina  in  Indochina.  He  said  we  could  not
have  another  Korea.  ...  we  could  not  put  ground  troops  in  Indochina.  .  .  .
our  only  hope  was  of  ch^^ing  the  Chines£.jiLlad."  Secretary  of  State  Note  (L.  D.
Battle),  17  June  1952.

Document  12 {page  382)

Acheson  publicly  announces  optimism  over  the  conduct  of  the  National  armies
in  Indochina  and  that  communist  "aggression  has  been  checked"  and  that  the
"tide  is  now  moving  in  our  favor."  State  Department  Release  473,  18  June  1952.

Document  13 {page  384)

The  President  approves  NSC  124/2  (NSC  124/1  as  amended)  on  the  U.S.  ob-
jectives and  courses  of  action  with  respect  to  Southeast  Asia.  With  respect  to
Indochina,  the  U.S.  would  continue  to  assure  the  French  of  the  international
interest  of  the  Indochina  eflFort;  use  U.S.  influence  to  promote  political,  mili-
tary, economic,  and  social  policies;  provide  increased  aid  in  the  absence  of  overt
Chinese  aggression;  oppose  French  withdrawal;  and  seek  collective  action  against
Red  China  intervention.  NSC  124/2,  25  June  1952.

Document  14 {page  390)

The  U.S.  and  Britain  discuss  issuing  a  warning  to  Red  China  on  intervention  in
Indochina.  French  successes  could  trigger  Chinese  intervention  and  the  U.S.  had
"no  infantry  available  for  operations  within  Indochina."  The  U.S.  thinking  is


Documents  349


along  the  lines  of  a  naval  blockade  of  China's  coast.  London  Ministerial  Talks,
26  June  1952.

1953

Document  15 {page  391)

The  Intelligence  Advisory  Committee  concludes  that  Communist  China  will  not
invade  Indochina  even  though  hostilities  conclude  in  Korea.  The  French  situa-
tion, however,  is  expected  to  continue  to  deteriorate  while  the  Viet  Minh  prestige
increases.  National  Intelligence  Estimate,  NIE-91,  4  June  1953.

Document  16 {page  405)

The  State  Department  recommends  to  the  NSC  an  increase  in  aid  to  France  of
$400  million  in  the  current  fiscal  year.  Memorandum  for  NSC,  5  August  1953.

Document  17 {page  410)

The  JCS  learn  that  Secretary  of  Defense  plans  to  forward  their  1 1  August  memo-
randum to  Secretary  of  State  so  a  new  memorandum  is  drafted  which  makes
changes  to  certain  "overly  optimistic"  statements  with  respect  to  "promises  of
success  offered  by  the  Navarre  Concept."  JCS  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of
Defense,  28  August  1953.

Document  18 {page  412)

President  Eisenhower  approves  the  statement  of  NSC  162/2  as  basic  national

security  policy  which  addresses  the  Soviet  threat  to  U.S.  security.  NSC  162/2,
30  October  1953.

Document  19 {page  429)

The  CIA  estimates  the  Chinese  and  Soviet  reactions  to  U.S.  intervention  in  Indo-
china with  ground,  air,  and  naval  forces.  It  is  anticipated  that  the  Communist
Bloc  would  not  overtly  intervene  even  though  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh
would  result  but  would  support  and  augment  the  Viet  Minh  to  prolong  the  re-
sistance. Special  CIA  Estimate,  SE-53,  18  December  1953.

1954

Document  20 {page  434)

The  President  approves  the  statement  of  policy  in  MSC  177,  "United  States  Ob-
jectives and  Courses  of  Action  with  Respect  to  Southeast  Asia,"  which  views  the
loss  of  Indochina  as  having  "most  serious  repercussions  on  U.S.  and  free  world
interests  .  .  ."  (NSC  177  was  renumbered  as  NSC  5405)  NSC  5405,  16  Janu-
ary 1954.

Document  21 {page  443)

The  President's  Special  Committee  decides  to  recommend  action  on  certain  ur-
gent French  requests  for  twenty-two  B-26  aircraft  and  two  hundred  Air  Force
mechanics  for  Indochina,  and  to  await  General  O'Daniel's  return  before  decid-
ing on  other  requests.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  importance  to  the  U.S.  of
winning  in  Indochina  could  lead  to  intervention  by  U.S.  and  naval  forces — but
"not  ground  forces."  ISA  Memorandum  for  the  Record,  30  January  1954.

Document  22 {page  447)

The  JCS  express  concern  over  developments  in  the  status  of  the  MAAG  Chief
to  Indochina  relative  to  a  considerable  increase  in  personnel  and  scope  of  train-


350 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I


ing  responsibilities.  The  French  feel  that  "it  should  be  clearly  understood  that
neither  O'Daniel  nor  MAAG  was  to  have  any  powers,  advisory  or  otherwise"  in
planning  operations  or  training  the  national  armies.  The  JCS  feels  a  demotion
of  O'Daniel  in  deference  to  Navarre  is  detrimental  to  U.S.  prestige.  JCS  Memo-
randum for  Secretary  of  Defense,  5  March  1954.

Document  23 (page  448)

In  the  preparation  of  Defense  Department  views  regarding  negotiations  on  Indo-
china for  the  Geneva  Conference,  the  JCS  reaffirm  their  position  concerning  the
strategic  importance  of  Indochina  to  the  security  interests  of  the  United  States
as  reflected  in  NSC  5405.  JCS  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  Defense,  12  March
1954.

Document  24 {page  451)

General  Erskine  submits  the  President's  Special  Committee  recommendations  on
the  military  implications  of  the  U.S.  position  on  Indochina  at  Geneva.  The  an-
alysis concludes  that  "no  solution  to  the  Indochina  problem  short  of  victory  is
acceptable."  The  conclusions  expressed  are  felt  to  merit  consideration  by  the
NSC  and  the  President.  Erskine  Memorandum  for  the  Special  Committee,  NSC,
17  March  1954.

Document  25 {page  454)

Secretary  of  Defense,  Charles  E.  Wilson,  is  fully  in  accord  with  the  JCS  views
and  General  Erskine's  recommendations,  and  recommends  to  Secretary  Dulles
that  they  be  carefully  considered  in  preparation  for  the  Geneva  Conference.
Wilson  letter  to  Dulles,  23  March  1954.

Document  26 {page  455)

General  Ely,  Chairman  of  the  French  Chiefs  of  Staff,  is  "unsympathetic"  to  the
JCS  view  to  expand  MAAG,  Indochina  to  assist  in  training  Vietnamese.  Ely  feels
it  would  encroach  on  French  responsibilities,  would  affect  "prestige"  and  shows
lack  of  confidence  in  French  Leadership.  (Annex  A,  Ely  Memorandum  for  Rad-
ford; Annex  B,  JCS  Memorandum  for  the  President)  JCS  Memorandum  for
President's  Committee,  29  March  1954.

Document  27 {page  460)

The  U.S.  proposes  a  coalition  of  U.S.,  France,  Associated  States,  U.K.,  Australia,
New  Zealand,  Thailand,  and  the  Philippines,  which  would  fight  in  Indochina  as
an  alternative  to  French  Union  surrender  and  as  a  position  of  strength  going  to
Geneva.  Dulles  3476  to  Paris,  3  April  1954.

Document  28 {page  461)

The  British  consider  partition  the  "least  undesirable  settlement"  for  Indochina
and  had  not  developed  thoughts  on  a  confrontation  with  a  French  sell-out.  Dulles
5177  to  London,  4  April  1954.

Document  29 {page  461)

The  French  request  "immediate  armed  intervention  of  U.S.  carrier  aircraft  at
Dien  Bien  Phu"  to  save  the  situation.  Admiral  Radford  had  previously  assured
Ely  that  he  would  "do  his  best"  to  obtain  the  U.S.  support.  Paris  3710  to  Dulles,
4  April  1954.


Documents  351


Document  30 (page  462)

NSC  Action  No.  1074- A  considers  the  problem  of  determining  the  circumstances,
conditions,  and  extent  to  which  the  U.S.  should  commit  its  resources  to  save
Indochina.  The  problem  involves  four  issues:  (1)  the  prospect  of  loss  of  Indo-
china; (2)  the  risks,  requirements,  and  consequences  of  intervention;  (3)  de-
sirability and  form  of  U.S.  intervention;  and  (4)  the  timing  and  circumstances  of
intervention.  NSC  Action  1074-A,  5  April  1954.

Document  31 {page  471)

The  U.S.  Army  position  on  intervention  in  Indochina  cites  the  military  disad-
vantages of  such  action.  Specifically,  the  Army  views  are  that  air  and  naval
forces  alone  cannot  assure  victory;  that  atomic  weapons  do  not  reduce  the  num-
ber of  ground  troops  required;  that  at  least  seven  U.S.  divisions  with  air  and
naval  support  are  required  to  win  //  the  French  withdraw  and  the  Chinese  do
not  intervene;  and  that  the  equivalent  of  twelve  U.S.  divisions  are  required  //  the
Chinese  intervene.  Army  Position  on  NSC  Action  No.  1074-A  (undated).

Document  32 (page  472)

The  President's  Special  Committee  submits  recommendations  concerning  longer
range  policy  and  courses  of  action  for  possible  future  contingencies  in  South-
east Asia  not  covered  by  NSC  5405.  It  is  recommended  that  the  U.S.  accept
nothing  short  of  military  victory,  oppose  a  negotiated  settlement  at  Geneva,  pres-
sure the  Associated  States  to  continue  the  war  with  U.S.  support  even  if  nego-
tiations succeed,  and  seek  participation  of  other  nations.  Regardless  of  the
outcome  of  current  operations  in  Indochina,  the  U.S.  in  all  prudence  should  de-
velop a  regional  defense  posture  incorporating  all  the  Southeast  Asian  states.
Part  II,  Special  Committee  Report  on  Southeast  Asia,  5  April  1954.

Document  33 (page  476)

"U.S.  is  doing  everything  possible  ....  to  prepare  public,  Congressional,  and
constitutional  basis  for  united  action  in  Indochina."  However,  such  action  is  con-
sidered "impossible"  except  on  a  coalition  basis  with  British  Commonwealth
participation.  Dulles  3482  to  Paris,  5  April  1954.

Document  34 (page  476)

France  feels  that  the  time  for  formulating  coalitions  has  passed  as  the  fate  of
Indochina  will  be  decided  in  the  next  ten  days  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Dillon  (Paris)
3729  to  Dulles,  5  April  1954.

Document  35 (page  477)

Eden  feels  the  seriousness  of  the  French  military  situation  is  exaggerated —
"French  cannot  lose  war  between  now  and  the  coming  of  the  rainy  season  how-
ever badly  they  may  conduct  it."  London  4382  to  Dulles,  6  April  1954.

Document  36 (page  477)

Eden  informs  Dulles  that  Britain  is  strongly  opposed  to  intervention  at  Dien  Bien
Phu  and  intends  to  lend  only  diplomatic  support  to  France  at  Geneva  in  search
of  a  settlement.  DULTE  5  (Geneva)  to  Washington,  25  April  1954.

Document  37 (page  478)

Dulles  expresses  "dismay  that  the  British  are  apparently  encouraging  the  French
in  a  direction  of  surrender  which  is  in  conflict  not  only  with  our  interest  but  what
I  [Dulles]  conceived  theirs  to  be."  DULTE  9,  26  April  1954.


352 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I
Document  38 (page  480)

Dulles  and  Eden  exchange  frank  and  heated  words  over  the  British  pressuring
France  for  a  cease-fire.  The  U.S.  indicates  that  the  tripartite  position  is  poor,
i.e.,  not  "very  impressive  or  cohesive"  and  that  "the  other  side"  was  worried —
but  not  about  Britain.  The  U.S.  is  also  concerned  over  the  effects  on  NATO,
EDC  and  the  entire  defense  structure  in  Europe.  DULTE  13,  27  April  1954.

Document  39 {page  481)

Dulles  makes  an  estimate  of  rapidly  moving  developments:  (1)  when  Dien  Bien
Phu  falls,  the  French  Government  will  change,  probably  to  the  left,  committed
to  liquidate  China.  A  withdrawal  of  forces  to  defensible  enclaves  under  U.S.
protection  with  subsequent  U.S.  training  of  native  armies  is  considered.  Open
intervention  at  this  point  would  be  answered  by  Chinese  intervention,  (2)  U.K.
attitude  is  one  of  increasing  weakness,  (3)  "the  decline  of  France,  the  great
weakness  of  Italy,  and  the  considerable  weakness  of  England  create  a  situation
where  ...  we  must  be  prepared  to  take  the  leadership.  .  .  ."  DULTE  21,  29
April  1954.

Document  40 {page  482)

The  Intelligence  Advisory  Committee  concludes  that  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu
would  have  far-reaching  and  adverse  repercussions,  but  would  not  signal  the
collapse  of  the  French  Union  political  and  military  situation  in  Indochina,  nor
would  it  substantially  alter  relative  military  capabilities  of  French  and  Viet  Minh
forces.  The  French  Union  could  retain  control  of  the  cities  though  there  would  be
a  serious  decline  in  the  Vietnamese  will  to  continue  the  war.  NIE  63-54,  30  April
1954.

Document  41 {page  487)

Major  General  Thomas  J.  H.  Trapnell,  former  Chief  of  MAAG,  Indochina
comments  in  his  debriefing  on  the  French  situation  in  Indochina.  His  comments
cover  in  detail  the  strategic  position  of  Indochina,  the  government  and  its  prose-
cution of  the  war,  the  performance  of  MDAP  supported  forces,  the  objectives  of
the  opposing  forces,  the  organization  and  tactics  of  both  the  French  and  Viet
Minh  forces.  In  Trapnell's  view,  few  of  the  aims  of  the  Navarre  concept  are  pro-
gressing satisfactorily.  "Dien  Bien  Phu  is  not  only  another  Na  San,  but  a  grave
tactical  and  strategic  error."  On  the  political  aspects  of  the  war,  Trapnell  feels
that  "a  strictly  military  solution  to  the  war  in  Indochina  is  not  possible  ...  It  is
doubtful  if  the  ordinary  people  understand  the  issues  at  stake  between  the  rebel
and  Associated  States  objectives."  The  solution  in  Indochina  requires  a  strong
French  assault  on  the  Viet  Minh,  training  of  National  armies,  a  defensive  alliance
of  Asian  nations,  and  a  guarantee  of  the  Associated  States  borders.  Trapnell  rec-
omends  a  U.S.  training  mission  for  Indochina,  and  concludes  that  victory  in
Indochina  is  international  rather  than  local  and  essentially  political  as  well  as  mil-
itary. Major  General  Trapnell  Debriefing,  3  May  1954.

Document  42 {page  499)

The  NSC  195th  Meeting  considers  Secretary  Dulles  pessimistic  report  on  Geneva
to  the  President:  (1)  there  is  no  responsible  French  Government  to  deal  with,
(2)  the  British  reject  the  "regional  grouping,"  (3)  the  British  want  secret  talks
on  Southeast  Asia,  (4)  the  expected  communist  proposal  is  for  foreign  troop
withdrawal  and  elections,  (5)  and  the  U.K.  wants  a  settlement  based  on  parti-
tion. NSC  195th  Meeting,  6  May  1954.


Documents  353


Document  43 {page  500)

Dulles  briefs  Congressional  leaders  on  the  Geneva  Conference  and  reviews  the
weaknesses  of  Britain's  position.  Congress  members  comments  are  adverse.
Dulles  states  three  conclusions:  (1)  U.S.  should  not  intervene  militarily,  (2)
U.S.  must  push  rapidly  for  a  Southeast  Asia  community,  (3)  and  the  U.S.  should
not  "write  off"  the  British  and  French  in  spite  of  their  weakness  in  Asia.  TEDUL
37,  6  May  1954.

Document  44 {page  501)

President  Eisenhower  makes  it  clear  that  the  preconditions  for  U.S.  intervention
in  Indochina  are  that  the  "U.S.  would  never  intervene  alone,  that  the  indigenous
people  must  invite  intervention,  and  that  there  must  be  regional  or  collective
action.  The  NSC  action  of  the  meeting  on  5  April  as  pertains  to  paragraph  \.b.
of  the  record  (organizing  a  regional  grouping)  is  approved  by  the  President.
Memorandum  by  R.  Cutler,  Special  Assistant,  for  Secretary  of  Defense  and
CJCS  and  Meeting  Minutes,  7  May  1954.

Document  45 {page  504)

May  8-July  21:  Geneva  Conference  on  Indochina.  The  1st  Plenary  Session  con-
venes on  8  May  and  hears  proposals  by  France  and  the  Viet  Minh  for  cessation
of  hostilities  and  participation  in  the  conference.  (Excerpts)  The  delegates  to
the  conference  are  from  Great  Britain  and  the  USSR  (joint  chairmen),  France,
the  United  States,  Communist  China,  Cambodia,  Laos,  ano  Vietnam,  and  the
Viet  Minh  regime.  (Final  agreements  are  signed  on  July  20  and  21,  and  the
main  provisions  concerning  Vietnam  are  that  (1)  Vietnam  is  to  be  partitioned
along  the  17th  parallel  into  North  and  South  Vietnam,  (2)  regulations  are  im-
posed on  foreign  military  bases  and  personnel  and  on  increased  armaments,
(3)  countrywide  elections,  leading  to  the  reunification  of  North  and  South
Vietnam,  are  to  be  held  by  July  20,  1956,  and  (4)  an  International  Control
Commission  (ICC)  is  to  be  established  to  supervise  the  implementation  of  the
agreements.  The  United  States  and  Vietnam  are  not  signatories  to  the  agree-
ments. The  United  States  issues  a  unilateral  declaration  stating  that  it  (1)
"will  refrain  from  the  threat  or  the  use  of  force  to  disturb"  the  Geneva  agree-
ments, (2)  "would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation  of  the  afore-
said agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threatening  international
peace  and  security,"  and  (3)  "shall  continue  to  seek  to  achieve  unity  through
free  elections,  supervised  by  the  UN  to  insure  that  they  are  conducted  fairly.")
Excerpts  from  1st  Plenary  Session  of  the  Geneva  Conference,  8  May  1954.

Document  46 {page  506)

The  Defense  member  of  the  NSC  Planning  Board  indicates  the  options  available
to  the  U.S.  with  regard  to  the  Geneva  results.  General  Bonesteel  suggests  that
the  increased  risks  associated  with  pressuring  France  to  continue  the  war  and
possible  U.S.  intervention  to  stop  the  communist  advance  can  "more  surely  and
safely  be  accepted  now  than  ever  again."  On  the  other  hand,  a  compromise  at
Geneva  would  lead  to  communist  subversion  at  a  late  date  and  U.S.  involvement
then  might  be  inhibited  by  an  increased  Soviet  nuclear  capability.  "Asia  could
thus  be  lost."  General  Bonesteel  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  Defense,  9  May
1954.

Document  47 {page  507)

Secretary  Dulles  forwards  the  basic  instructions  approved  by  the  President  for
the  head  of  the  U.S.  Delegation  to  Geneva.  "The  United  States  is  not  prepared


354 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

to  give  its  express  or  implied  approval  to  any  cease-fire,  armistice,  or  other  settle-
ment .  .  .  ."  which  would  subvert  the  local  governments,  impair  territorial
integrity,  or  jeopardize  forces  of  the  French  Union.  Dulles  TOSEC  138  to
Geneva,  12  May  1954.

Document  48 {page  508)

Secretary  Stevens  emphasizes  the  Army's  concern  over  high-level  official  views
that  "air  and  sea  forces  alone  could  solve  our  problems  in  Indochina"  and  that
the  complex  nature  of  these  problems  would  require  a  major  logistical  effort —
"it  explodes  the  myth  that  air  and  sea  forces  could  solve  the  Indochina  prob-
lems." Secretary  of  the  Army  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  Defense,  19  May
1954.

Document  49 {page  509)

The  ICS  recommend  against  a  "Korea-type"  defense  of  Southeast  Asia  as  un-
sound. Accordingly,  the  U.S.  "should  adopt  the  concept  of  offensive  actions
against  the  'military  power  of  the  aggressor,'  (in  this  instance,  Communist  China)
rather  than  local  reaction  to  the  attack.  JCS  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of
Defense,  21  May  1954.

Document  50 {page  511)

The  JCS  point  out  their  belief  that,  from  the  U.S.  point  of  view  with  reference
to  the  Far  East,  "Indochina  is  devoid  of  decisive  military  objectives  and  alloca-
tion of  more  than  token  U.S.  armed  forces  in  Indochina  would  be  a  serious
diversion  of  limited  U.S.  capabilities."  JCS  Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  De-
fense, 26  May  1954.

Document  51 {page  515)

The  White  House  views  the  JCS  position  on  intervention  in  Indochina  as  not  in-
volving any  new  policy  issue  relative  to  NSC  5405.  However,  a  pencilled  Secre-
tary of  Defense  marginal  note  indicates  that  the  White  House  "misses  the  point"
— the  JCS  was  considering  the  "regional  grouping"  and  others  in  the  grouping,
i.e.,  U.K.  may  object  to  NSC  5405  policy.  Hence  the  JCS  is  warning  "not  to  get
involved  in  such  a  grouping"  unless  all  parties  accept  direct  action.  White  House
Memorandum  for  Secretary  of  Defense,  26  May  1954.

Document  52 {page  516)

Ely  emphasizes  particular  points  to  Trapnell  and  Dillon:  (1)  Ely  was  not  in  ac-
cord with  O'Daniel's  proposal  to  reorganize  the  Vietnamese  army  on  a  di-
visional basis,  (2)  O'Daniel's  operational  war  plant  was  unrealistic,  (3)  the
increasing  frequency  of  American  criticism  of  French  conduct  of  the  war  was
not  appreciated,  (4)  Ely  was  regrouping  his  forces  for  defense  of  the  Delta,  and
(5)  One  or  two  U.S.  Marine  divisions  could  assure  defense  of  the  Delta.  Paris
4566  to  Dulles,  27  May  1954.

Document  53 {page  518)

General  Valluy  evaluates  the  Tonkin  Delta  military  situation:  (1)  If  Tonkin
is  lost,  a  military  line  will  not  be  re-established,  (2)  in  this  connection,  there
are  no  South  Vietnamese  who  could  oppose  North  Vietnamese,  (3)  Ho  Chi
Minh's  objective  is  Tonkin  and  the  political  capital  Hanoi,  to  be  gained  either
by  negotiation  or  military  force  as  necessary,  (4)  if  Tonkin  is  lost,  France  will
not  fight  in  the  South,  (5)  nor  would  Vietnamese  fight  against  other  Vietnamese


Documents  355


and  sooner  or  later  the  whole  of  Vietnam  will  become  communist.  TEDUL  171,
7  June  1954.

Document  54 {page  519)

Eden  cites  three  major  issues  emerging  on  which  "we  cannot  compromise":  (1)
separate  treatment  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  problem,  (2)  status  and  powers  of
international  supervisory  authority  and  (3)  composition  of  the  international
supervisory  authority.  Britain  feels  negotiations  have  failed  and  little  can  be
salvaged  in  Vietnam.  DULTE  164,  9  June  1954.

Document  55 {page  521)

"General  Ely  has  twice  in  my  presence  stated  that  his  keenest  desire  is  for  the
United  States  to  enter  this  war."  The  purpose  of  General  Valluy's  statement
(war  assessment)  is  either  to  bring  the  U.S.  and  five  other  powers  into  the  con-
flict or  to  prepare  an  "excuse  before  history"  for  an  armistice.  Saigon  2714  to
Dulles,  10  June  1954.

Document  56 {page  522)

The  French  impression  is  that  even  after  all  conditions  are  met,  the  chances
of  U.S.  participation  are  "nil."  With  this  attitude  it  is  only  a  matter  of  time  un-
til the  French  come  to  terms  with  the  Viet  Minh.  The  result  would  be  disastrous
to  French  public  opinion  and  the  "U.S.  would  be  blamed"  for  having  failed  in  the
crisis.  Therefore,  it  is  recommended  that  the  French  be  informed  that  "the  Presi-
dent is  no  longer  prepared  to  request  military  intervention''  even  if  France  ful-
fills all  conditions.  France  should  strive  for  an  armistice  and  thus  avoid  a  military
disaster.  A  few  months  delay  in  communist  takeover  in  Indochina  is  not  com-
mensurate with  "possible  collapse  of  the  defense  of  Western  Europe."  Paris  4841
to  Dulles,  14  June  1954.

Document  57 {page  523)

The  French  want,  and  "in  effect  have,  an  option  on  our  intervention,  but  they  do
not  want  to  exercise  it  and  the  date  of  expiry  of  our  option  is  fast  running  out."
TEDUL  197,  14  June  1954.

Document  58 {page  524)

Secretary  Dulles  emphasizes  that  events  have  shown  that  predictions  he  has
made  all  along  on  the  lack  of  any  real  French  desire  for  U.S.  intervention  but
"as  a  card  to  play  at  Geneva."  The  U.S.  does  not  see  that  France's  bitterness  is
justified  considering  "prolonged  French  and  U.K.  indecision."  Dulles  4579  to
Paris,  14  June  1954.

Document  59 {page  525)

The  CIA  estimates  communist  reactions  to  the  participation  of  U.S.  air  and  naval
forces  at  various  levels  of  intensity  and  on  various  targets  in  conjunction  with
French  Union  forces  in  Indochina.  Special  National  Intelligence  Estimate,  SNIE
10-4-54,  15  June  1954.

Document  60 {page  531)

The  "underground  military  talks"  at  Geneva  are  pointing  toward  a  de  facto
partition  of  Indochina.  "There  can  of  course  be  no  repeat  no  question  of  U.S.
participation  in  any  attempt  to  'sell'  a  partition  to  noncommunist  Vietnamese.
TEDUL  212,  17  June  1954.


356 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I
Document  61 {page  532)

U.S.  re-examines  possible  de  facto  partition  of  Vietnam  in  light  of  five-power
staff  report  suggesting  Thakhek-Donghoi  line.  TEDUL  222,  18  June  1954.

Document  62 {page  532)

The  French  feel  that  partition  is  the  best  settlement  they  could  have  worked  for
under  the  conditions  laid  down  by  U.S.  for  intervention  which  "no  French  Par-
liament would  approve."  Partition  should  come  as  no  surprise  to  the  Vietnamese
since  the  Viet  Minh  had  made  it  clear  to  them — "coalition  government  or  par-
tition." DULTE  195,  18  June  1954.

Document  63 {page  534)

General  Smith  and  Molotov  conduct  lengthy  conversations  on  "making  positions
clear."  The  Soviet  tactics  were  probably  to  forestall  U.S.  intervention  in  the  Delta
by  a  compromise  formula  if  intervention  appeared  imminent.  When  intervention
became  improbable,  the  "ante"  in  negotiations  was  raised.  DULTE  202,  19
June  1954.

Document  64 {page  537)

In  conversations  with  the  French,  China  recognizes  that  "two  governments"
exist  in  Vietnam  and  Chou  En-lai  regards  that  the  final  political  setdement
should  be  reached  by  direct  negotiations  between  the  two  governments.  Paris
5035  to  Dulles,  24  June  1954.

Document  65 {page  538)

Dulles  thinks  our  present  role  at  Geneva  should  "soon  be  restricted  to  that  of
observer.  .  .  ."  TOSEC  478,  24  June  1954.

Document  66 {page  539)

A  French  aide-memoire  indicates  the  French  objective  to  seek  a  de  facto  divi-
sion which  leaves  a  solid  territory  for  the  State  of  Vietnam  and  further  re-
quests that  the  U.S.  do  nothing  to  encourage  an  anticipated  "violent  and  unrea-
soning" reaction  on  the  part  of  Vietnamese  patriots  who  object  to  an  indefinite
period  of  division  of  the  country.  Dulles  4852  to  Paris,  28  June  1954.

Document  67 {page  540)

French  negotiations  with  Viet  Minh  are  stalled  and  Mendes-France  is  perplexed
by  reference  to  the  "Dong  Hoi"  line  since  France  was  holding  out  for  the  18th
parallel.  Paris  5117  to  Dulles,  30  June  1954.  ■

Document  68 {page  541)  \
Dulles  warns  that  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  has  been  "kept  in  the  dark"  on  French  nego-
tiations and  fears  that  if  revealed  as  a  fait  accompli  the  reaction  French  wish  to  \
avoid  will  result.  Dulles  39  to  Paris,  2  July  1954.  ji

Document  68 {page  541)

France  apologizes  for  not  keeping  the  U.S.  fully  informed  of  French  military
withdrawals  in  the  Delta.  In  addition,  while  France  is  holding  out  for  an  eighteen-
month  period  before  elections.  Diem,  to  the  contrary,  has  suggested  elections
within  a  year.  Paris  32  to  Dulles,  2  July  1954.


Documents  357


Document  70 (page  542)

The  U.S.  does  not  want  to  be  associated  with  a  settlement  which  falls  short  of  the
seven-point  memorandum  on  which  Britain  agreed  and  now  appears  to  be  less  than
firm.  "If  either  or  both  the  French  and  Communists  are  operating  on  the  as-
sumption we  will  adhere  to  any  settlement  they  agree  to,  then  we  may  be  headed
for  serious  trouble."  Dulles  52  to  Paris,  3  July  1954.

Document  71 (page  543)

Dillon  recommends  that  if  the  U.S.  attempts  to  get  the  best  possible  settlement,
we  should  (1)  maintain  a  Geneva  delegation,  (2)  have  Dulles  return  to  head  the
delegation,  (3)  offer  French  support  to  sell  a  setdement  to  Vietnam  if  it  is  satis-
factory, and  (4)  pressure  Britain  to  stick  to  the  seven  points  of  US-UK
agreement.  Paris  41  to  Dulles,  4  July  1954.

Document  72 (page  545)

Mendes-France  will  announce  to  the  National  Assembly  that  if  a  cease-fire  is  not
agreed  to  prior  to  21  July,  it  will  be  necessary  for  the  Assembly  to  approve  the
sending  of  conscripts  to  Indochina.  Paris  66  to  Dulles,  6  July  1954.

Document  73 (page  546)

Dulles  informs  Eden  that  it  is  "better  if  neither  Bedell  nor  I  went  back"  to
Geneva  since  the  French  will  probably  settle  for  worse  than  the  7-point  agree-
ment, hence  it  would  be  embarrassing  to  all  concerned.  Dulles  NIACT  101  to
London,  7  July  1954.

Document  74 (page  546)

The  U.S.  feels  that  elections  mean  eventual  unification  of  Vietnam  under  Ho
Chi  Minh  and  therefore  should  be  held  "as  long  after  a  cease-fire  agreement  as
possible  and  in  conditions  free  from  intimidation.  .  .  ."  Further,  the  U.S.  believes
no  date  should  be  set  now  and  that  no  conditions  be  accepted  which  would
affect  international  supervision  of  elections.  The  U.S.  would  not  oppose  a
settlement  based  on  the  7  points  nor  would  we  seek  to  upset  a  settlement  by
force.  Dulles  77  to  Paris,  7  July  1954.

Document  75 (page  547)

"I  have  never  harbored  any  thought  of  wilful  concealment  .  .  .  there  is  a  cer-
tain lack  of  intimacy  .  .  ."  in  relations  with  the  present  government.  The  U.S.
intends  to  leave  representation  at  Geneva  but  not  Bedell  Smith  nor  Dulles  will
return.  The  U.S.  should  avoid  a  "position  at  Geneva  .  .  ."  Dulles  85  to  Paris,  8
July  1954.

Document  76 (page  548)

The  Chinese  inform  Ambassador  Johnson  that  Chou  En-lai  had  a  "very  good
meeting"  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  that  "results  would  be  helpful  to  the  French."
The  French  believe  that  the  Sino-Soviet  positions  have  been  coordinated  with
the  Chinese  views  on  Asian  problems  being  given  major  weight.  SECTO  578.
9  July  1954.

Document  77 (page  550)

President  Eisenhower  and  Secretary  Dulles  indicate  firmly  to  President  Mendes-
France  the  rationale  behind  not  sending  Dulles  or  General  Smith  back  to


358 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Geneva.  Essentially,  the  rationale  is  based  on  failure  of  the  U.S.,  U.K.  and
France  to  agree  on  a  joint  position  at  Geneva  and  lack  of  agreement  on  a
"united  action"  proposal  if  the  position  is  not  accepted  by  the  communists.
Dulles  sees  France  and  U.K.  enhancing  a  communist  "whittling-away"  process
by  readily  accepting  less  than  the  seven  points.  Dulles  127  to  Paris,  10  July  1954.

Document  78 {page  552)

France  views  the  Dulles  decision  as  (1)  making  the  French  bargaining  position
weaker  and  (2)  that  Europe  would  interpret  U.S.  absence  from  Geneva  as  a
step  in  the  "return  to  a  policy  of  isolationism."  Paris  134  to  Dulles,  11  July  1954.

Document  79 {page  553)

France  indicates  the  "necessity  for  a  clear-cut  U.S.  guarantee  that  would  protect
the  Associated  States"  if  the  communists  did  not  honor  a  Geneva  settlement.
Mendes-France  will  resign  if  no  cease-fire  is  reached.  Paris  133  to  Dulles,  11
July  1954.

Document  80 {page  554)

Secretary  Dulles  reports  on  the  Paris  meeting:  (1)  an  agreed  French-United
States  position  paper  on  Indochina  which  has  the  United  States  respecting  terms
conforming  to  a  7-point  agreement;  (2)  the  7  points  along  the  lines  which  were
agreed  during  the  Churchill-Eisenhower  conversations;  (3)  a  Mendes-France  to
Dulles  letter  which  tells  Dulles  that  his  absence  from  Geneva  would  produce  an
effect  opposite  to  his  intention;  (4)  a  Dulles  to  Mendes-France  letter  which  in-
forms him  of  General  Smith's  return  to  Geneva;  (5)  and  a  letter  from  Eden  to
Mendes-France  reassuring  him  of  Britain's  support.  Paris  179  to  Dulles,  14
July  1954.

Document  81 {page  558)

Secretary  Dulles  reports  on  his  trip  to  Paris  at  the  NSC  meeting.  Dulles  had  told
Mendes  that  France's  troubles  stemmed  from  lack  of  a  decision  on  EDC  and
the  Soviets  were  successful  in  splitting  France  and  Germany.  If  the  U.S.  cannot
guarantee  the  Geneva  Conference  results  or  influence  France  to  reject  any
settlement,  the  U.S.  will  be  blamed  and  put  a  major  strain  on  Franco-United
States  relations.  NSC  Minutes,  15  July  1954.

Document  82 {page  559)

At  a  meeting  of  Mendes,  Eden,  and  Molotov,  the  outstanding  issues  are  sum-
marized: (1)  demarcation  line  for  Vietnam;  (2)  elections;  (3)  control  arrange-
ments; (4)  regroupment  time;  (5)  prevention  of  arms  importation,  and  (6)
Laotian  regroupment  areas.  France  strongly  opposes  Molotov  on  holding  elec-
tions in  1955  and  placing  the  demarcation  line  at  the  16th  parallel.  SECTO  632,
17  July  1954.  ^

Document  83 {page  560)

The  Vietnamese  delegation  to  the  Geneva  Conference  secretly  passes  the  U.S.
delegate  a  note  of  protest  which  had  been  handed  to  the  French.  The  note  com-
plains that  the  "National  Government  of  Vietnam  has  been  left  in  complete
ignorance"  of  proposals  made  by  the  French  to  other  nations  on  Vietnam's  fate.
Vietnam  rejects  the  de  facto  partition  proposal,  a  cease-fire,  and  requests  that


Documents  359


United  Nations  control  be  established  over  all  Vietnam  territory.  SECTO  633,
17  July  1954.

Document  84 {page  561)

The  Chinese  Communists  inform  the  U.S.  of  their  position  via  Seymour  Topping,
Associated  Press.  The  despatch  reflects  the  views  of  Chou  En-lai  and  demands
that  the  U.S.  guarantee  a  "partition  peace  plan."  Further,  China  is  hopeful  of  a
cease-fire  but  did  not  rule  out  the  chance  for  one  even  if  the  U.S.  refuses  to
accept  the  armistice.  SECTO  639,  18  July  1954.

Document  85 {page  563)

The  U.S.  fears  Britain  will  push  France  into  an  agreement  short  of  the  7  points
resulting  in  a  situation  which  had  been  previously  discussed  in  Paris.  TOSEC
565,  18  July  1954.

Document  86 {page  563)

At  the  23rd  Indochina  restricted  session,  Tran  Van  Do  (Vietnam)  states  that
Vietnam  cannot  associate  iself  with  the  final  declaration  of  the  Conference  which
is  to  be  reviewed.  Vietnam  does  not  agree  to  conditions  for  cease-fire  nor  have
they  as  yet  advanced  proposals  for  a  solution  "based  on  peace,  independence,  and
unity."  SECTO  654,  18  July  1954.

Document  87 {page  566)

The  Vietnamese  delegation  requests  a  plenary  session  to  put  forward  their
position  (Document  171,  preceding).  The  U.S.  replies  that  the  Vietnamese  posi-
tion is  "not  practicable"  and,  in  indicating  that  time  is  short,  suggests  that  the
Vietnamese  "speak  directly  with  the  French."  SECTO  655,  18  July  1954.

Document  88 {page  566)

Seymour  Topping  again  supplies  confidential  information  from  a  Chinese  Com-
munist contact,  Huang  Hua.  "When  Huang  Hua  spoke  of  the  possibility  of
American  bases  in  Indochina,  or  anti-Communist  pact  in  Southeast  Asia,  he
became  very  agitated,  his  hands  shook,  and  his  usually  excellent  English  broke
down  .  .  ."  Chinese  are  convinced  that  France  and  the  U.S.  have  made  a  deal.
SECTO  661,  19  July  1954.

Document  89 {page  567)

International  control  commission  is  to  be  composed  of  Poland,  India,  Canada,
or  Belgium.  The  U.S.  is  satisfied  that  this  is  better  than  Korea  and  is  "within
the  spirit  of  Point  7."  SECTO  666,  19  July  1954.

Document  90 {page  567)

General  Smith  makes  it  clear  to  France  that  the  U.S.  could,  under  no  circum-
stance, associate  itself  with  the  conference  declaration  and  recommends  authori-
zation to  amend  the  proposed  U.S.  declaration  of  position.  SECTO  669,  19  July
1954.

Document  91 {page  568)

Dulles  has  no  objection  on  Smith's  proposal  to  amend  the  declaration,  but  is
concerned  about  including  part  of  paragraph  9  of  the  Conference  declaration,
which  seems  to  imply  a  "multilateral  engagement  with  the  Communists"  which
is  inconsistent  with  the  U.S.  basic  approach.  TOSEC  576  NIACT,  19  July  1954.


360 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I
Document  92 (page  569)

The  Vietnamese  delegation  proposes:  (1)  a  cease-fire  on  present  positions;  (2)
regroupment  into  two  small  zones;  (3)  disarmament  of  irregular  troops;  (4)
disarmament  and  withdrawal  of  foreign  troops;  and  (5)  control  by  the  United
Nations.  It  is  noted  that  there  is  no  provision  for  demarcation  line  or  partition.
SECTO  673,  19  July  1954.

Document  93 (page  570)

The  United  States,  not  prepared  to  sign  the  Accords,  makes  a  unilateral  declara-
tion of  its  position  on  the  Conference  conclusions.  The  United  States  declares
that  it  will  refrain  from  the  threat  or  use  of  force  to  disturb  the  agreements  and
would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  with  grave  concern  and  as  a  threat
to  international  peace  and  security.  Unilateral  Declaration  of  the  United  States,
21  July  1954.

Document  94 {page  571)

Final  Declaration  of  the  Geneva  Conference,  21  July  1954.

Document  95 {page  573)

Lansdale  Team's  Report  on  covert  Saigon  Mission  in  1954  and  1955.


Documents  361


[Document  1]

27  February  1950

REPORT  BY  THE  NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL

on

THE  POSITION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES
WITH  RESPECT  TO  INDOCHINA

THE  PROBLEM

1.  To  undertake  a  determination  of  all  practicable  United  States  measures  to
protect  its  security  in  Indochina  and  to  prevent  the  expansion  of  communist
aggression  in  that  area.

ANALYSIS

2.  It  is  recognized  that  the  threat  of  communist  aggression  against  Indochina
is  only  one  phase  of  anticipated  communist  plans  to  seize  all  of  Southeast  Asia.
It  is  understood  that  Burma  is  weak  internally  and  could  be  invaded  without
strong  opposition  or  even  that  the  Government  of  Burma  could  be  subverted.
However,  Indochina  is  the  area  most  immediately  threatened.  It  is  also  the
only  area  adjacent  to  communist  China  which  contains  a  large  European  army,
which  along  with  native  troops  is  now  in  armed  conflict  with  the  forces  of
communist  aggression.  A  decision  to  contain  communist  expansion  at  the
border  of  Indochina  must  be  considered  as  a  part  of  a  wider  study  to  prevent
communist  aggression  into  other  parts  of  Southeast  Asia.

3.  A  large  segment  of  the  Indochinese  nationalist  movement  was  seized  in
1945  by  Ho  Chi  Minh,  a  Vietnamese  who  under  various  aliases  has  served  as
a  communist  agent  for  thirty  years.  He  has  attracted  non-communist  as  well  as
communist  elements  to  his  support.  In  1946,  he  attempted,  but  failed  to  secure
French  agreement  to  his  recognition  as  the  head  of  a  government  of  Vietnam.
Since  then  he  has  directed  a  guerrilla  army  in  raids  against  French  installations
and  lines  of  communication.  French  forces  which  have  been  attempting  to
restore  law  and  order  found  themselves  pitted  against  a  determined  adversary
who  manufactures  effective  arms  locally,  who  received  supplies  of  arms  from
outside  sources,  who  maintained  no  capital  or  permanent  headquarters  and  who
was,  and  is  able,  to  disrupt  and  harass  almost  any  area  within  Vietnam
(Tonkin,  Annam  and  Cochinchina)  at  will.

4.  The  United  States  has,  since  the  Japanese  surrender,  pointed  out  to  the
French  Government  that  the  legitimate  nationalist  aspirations  of  the  people  of
Indochina  must  be  satisfied,  and  that  a  return  to  the  prewar  colonial  rule  is  not
possible.  The  Department  of  State  has  pointed  out  to  the  French  Government
that  it  was  and  is  necessary  to  establish  and  support  governments  in  Indochina
particularly  in  Vietnam,  under  leaders  who  are  capable  of  attracting  to  their
causes  the  non-communist  nationalist  followers  who  had  drifted  to  the  Ho  Chi
Minh  communist  movement  in  the  absence  of  any  non-communist  nationalist

: movement  around  which  to  plan  their  aspirations.

j  5.  In  an  effort  to  establish  stability  by  political  means,  where  military
1  measures  had  been  unsuccessful,  i.e.,  by  attracting  non-communist  nationalists,
!,  now  followers  of  Ho  Chi  Minh,  to  the  support  of  anti-communist  nationalist


362 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

leaders,  the  French  Government  entered  into  agreements  with  the  governments
of  the  Kingdoms  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  to  elevate  their  status  from  protec-
torates to  that  of  independent  states  within  the  French  Union.  The  State  of
Vietnam  was  formed,  with  similar  status,  out  of  the  former  French  protectorates
of  Tonkin,  Annam  and  the  former  French  Colony  of  Cochinchina.  Each  state
received  an  increased  degree  of  autonomy  and  sovereignty.  Further  steps  to-
wards independence  were  indicated  by  the  French.  The  agreements  were  ratified
by  the  French  Government  on  2  February  1950.

6.  The  Governments  of  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  vyer^  officially  recog-
nized by  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  on  February  7^  1950^  Other
Western  powers  have,  or  are  committed  to  do  likewise.  The  United  States  has
consistently  brought  to  the  attention  of  non-communist  Asian  countries  the
danger  of  communist  aggression  which  threatens  them  if  communist  expansion
in  Indochina  is  unchecked.  As  this  danger  becomes  more  evident  it  is  expected
to  overcome  the  reluctance  that  they  have  had  to  recognize  and  support  the
three  new  states.  We  are  therefore  continuing  to  press  those  countries  to  recog-
nize the  new  states.  On  January  18,  1950,  the  Chinese  Communist  Government
announced  its  recognition  of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  movement  as  the  legal  Govern-
ment of  Vietnam,  while  on  January  30,  1950,  the  Soviet  Government,  while
maintaining  diplomatic  relations  with  France,  similarly  announced  its  rec-
ognition.

7.  The  newly  formed  States  of  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  do  not  as  yet
have  sufficient  political  stability  nor  military  power  to  prevent  the  infiltration
into  their  areas  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  forces.  The  French  Armed  Forces,  while
apparently  effectively  utilized  at  the  present  time,  can  do  little  more  than  to
maintain  the  status  quo.  Their  strength  of  some  140,000  does,  however,  repre-
sent an  army  in  being  and  the  only  military  bulwark  in  that  area  against  the
further  expansion  of  communist  aggression  from  either  internal  or  external
forces.

8.  The  presence  of  Chinese  Communist  troops  along  the  border  of  Indochina
makes  it  possible  for  arms,  material  and  troops  to  move  freely  from  Communist
China  to  the  northern  Tonkin  area  now  controlled  by  Ho  Chi  Minh.  There  is
already  evidence  of  movement  of  arms.

9.  In  the  present  state  of  affairs,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  combined  native
Indochinese  and  French  troops  can  successfully  contain  Ho's  forces  should  they
be  strengthened  by  either  Chinese  Communist  troops  crossing  the  border,  or
Communist-supplied  arms  and  material  in  quantity  from  outside  Indochina
strengthening  Ho's  forces.

CONCLUSIONS

10.  It  is  important  to  United  States  security  interests  that  all  practicable
measures  be  taken  to  prevent  further  communist  expansion  in  Southeast  Asia.
Indochina  is  a  key  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  is  under  immediate  threat.

11.  The  neighboring  countries  of  Thailand  and  Burma  could  be  expected  to
fall  under  Communist  domination  if  Indochina  were  controlled  by  a  Communist-
dominated  government.  The  balance  of  Southeast  Asia  would  then  be  in  grave
hazard.

12.  Accordingly,  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense  should  prepare  as  a
matter  of  priority  a  program  of  all  practicable  measures  designed  to  protect
United  States  security  interests  in  Indochina.


Documents  363


[Document  2]

March  7,  1950

Dear  General  Burns:

Embodied  below  is  a  brief  statement  of  Department  of  State  policy  in  Indo-
china and  Southeast  Asia.  I  believe  that  an  examination  of  this  statement  will
facilitate  your  consideration  of  NSC  64.

The  Department  of  State  continues  to  hold  that  Southeast  Asia  is  in  grave
danger  of  Communist  domination  as  a  consequence  of  aggression  from  Com-
munist China  and  of  internal  subversive  activities.  The  Department  of  State
maintains  that  Indochina,  subject  as  it  is  to  the  most  immediate  danger,  is  the
most  strategically  important  area  of  Southeast  Asia.

The  Department  of  State  believes  that  within  the  limitations  imposed  by
existing  commitments  and  strategic  priorities,  the  resources  of  the  United  States
should  be  deployed  to  reserve  Indochina  and  Southeast  Asia  from  further  Com-
munist encroachment.  The  Department  of  State  has  accordingly  already  en-
gaged all  its  political  resources  to  the  end  that  this  object  be  secured.  The
Department  is  now  engaged  in  the  process  of  urgently  examining  what  addi-
tional economic  resources  can  effectively  be  engaged  in  the  same  operation.

It  is  now,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Department,  a  matter  of  the  greatest  urgency
that  the  Department  of  Defense  assess  the  strategic  aspects  of  the  situation  and
consider,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  how  the  United  States  can  best  con-
tribute to  the  prevention  of  further  Communist  encroachment  in  that  area.

The  military  assessment  requested  above  is  necessary  to  a  final  determination
by  this  Government  of  the  manner  in  which  United  States  policy  in  this  area
shall  be  executed.

Sincerely  yours,

/s/  Dean  Rusk

Deputy  Under  Secretary

Major  General  James  H.  Burns,
Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,
Department  of  Defense.


[Document  31

10  April  1950

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
SUBJECT:  Strategic  Assessment  of  Southeast  Asia

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  studied  your  memorandum,  dated  10  March
1950,  with  its  enclosures,  in  which  you  requested  their  views  regarding:

a.  The  strategic  importance,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  of  South-
east Asia;

b.  NSC  64,  a  report  by  the  Department  of  State  on  the  position  of  the
United  States  with  respect  to  Indochina,  which  is  now  before  the  National
Security  Council  for  consideration;

c.  The  measures  that,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  might  be  taken  to
prevent  Communist  expansion  into  Southeast  Asia;

d.  The  order  of  magnitude  and  means  of  implementation  of  such  meas-
ures; and


364 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  ' Papers/Vol.  I

e.  A  French  aide-memoire  on  the  subject  of  aid  for  Indochina,  dated
16  February  1950.

1.  In  light  of  U.S.  strategic  concepts,  the  integrity  of  the  offshore  island
chain  from  Japan  to  Indochina  is  of  critical  strategic  importance  to  the  United
States.

2.  The  mainland  states  of  Southeast  Asia  also  are  at  present  of  critical
strategic  importance  to  the  United  States  because:

a.  They  are  the  major  sources  of  certain  strategic  materials  required  for
the  completion  of  United  States  stock  pile  projects;
h.  The  area  is  a  crossroad  of  communications;

c.  Southeast  Asia  is  a  vital  segment  in  the  line  of  containment  of  com-
munism stretching  from  Japan  southward  and  around  to  the  Indian  Pen-
insula. The  security  of  the  three

[Section  missing]

forces  are  allied  with  them.  In  addition,  the  generally  inadequate  indigenous
forces  of  the  independent  states  are  actively  engaged  in  attempting  to  maintain
internal  security  in  the  face  of  Communist  aggression  tactics.

5.  It  appears  obvious  from  intelligence  estimates  that  the  situation  in  South-
east Asia  has  deteriorated  and,  without  United  States  assistance,  this  deterio-
ration will  be  accelerated.  In  general,  the  basic  conditions  of  political  and
economic  stability  in  this  area,  as  well  as  the  military  and  internal  security  con-
ditions, are  unsatisfactory.  These  factors  are  closely  interrelated  and  it  is  prob-
able that,  from  the  long-term  point  of  view,  political  and  economic  stability  is
the  controlling  factor.  On  the  other  hand,  the  military  situation  in  some  areas,
particularly  Indochina,  is  of  pressing  urgency.

6.  With  respect  to  the  measures  which,  from  the  United  States  military  point
of  view,  might  be  taken  to  prevent  Communist  expansion  in  Southeast  Asia,  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  early  implementation  of  military  aid  programs
for  Indochina,  Indonesia,  Thailand,  the  Philippines,  and  Burma.  Malaya  might
also  be  included  provided  the  British  by  their  actions  in  the  areas  in  Asia  where
they  have  primary  interest  evince  a  determined  effort  to  resist  the  expansion  of
communism  and  present  sufficient  military  justification  for  aid.  The  effective-
ness of  these  military  aid  programs  would  be  greatly  increased  by  appropriate
public  statements  of  United  States  policy  in  Southeast  Asia.

7.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that  the  military  aid  from  funds
already  allocated  by  the  President  for  the  states  of  Southeast  Asia  be  delivered
at  the  earliest  practicable  date.  They  further  recommend  that  the  presently  un-
allocated portion  of  the  President's  emergency  fund  under  Section  303  of
Public  Law  329  (81st  Congress,  1st  Session),  be  planned  and  programmed  as
a  matter  of  urgency.

8.  Precise  determination  of  the  amounts  required  for  military  aid,  special
covert  operations,  and  concomitant  economic  and  psychological  programs  in
Southeast  Asia  cannot  be  made  at  this  time  since  the  financial  requirements
will,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  on  the  success  of  aid  and  other  programs  now  in
the  process  of  implementation.  In  the  light  of  the  world  situation,  however,  it
would  appear  that  military  aid  programs  and  other  measures  will  be  necessary
in  Southeast  Asia  at  least  during  the  next  fiscal  year  and  in  at  least  the  same
general  over-all  order  of  magnitude.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  therefore,  strongly
recommend  that  appropriations  for  over-all  use  in  the  general  area  of  Asia  be
sought  for  the  next  fiscal  year  in  terms  similar  to  those  under  Section  303  of
Public  Law  329  (81st  Congress,  1st  Session).  It  is  believed  that  approximately
$100,000,000  will  be  required  for  the  military  portion  of  this  program.


Documents  365


9.  In  view  of  the  history  of  military  aid  in  China,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
urge  that  these  aid  programs  be  subject,  in  any  event,  to  the  following  con-
ditions:

a.  That  United  States  military  aid  not  be  granted  unconditionally;  rather,
that  it  be  carefully  controlled  and  that  the  aid  program  be  integrated  with
political  and  economic  programs;  and

b.  That  requests  for  military  equipment  be  screened  first  by  an  officer
designated  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  on  duty  in  the  recipient
state.  These  requests  should  be  subject  to  his  determination  as  to  the
feasibility  and  satisfactory  coordination  of  specific  military  operations.  It
should  be  understood  that  military  aid  will  only  be  considered  in  connection
with  such  coordinated  operational  plans  as  are  approved  by  the  representa-
tive of  the  Department  of  Defense  on  duty  in  the  recipient  country.  Further,
in  conformity  with  current  procedures,  the  final  approval  of  all  programs
for  military  materiel  will  be  subject  to  the  occurrence  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff.

10.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that  a  Southeast  Asia  Aid  Commit-
tee be  appointed  with  State,  Defense  and  ECA  representation  which  will  be
responsible  for  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  program  for  the
general  area  of  Southeast  Asia.  Requests  for  aid  should  be  screened  by  the  field
representatives  of  the  committee  in  consultation  with  the  local  authorities  in  the
countries  concerned.

11.  Present  arrangements  for  military  aid  to  Indonesia  through  the  military
attaches  and  to  the  Philippines  through  the  Joint  United  States  Military  Aid
Group  appear  to  be  satisfactory  and  should  be  continued.

12.  A  small  military  aid  group  should  be  established  in  Thailand  to  operate
in  conformity  with  the  requirements  in  paragraph  9  above.  Arrangements  for
military  aid  should  be  made  directly  with  the  Thai  Government,

13.  In  view  of  the  very  unsettled  conditions  in  Burma,  the  program  for
military  aid  to  that  country  should,  for  the  time  being  at  least,  be  modest.  The
arrangements  should  be  made  after  consultation  with  the  British,  and  could  well
be  handled  by  the  United  States  Armed  Forces  attaches  to  that  country.  Ar-
rangements for  military  aid  to  Malaya,  if  and  when  authorized,  should  be
handled  similarly  except  that  request  should,  in  the  first  instance,  originate  with
British  authorities.

14.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  StalT  recognize  the  political  implications  involved  in
military  aid  to  Indochina.  It  must  be  appreciated,  however,  that  French  armed
forces  of  approximately  140,000  men  are  in  the  field  and  that  if  these  were  to
be  withdrawn  this  year  because  of  political  considerations,  the  Bao  Dai  regime
probably  could  not  survive  even  with  United  States  aid.  If  the  United  States
were  now  to  insist  upon  independence  for  Vietnam  and  a  phased  French  with-
drawal from  that  country,  this  might  improve  the  political  situation.  The  French
could  be  expected  to  interpose  objections  to,  and  certainly  delays  in,  such  a
program.  Conditions  in  Indochina,  however,  are  unstable  and  the  situation  is
apparently  deteriorating  rapidly  so  that  the  urgent  need  for  at  least  an  initial
increment  of  military  and  economic  aid  is  psychologically  overriding.  The  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff,  therefore,  recommend  the  provision  of  military  aid  to  Indochina
at  the  earliest  practicable  date  under  a  program  to  implement  the  President's
action  approving  the  allocation  of  15  million  dollars  for  Indochina  and  that
corresponding  increments  of  political  and  economic  aid  be  programmed  on  an


366 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

interim  basis  without  prejudice  to  the  pattern  of  the  policy  for  additional  mili-
tary, political  and  economic  aid  that  may  be  developed  later.

15.  In  view  of  the  considerations  set  forth  in  paragraph  14  above,  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  the  immediate  establishment  of  a  small  United  States
military  aid  group  in  Indochina,  to  operate  in  conformity  with  the  requirements
in  paragraph  9  above.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  would  expect  the  senior  member
of  this  group  to  sit  in  consultation  with  military  representatives  of  France  and
Vietnam  and  possibly  of  Laos  and  Cambodia.  In  addition  to  screening  requests
for  materiel,  he  would  be  expected  to  insure  full  coordination  of  military  plans
and  efforts  between  the  French  and  Vietnamese  forces  and  to  supervise  the
allocation  of  material.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  in  the  possibility  of
success  of  a  prompt  coordinated  United  States  program  of  military,  political,
and  economic  aid  to  Southeast  Asia  and  feel  that  such  a  success  might  well  lead
to  the  gaining  of  the  initiative  in  the  struggle  in  that  general  area.

16.  China  is  the  vital  strategic  area  in  Asia.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are
firmly  of  the  opinion  that  attainment  of  United  States  objectives  in  Asia  can
only  be  achieved  by  ultimate  success  in  China.  Resolution  of  the  situation  facing
Southeast  Asia  would  therefore,  be  facilitated  if  prompt  and  continuing  meas-
ures were  undertaken  to  reduce  the  pressure  from  Communist  China.  In  this
connection,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  noted  the  evidences  of  renewed
vitality  and  apparent  increased  effectiveness  of  the  Chinese  Nationalist  forces.

17.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  suggest  the  following  measures  with  military
implications:

a.  An  increased  number  of  courtesy  or  "show  the  flag"  visits  to  South-
east Asian  states;

b.  Recognition  of  the  "port  closure"  of  Communist  China  seaports  by
the  Nationalists  as  a  de  facto  blockade  so  long  as  it  is  effective.  Such  action
should  remove  some  of  the  pressure,  direct  and  indirect,  upon  Southeast
Asia;  should  be  of  assistance  to  the  anti-Communist  forces  engaged  in  inter-
ference with  the  lines  of  communication  to  China;  and  should  aggravate
the  economic  problems  and  general  unrest  in  Communist  China;

c.  A  program  of  special  covert  operations  designed  to  interfere  with
Communist  activities  in  Southeast  Asia;  and

d.  Long-term  measures  to  provide  for  Japan  and  the  other  offshore
islands  a  secure  source  of  food  and  other  strategic  materials  from  non-
Communist  held  areas  in  the  Far  East.

18.  Comments  on  the  French  aide-memoire  of  16  February  1950,  are  con-
tained in  the  substance  of  this  memorandum.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  do  not
concur  in  the  French  suggestion  for  conversations  between  the  "French  and
American  General  Staffs"  on  the  subject  of  Indochina  since  the  desired  ends  will
best  be  served  through  conferences  in  Indochina  among  the  United  States  mili-
tary aid  group  and  military  representatives  of  France,  Vietnam,  Laos,  and
Cambodia.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  not  unmindful  of  the  need  for  collabora-
tion and  consultation  with  the  British  and  French  Governments  on  Southeast
Asia  matters  and  recommend,  therefore,  that  military  representatives  participate
in  the  forthcoming  tripartite  discussions  on  Southeast  Asia  to  be  held  at  the
forthcoming  meeting  of  the  Foreign  Ministers.

FOR  THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF:

/s/  OMAR  N.  BRADLEY
Chairman

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


Documents  367


[Document  4]

The  Secretary  of  State
Mr.  Griffin

Conference  on  Indo-China — May  2,  1950.


May  4,  1950


1.  The  Indo-China  situation  cannot  be  maintained  in  its  present  status  quo.

Time  is  of  the  essence  in  the  Vietnam  situation.  Bao  Dai  and  his  Government
cannot  maintain  a  status  quo.  Bao  Dai  must  either  quickly  win  additional  sup-
port and  begin  showing  gains  in  prestige  or  there  will  be  a  falling  away  of  his
present  following.  There  is  general  cynicism  in  Vietnam  about  the  French  will-
ingness to  permit  reasonable  self-government,  and  that  cynicism  spreads  to  the
Bao  Dai  Government.  Bao  Dai  at  present  represents  a  minority  group,  but  he
still  is  potentially  capable  of  achieving  substantial  majority  support  if  he  can
prove  that  he  is  taking  over  authority  and  responsibility  and  is  exercising  them.
He  must  be  given  face.  Unless  the  present  trend  is  materially  and  almost  im-
mediately corrected,  Bao  Dai's  opportunity  will  be  irretrievably  lost  and  his
strength  will  run  to  water.  To  salvage  the  situation  a  fundamental  agreement
must  be  brought  about  with  the  French,  followed  quickly  and  with  certainty
with  action  designed  to  make  Bao  Dai  a  success.  If  Bao  Dai  once  starts  slipping,
it  will  be  impossible  to  restore  him.

2.  Problem  of  a  foundation  for  agreement.

In  order  to  have  a  firm  basis  of  agreement  with  the  French  regarding  U.S.
relations  with  the  State  of  Vietnam  and  the  Kingdoms  of  Cambodia  and  Laos,
it  is  almost  a  necessity  to  secure  from  the  French  a  rational  evaluation  of  what
they  expect  of  Indo-China,  a  forecast  of  the  situation  they  reasonably  believe
can  be  brought  about  that  would  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  the  people  of  Vietnam
within  the  French  Union.

The  French  themselves  were  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  a  conclusive  mili-
tary solution  of  their  problem  was  unattainable  and  they  resorted,  therefore,  to
the  effort  to  bring  about  a  political  solution.  In  that  effort  the  United  States  be-
came involved  in  the  recognition  of  the  Government  of  Vietnam.

The  French  also  recognize  the  fact  that  they  cannot  afford  a  continued  mili-
tary cost  of  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars  a  year  in  a  campaign  that  has  failed
and  that  has  no  prospect  of  bringing  about  a  military  solution.  As  ERP  aid  is
subsequently  reduced,  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  French  to  carry  this  ex-
pense. Even  today,  with  the  help  of  ERP,  domestic  plans  of  the  French  Govern-
ment are  deeply  affected  by  this  drain,  which  indirectly  but  powerfully  affects
the  Government's  capacity  to  deal  with  labor,  social  and  educational  exigencies
at  home.

The  French  are  also  aware,  realistically,  of  the  military  weakness  on  the  con-
tinent due  to  the  maintenance  of  a  military  establishment  in  Indo-China  that
absorbs  half  of  the  regular  army  and  the  best  cadres  for  troop  training,  whose
losses  are  continuous,  and  whose  depletion  of  French  officer  strength  equals  the
output  of  new  officers  from  the  French  military  academies.  This,  incidentally
though  importantly,  affects  the  United  States  position  in  military  assistance  to
the  Continent.

Despite  French  sentimental  aspirations  for  absorbing  colonial  areas  within  the
body  and  spirit  of  "metropolitan  France,"  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  French


368 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

are  realistic  enough,  when  not  emotionally  disturbed,  to  appreciate  the  fact  that
the  peoples  of  Vietnam  can  no  longer  be  "integrated"  in  that  respect.

Therefore  it  appears  that  the  time  has  come  that  an  entirely  rational  French
consideration  of  this  problem  must  take  place,  that  can  be  the  foundation  of
policy  considerations.  It  is  strictly  necessary  that  this  consideration  be  made
now,  so  that  U.S.  policy  may  reasonably  and  justifiably  work  in  cooperation  with
the  French  in  attempting  to  make  firm  and  workable  a  self-governed  Vietnam
State  conditioned  to  find  it  desirable  and  advantageous  to  be  a  part  of  the
French  Union.

In  short,  we  must  find  out  what  the  French  expect  of  Vietnam.

3. Decisions  and  actions  necessary  to  create  public  respect  for  the  Bao  Dai
government.

a.  A  clear  definition  of  the  French  Union,  its  meaning,  its  responsibilities
and  guarantees  including  the  guarantee  of  a  method  for  "evolutionary"
treatment  of  countries  accepted  as  partners  within  the  French  Union.
These  conditions  have  never  been  defined,  and  no  one  knows  what  the
French  Union  means.

b.  Implementation  of  the  provisions  of  the  March  9  agreement.  This  should
not  be  a  mean  or  petty  literal  and  parsimonious  interpretation,  but  broad
and  generous.  Not  only  have  the  French  been  laggard  in  carrying  out  the
terms  of  the  agreement  but  they  have  been  jealous  and  circumscribed  in
interpretation  of  every  provision.  (In  the  matter  of  technical  assistance  to
the  Viets,  the  French  Secretariat  was  adament  in  its  opposition  to  any  form
of  American  or  other  foreign  aid,  stating  that  such  aid  was  a  violation  of
the  agreement.)

c.  The  attitude  of  the  French  towards  the  Viet  Government  must  be  one  of
acceptance  of  a  fact  and  a  determination  to  make  a  success  of  that  Gov-
ernment. This  may  be  contrary  to  human  nature,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  that
Government  can  succeed  without  the  most  generous,  if  not  passionate,
French  assistance.  This  assistance  must  be  on  a  subordinate  level,  thorough
and  complete.  It  is  indispensable.  Until  now  the  French  attitude  has  been
to  point  with  scorn  at  the  failures  and  aberrations  of  the  untrained  Viet
Government  leaders  and  to  take  the  "I  told  you  so"  attitude.

d.  Acceptance  of  the  principle  of  bilateral  relations  between  other  govern-
ments and  the  Bao  Dai  regime.  This  will  be  hard  for  the  French  to  take.
They  desire  to  maintain  the  form  or  myth  of  a  quadripartite  arrangement.
While  a  form  of  at  least  tripartite  arrangement  is  necessary  among  the
Vietnam,  Cambodian  and  Laotian  Governments — for  physical  and  eco-
nomic reasons — it  is  imperative  for  the  prestige  of  the  Bao  Dai  Govern-
ment for  it  to  be  able  to  conduct  some  dealings  with  other  governments.
This  should  apply  at  least  to  a  substantial  part  of  the  proposed  economic
aid  program.  When  the  U.S.  and  Britain  recognized  Bao  Dai,  that  recogni-
tion was  taken  as  a  bilateral  action.  In  itself  it  established  a  precedent.
This  is  a  vital  issue,  and  one  of  the  most  difficult  to  work  out.

e.  Turning  over  to  Bao  Dai  of  the  No.  1  residence  in  Saigon,  now  occupied
by  the  French  High  Commissioner.  This  is  symbolic  as  well  as  practical.
This  is  undoubtedly  the  reason  why  it  is  impossible  for  Bao  Dai  to  take
residence  in  the  capital  city,  where  his  presence  would  be  a  sign  of  the
reality  of  his  Government.  Even  Pignon  is  opposed  to  this,  on  the  grounds
that  it  would  affect  French  morale.  Nevertheless  this  cannot  be  overlooked.


Documents  369


f.  Statement  of  the  French  that  their  purpose  in  training  and  preparing  for
field  operations  of  a  Bao  Dai  army  is  part  of  their  plan  for  the  complete
protection  of  the  country  by  Viet  forces,  which  thereafter  would  enable
them  to  withdraw.

g.  There  are  many  other  actions,  most  of  them  minor  in  importance  in  west-
ern eyes  but  highly  significant  to  Orientals,  that  can  be  taken  to  set  up  the
prestige  and  position  of  Bao  Dai.  Some  of  these  proposals  have  been  con-
tained in  Gallion's  cables.


4. Current  Military  Problems.

A  French  army  of  mixed  but  "regular"  troops  of  approximately  160,000
men  is  maintained  in  Indo-China,  chiefly  in  the  Province  of  Tonkin,  to  prevent
the  overrunning  of  the  Province  and  the  Red  River  Valley  by  the  Viet  Minh
and  to  stand  guard  against  Chinese  invasion  of  infiltration.

The  presence  of  this  army  is  indispensable  even  though  many  Bao  Dai  sup-
porters would  prefer  to  have  it  removed  forthwith.  These  people  believe  they
could  settle  their  differences  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  by  negotiation  if  the  French
were  withdrawn.  The  latter  point  of  view  is  not  realistic,  and  there  is  good
reason  to  believe  that  withdrawal  of  French  forces  would  quickly  lend  to  Com-
munist takeover.

French-trained  Viet  troops  are  effective  and  loyal,  and  those  embodied  in
the  French  army  are  said  to  be  the  equal  of  any  colonial  troops.  The  French
are  vigorously  training  approximately  80,000  Viet  troops  for  the  Bao  Dai  army.
Such  units,  once  tried  and  found  satisfactory,  can  in  time  begin  to  take  over
French  garrisoned  areas  and  make  possible  the  return  to  the  Continent  of
regular  French  contingents.

An  American  arms  program  can  be  used  to  stimulate  this  training  and  re-
placement program.

There  is  the  danger  that  French  public  sentiment — and  some  practical  mili-
tary pressure — might  cause  the  French  to  threaten  to  withdraw  entirely  from
Indo-China  and  "cut  their  losses,"  if  pressure  on  the  French  for  "evolutionary"
treatment  of  the  Viet  political  problem  became  too  severe.  This  consideration
cannot  be  overlooked  when  working  for  concessions.  There  is  already  strong
feeling  in  many  French  quarters  that  Indo-China  should  be  written  off  before
more  blood  and  treasure  are  lost.

As  the  French  are  required  by  the  situation  and  by  our  insistence  to  turn
over  more  authority  to  the  Viet  Government,  it  must  be  recognized  that  the
morale  of  the  French  army  might  be  affected.  No  measure  could  influence  that
situation  more  favorably  than  if  the  United  States  were  willing  to  pledge  sea
and  air  support  for  the  Viet-French  forces  in  the  event  of  the  threat  of  invasion
of  Vietnam  from  Communist  China.

Generals  Carpentier  and  Massandri  are  officers  of  the  highest  calibre.  Car-
pentier's  apparent  acquiescence  to  the  arming  of  several  Bao  Dai  battalions  with
American  small  arms  is  an  indication  that  he  is  willing  to  yield  on  some  subjects
on  which  he  had  appeared  to  be  adamant.  He  speaks  frequently  of  his  friendship
and  great  respect  for  American  Generals  Gruenther  and  Mark  Clark.  In  matters
affecting  important  military  decisions  and  American  policy  in  the  Indo-China
field  it  might  be  most  useful  to  send  General  Gruenther  there,  after  a  complete
policy  briefing,  to  discuss  and  review  the  entire  military  subject  with  Carpentier.


370 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  5]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
FOR  THE  PRESS  May  11,  1950

No.  485

At  his  press  conference  today,  Acting  Secretary  Webb  made  the  following
statement :


AID  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA  '

A  special  survey  mission,  headed  by  R.  Allen  Griffin,  has  just  returned  from
Southeast  Asia  and  reported  on  economic  and  technical  assistance  needed  in
that  area.  Its  over-all  recommendations  for  the  area  are  modest  and  total  in  the
neighborhood  of  $60  million.  The  Department  is  working  on  plans  to  implement
that  program  at  once.

Secretary  Acheson  on  Monday  in  Paris  cited  the  urgency  of  the  situation  ap-
plying in  the  associated  states  of  Viet-Nam,  Laos  and  Cambodia.  The  Depart-
ment is  working  jointly  with  ECA  to  implement  the  economic  and  technical
assistance  recommendations  for  Indochina  as  well  as  the  other  states  of  South-
east Asia  and  anticipates  that  this  program  will  get  underway  in  the  immediate
future.

Military  assistance  for  Southeast  Asia  is  being  worked  out  by  the  Department
of  Defense  in  cooperation  with  the  Department  of  State,  and  the  details  will  not
be  made  public  for  security  reasons.

Military  assistance  needs  will  be  met  from  the  President's  emergency  fund
of  $75  million  provided  under  MDAP  for  the  general  area  of  China.

Economic  assistance  needs  will  be  met  from  the  ECA  China  Aid  funds,  part
of  which  both  Houses  of  Congress  have  indicated  will  be  made  available  for  the
general  area  of  China.  Final  legislative  action  is  still  pending  on  this  authoriza-
tion but  is  expected  to  be  completed  within  the  next  week.


[Document  6]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
FOR  THE  PRESS  May  25,  1950

No.  545


U.S.  FORMALLY  ANNOUNCES  INTENT  TO  ESTABLISH
AN  ECONOMIC  AID  MISSION  TO  THE  THREE
ASSOCIATED  STATES  OF  INDOCHINA

On  Wednesday,  May  24,  Charge  d' Affaires  Edmund  Gullion  delivered  the
following  letter  to  the  Chiefs  of  State  of  Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia  or  their
representatives  at  Saigon.  Simultaneously,  Ambassador  Bruce  delivered  an
identical  letter  to  the  President  of  the  French  Union  in  Paris.

The  text  of  the  letter  follows:

"I  have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  Government  of  the  United  States
has  decided  to  initiate  a  program  of  economic  aid  to  the  States  of  Cambodia,


Documents  371

Laos,  and  Vietnam.  My  Government  has  reached  this  decision  in  order  to  assist
Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Vietnam  to  restore  stability  and  pursue  their  peaceful  and
democratic  development.

"With  these  purposes  in  mind,  the  United  States  Government  is  establishing,
with  headquarters  in  Saigon  and  associated  with  United  States  Legation,  a
special  economic  mission  to  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Vietnam.  This  mission  will
have  the  responsibiUty  of  working  with  the  Governments  of  Cambodia,  Laos,
and  Vietnam  and  with  the  French  High  Commissioner  in  developing  and  carry-
ing out  a  coordinated  program  of  economic  aid  designed  to  assist  the  three
countries  in  restoring  their  normal  economic  life.  The  members  of  the  American
economic  mission  will  at  all  times  be  subject  to  the  authority  of  the  Government
of  the  United  States  and  will  not  become  a  part  of  the  administrations  of  the
Associated  States.

"The  Government  of  the  United  States  recognizes  that  this  American  as-
sistance will  be  complementary  to  the  effort  made  by  the  three  Associated  States
and  France,  without  any  intention  of  substitution.  American  aid  is  designed  to
reinforce  the  joint  effort  of  France  and  the  governments  and  peoples  of  Cam-
bodia, Laos,  and  Vietnam,  on  whom  rests  the  primary  responsibiHty  for  the
restoration  of  security  and  stability.

"United  States  economic  aid  will  be  granted  in  accordance  with  separate
bilateral  agreements  between  each  of  the  Associated  States  and  the  United
States  of  America.  The  approval  of  these  agreements  will  be  subject  to  legal
conventions  existing  between  the  Associated  States  and  France.  Initial  economic
aid  operations,  however,  may  begin  prior  to  the  conclusion  of  these  agreements.

"The  United  States  Government  is  of  the  opinion  that  it  would  be  desirable
for  the  three  governments  and  the  French  High  Commissioner  to  reach  agree-
ment among  themselves  for  the  coordination  of  those  matters  relating  to  the  aid
program  that  are  of  common  interest.  The  American  economic  mission  will
maintain  contact  with  the  three  Associated  States,  with  the  French  High  Com-
missioner in  Indochina  and,  if  desired,  with  any  body  which  may  be  set  up  by
the  Associated  States  and  France  in  connection  with  the  aid  program.

"Mr.  Robert  Blum  has  been  appointed  Chief  of  the  United  States  special
economic  mission  to  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Vietnam.

"Identical  letters  are  being  addressed  today  to  the  governments  of  Cambodia,
Laos,  Vietnam  and  the  President  of  the  French  Union."

The  letter  of  intent  refers  only  to  economic  aid  which  will  be  based  on  the
recommendations  of  the  Griffin  mission  which  recently  made  a  survey  trip  to
Southeast  Asia  and  carried  on  consultations  with  the  leaders  and  technicians  of
Indochina.

Secretary  of  State  Dean  Acheson  announced  the  policy  of  United  States  aid  to
Indochina  at  Paris  on  May  8  when  he  released  this  statement  following  an
exchange  of  views  with  Foreign  Minister  Schuman  of  France:

"The  Foreign  Minister  and  I  have  just  had  an  exchange  of  views  on  the
situation  in  Indochina  and  are  in  general  agreement  both  as  to  the  urgency  of
the  situation  in  that  area  and  as  to  the  necessity  for  remedial  action.  We  have
noted  the  fact  that  the  problem  of  meeting  the  threat  to  the  security  of  Vietnam,
Cambodia  and  Laos  which  now  enjoy  independence  within  the  French  Union  is
primarily  the  responsibility  of  France  and  the  governments  and  peoples  of  Indo-
china. The  United  States  recognizes  that  the  solution  of  the  Indochina  problem
^  depends  both  upon  the  restoration  of  security  and  upon  the  development  of
,  genuine  nationalism  and  that  United  States  assistance  can  and  should  contribute
to  these  major  objectives.


372 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"The  United  States  Government  convinced  that  neither  national  independence
nor  democratic  evolution  exist  in  any  area  dominated  by  Soviet  imperialism,
considers  the  situation  to  be  such  as  to  warrant  its  according  economic  aid  and
military  equipment  to  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina  and  to  France  in  order
to  assist  them  in  restoring  stability  and  permitting  these  states  to  pursue  their
peaceful  and  democratic  development."


[Document  7]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
FOR  THE  PRESS  June  3,  1950

No.  583

The  following  is  the  text  of  a  letter  of  June  2  from  Secretary  of  State  Dean
Acheson  to  the  Honorable  Robert  Allen  Griffin,  upon  the  conclusion  of  his
assignment  as  Head  of  the  Special  Economic  Mission  to  Southeast  Asia:

"Dear  Mr.  Griffin:

"I  congratulate  you  upon  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  Special  Economic
Mission  to  Southeast  Asia  which  you  led  and  extend  to  you  and  those  on  your
staff  my  warmest  personal  thanks  for  the  careful  and  thorough  job  you  did.  In
surveying  so  large  an  area  under  conditions  which  called  for  constant  diplo-
matic tact  and  skillful  technical  appraisal  under  the  severest  time  pressure  you
performed  with  outstanding  ability  a  most  difficult  assignment.

"On  the  basis  of  your  recommendations  the  United  States  Government  is
launching  a  program  which  will  offer  rapid  economic  aid  to  those  countries  for
which  you  drew  up  plans.  The  purpose  of  this  assistance,  as  you  well  know,  is
to  mobilize  the  natural  and  human  resources  of  these  countries  for  the  improve-
ment of  the  general  welfare  of  the  people  and  the  strengthening  of  democratic
governments  throughout  Southeast  Asia.

"The  fresh  approach  you  took,  unhampered  by  preconceived  plans,  and  the
creative  ability  which  you  displayed  in  working  out  a  program  with  the  ap-
proval of  the  Asian  governments  concerned  have  contributed  much  to  the
auspicious  launching  of  this  important  program.

"Sincerely  yours,
"DEAN  ACHESON

"The  Honorable
"Robert  Allen  Griffin,
"Pebble  Beach,  California."


[Document  8]

IMMEDIATE  RELEASE  June  27,  1950

STATEMENT  BY  THE  PRESIDENT

In  Korea  the  Government  forces,  which  were  armed  to  prevent  border  raids
and  to  preserve  internal  security,  were  attacked  by  invading  forces  from  North


Documents  373


Korea.  The  Security  Council  of  the  United  Nations  called  upon  the  invading
troops  to  cease  hostilities  and  to  withdraw  to  the  38th  parallel.  This  they  have
not  done,  but  on  the  contrary  have  pressed  the  attack.  The  Security  Council
called  upon  all  members  of  the  United  Nations  to  render  every  assistance  to  the
United  Nations  in  the  execution  of  this  resolution.  In  these  circumstances  I
have  ordered  United  States  air  and  sea  forces  to  give  the  Korean  Government
troops  cover  and  support.

The  attack  upon  Korea  makes  it  plain  beyond  all  doubt  that  Communism  has
passed  beyond  the  use  of  subversion  to  conquer  independent  nations  and  will
now  use  armed  invasion  and  war.  It  has  defied  the  orders  of  the  Security  Council
of  the  United  Nations  issued  to  preserve  international  peace  and  security.  In
these  circumstances  the  occupation  of  Formosa  by  Communist  forces  would  be
a  direct  threat  to  the  security  of  the  Pacific  area  and  to  United  States  forces  per-
forming their  lawful  and  necessary  functions  in  that  area.

Accordingly,  I  have  ordered  the  Seventh  Fleet  to  prevent  any  attack  on
Formosa.  As  a  corollary  of  this  action  I  am  calling  upon  the  Chinese  Govern-
ment on  Formosa  to  cease  all  air  and  sea  operations  against  the  mainland.  The
Seventh  Fleet  will  see  that  this  is  done.  The  determination  of  the  future  status
of  Formosa  must  await  the  restoration  of  security  in  the  Pacific,  a  peace  settle-
ment with  Japan,  or  consideration  by  the  United  Nations.

I  have  also  directed  that  United  States  Forces  in  the  Philippines  be  strength-
ened and  that  military  assistance  to  the  Philippine  Government  be  accelerated.

I  have  similarly  directed  acceleration  in  the  furnishing  of  military  assistance  to
the  forces  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  in  Indo  China  and  the  dispatch
of  a  military  mission  to  provide  close  working  relations  with  those  forces.

I  know  that  all  members  of  the  United  Nations  will  consider  carefully  the
consequences  of  this  latest  aggression  in  Korea  in  defiance  of  the  Charter  of  the
United  Nations.  A  return  to  the  rule  of  force  in  international  affairs  would  have
far  reaching  effects.  The  United  States  will  continue  to  uphold  the  rule  of  law.

I  have  instructed  Ambassador  Austin,  as  the  representative  of  the  United
States  to  the  Security  Council,  to  report  these  steps  to  the  Council.


[Document  9]

Indo-China

25  July  1950

1. Existing  Policy

a.  U.S.  Policy  with  respect  to  Indo-China  as  approved  by  the  President  on
24  April  1950  concludes  that:

(1)  Indo-China  is  a  key  area  of  Southeast  Asia  and  is  under  immediate
threat.

(2)  The  neighboring  countries  of  Thailand  and  Burma  could  be  expected
to  fall  under  Communist  domination  if  Indo-China  were  controlled  by  a
Communist-dominated  government.  The  balance  of  Southeast  Asia  would
then  be  in  grave  hazard.

(3)  Accordingly,  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense  should  prepare
as  a  matter  of  priority  a  program  of  all  practicable  measures  designed  to
protect  United  States  security  interests  in  Indo-China.


374 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

b.  On  10  April  1950  the  JCS  concurred  in  the  above  conclusions  and  recom-
mended early  implementation  of  military  aid  programs  for  Indo-China,  In-
donesia, Thailand,  the  Philippines  and  Burma.  Such  aid  programs  to  be  closely
controlled  and  be  integrated  with  political  and  economic  programs.

c.  On  7  July  1950  the  JCS  (J.C.S.  1924/14)  approved  the  following  in  their
review  of  NSC  73.

If  the  Chinese  Communists  provide  overt  military  assistance  to  Southeast
Asian  Communist  elements,  the  United  States  should  prevail  upon  the
British  to  reverse  their  proffers  of  recognition  to  Communist  China  and  to
provide  such  military  assistance  as  is  practicable  to  assist  the  Burmese
and/or  the  French  in  resisting  Chinese  Communist  aggression.  In  addition:

a.  If  overt  military  assistance  is  provided  the  Viet  Minh  forces  of
Indo-China,  the  United  States  should  increase  its  MDAP  assistance  to
the  French  and  urge  the  French  to  continue  an  active  defense,  with  the
United  States  giving  consideration  to  the  provision  of  air  and  naval
assistance.

b.  The  United  States  should  ask  the  United  Nations  to  call  upon
member  nations  to  make  forces  available  to  resist  the  Chinese  Com-
munist aggression.

Chinese  Communist  military  moves  against  Southeast  Asia  states  in  the
near  future  are  possible  and  in  such  an  event  the  U.S.  should  be  prepared
to  provide  military  assistance  short  of  actual  participation  of  U.S.  Armed
Forces  at  this  time.

G?.  On  14  July  the  JSPC  submitted  a  report  (J.C.S.  1924/20— Nor  yet  ap-
proved) for  consideration  by  the  JCS  which  included  the  following  with  refer-
ence to  Southeast  Asia:

The  French  military  position  in  Indo-China  has  continued  to  im-
prove. .  .  .  No  unusual  Chinese  Communist  or  Vietminh  activities  have
occurred  since  the  Korean  invasion.  While  the  entire  East  Asia  situation  is
potentially  explosive  there  are  no  present  indications  that  the  situation  will
be  immediately  worsened  unless  the  Korean  situation  further  deteriorates.
With  respect  to  Burma,  Thailand,  and  Malaya,  internal  subversive  moves
will  probably  remain  the  chief  threats  to  the  established  governments.
Chinese  Communists  would  probably  move  against  these  countries  only  if
first  successful  in  Indo-China.  .  .

e.  Southeast  Asia

(1)  In  the  event  of  Chinese  Communist  moves  against  Indo-China  or
Burma,  U.S.  military  equipment  and  supplies  would  be  required  on  an
increased  scale  and  U.S.  naval  and  air  forces  might  be  called  upon  to
assist  the  French  in  Indo-China.  It  is  unlikely  that  U.S.  forces  would  be
employed  in  Burma.  This  is  considered  to  be  an  area  of  British  re-
sponsibility.

(2)  If  Indo-China,  Burma  and  Thailand  were  to  fall  under  Communist
domination,  British  forces  in  Malaya  should  be  augmented.  Except  for
possible  naval  support,  it  is  unlikely  that  U.S.  armed  forces  would  be
employed  in  Malaya  since  this  is  an  area  of  British  responsibility.


Documents  375

  J


[Document  10]

February  13,  1952

NSC  STAFF  STUDY
on

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION  WITH
RESPECT  TO  COMMUNIST  AGGRESSION  IN  SOUTHEAST  ASIA""

THE  PROBLEM

1.  To  determine  the  policy  of  the  United  States  toward  the  countries  of  South-
east Asia,  and  in  particular,  the  courses  of  action  which  may  be  taken  by  the
United  States  to  strengthen  and  coordinate  resistance  to  communism  on  the
part  of  the  governments  and  peoples  of  the  area,  to  prevent  Chinese  Com-
munist aggression,  and  to  meet  such  aggression  should  it  occur.

ANALYSIS

1. CONSEQUENCES  TO  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  COMMUNIST
DOMINATION  OF  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

2.  Communist  domination  of  Southeast  Asia,  whether  by  means  of  overt  in-
vasion, subversion,  or  accommodation  on  the  part  of  the  indigenous  govern-
ments, would  be  critical  to  United  States  security  interests.  Communist  success
in  this  area  would  spread  doubt  and  fear  among  other  threatened  non-com-
munist countries  as  to  the  ability  of  the  United  States  and  the  United  Nations
to  halt  communist  aggression  elsewhere.  It  would  strengthen  the  claim  that  the
advance  of  communism  is  inexorable  and  encourage  countries  vulnerable  to
Soviet  pressure  to  adopt  policies  of  neutralism  or  accommodation.  Successful
overt  Chinese  Communist  aggression  in  this  area,  especially  if  achieved  with-
out encountering  more  than  token  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  or
the  United  Nations,  would  have  critical  psychological  and  political  consequences
which  would  probably  include  the  relatively  swift  alignment  of  the  rest  of  Asia
and  thereafter  of  the  Middle  East  to  communism,  thereby  endangering  the
stability  and  security  of  Europe.  Such  a  communist  success  might  nullify  the
psychological  advantages  accruing  to  the  free  world  by  reason  of  its  response
to  the  aggression  in  Korea.

3.  The  fall  of  Southeast  Asia  would  underline  the  apparent  economic  advan-
tages to  Japan  of  association  with  the  communist-dominated  Asian  sphere.  Ex-
clusion of  Japan  from  trade  with  Southeast  Asia  would  seriously  affect  the
Japanese  economy,  and  increase  Japan's  dependence  on  United  States  aid.  In
the  long  run  the  loss  of  Southeast  Asia,  especially  Malaya  and  Indonesia,  could
result  in  such  economic  and  political  pressures  in  Japan  as  to  make  it  extremely
difficult  to  prevent  Japan's  eventual  accommodation  to  the  Soviet  Bloc.

*  The  term  Southeast  Asia  is  used  herein  to  mean  Indochina,  Burma,  Thailand,  the
Malay  Peninsula,  and  Indonesia.


i


376 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

4.  Southeast  Asia,  especially  Malaya  and  Indonesia,  is  the  principal  world
source  of  natural  rubber  and  tin.  Access  to  these  materials  by  the  Western
Powers  and  their  denial  to  the  Soviet  Bloc  is  important  at  all  times  and  par-
ticularly in  the  event  of  global  war.  Communist  control  over  the  rice  surpluses
of  the  Southeast  Asian  mainland  would  provide  the  USSR  with  a  powerful  eco-
nomic weapon  in  its  relations  with  other  countries  of  the  Far  East.  Indonesia
is  a  secondary  source  of  petroleum  whose  importance  would  be  enhanced  by
the  denial  to  the  Western  Powers  of  petroleum  sources  in  the  Middle  East.
Malaya  is  the  largest  net  dollar  earner  for  the  United  Kingdom,  and  its  loss
would  seriously  aggravate  the  economic  problems  facing  the  UK.

5.  Communist  control  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia  would  render  the  United  States
position  in  the  Pacific  offshore  island  chain  precarious  and  would  seriously
jeopardize  fundamental  United  States  security  interests  in  the  Far  East.  The
extension  of  communist  power  via  Burma  would  augment  the  communist  threat
to  India  and  Pakistan  and  strengthen  the  groups  within  those  countries  which
favor  accommodation.  However,  such  an  event  would  probably  result  in  a
stiffer  attitude  toward  communism  on  the  part  of  the  Indian  government.

6.  Communist  domination  of  mainland  Southeast  Asia  would  place  unfriendly
forces  astride  the  most  direct  and  best-developed  sea  and  air  routes  between
the  Western  Pacific  and  India  and  the  Near  East.  In  the  event  of  global  war,  the
development  of  Soviet  submarine  and  air  bases  in  mainland  Southeast  Asia
might  compel  the  detour  of  U.S.  and  allied  shipping  and  air  transportation  in
the  Southeast  Asia  region  via  considerably  longer  alternate  routes  to  the  south.
This  extension  of  friendly  lines  of  communication  would  hamper  U.S.  strategic
movements  in  this  region  and  tend  to  isolate  the  major  non-communist  bases  in
the  Far  East — the  offshore  island  chain  and  Australia — from  existing  bases  in
East  Africa  and  the  Near  and  Middle  East,  as  well  as  from  potential  bases  on
the  Indian  sub-continent.

7.  Besides  disrupting  established  lines  of  communication  in  the  area,  the
denial  of  actual  military  facilities  in  mainland  Southeast  Asia — in  particular,
the  loss  of  the  major  naval  operating  bases  at  Singapore — would  compel  the
utilization  of  less  desirable  peripheral  bases.  Soviet  exploitation  of  the  naval
and  air  bases  in  mainland  Southeast  Asia  probably  would  be  limited  by  the
difficulties  of  logistic  support  but  would,  nevertheless,  increase  the  threat  to
existing  lines  of  communication.

II. REGIONAL  STRATEGY

8.  The  continued  integrity  of  the  individual  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  is  to
a  large  extent  dependent  upon  a  successful  coordination  of  political  and  military
measures  for  the  entire  area.  The  development  of  practical  measures  aimed  at
preventing  the  absorption  of  these  countries  into  the  Soviet  orbit  must  therefore
recognize  this  interdependence  and  must,  in  general,  seek  courses  of  action  for
the  area  as  a  whole.

9.  However,  it  must  be  recognized  that  the  governments  and  peoples  of  South-
east Asia  have  little  in  common  other  than  their  geographic  proximity  and  their
newly  awakened  nationalism  and  anti-colonialism.  For  the  most  part,  their  econ-
omies are  competitive  rather  than  complementary.  The  countries  are  divided
internally  and  from  each  other  by  language  and  ethnic  differences.  The  several
nationalities  and  tribal  groups  are  the  heirs  of  centuries  of  warfare,  jealousy,
and  mutual  distrust.  In  addition,  their  present  governments  are  sharply  divided
in  their  attitudes  toward  the  current  East-West  struggle.  The  governments  of


Documents  377


the  three  Associated  States  of  Indochina  are  not  recognized  by  any  other  Asian
states  except  NationaHst  China  and  Thailand.

10.  In  the  strategic  sense,  the  defense  of  Tonkin  is  important  to  the  defense
of  mainland  Southeast  Asia.  If  Communist  forces  should  succeed  in  driving  the
French  Union  forces  from  Tonkin,  military  action  in  the  remainder  of  Indo-
china might  have  to  be  limited  to  delaying  action  and  the  perimeter  defense
of  certain  coastal  areas  pending  reinforcement  or  evacuation.  With  the  appear-
ance of  communist  success,  native  support  would  probably  swing  increasingly  to
the  Viet  Minh.

11.  Thailand  has  no  common  border  with  China  and  no  strong  internal  com-
munist element.  It  adjoins  areas  of  Indochina  now  controlled  by  the  Viet  Minh,
but  the  border  areas  are  remote  and  difficult.  Hence,  communist  seizure  of
Thailand  is  improbable  except  as  a  result  of  the  prior  loss  of  either  Burma  or
Indochina.

12.  Communist  control  of  either  Indochina  or  Burma  would  expose  Thailand
to  infiltration  and  severe  political  pressures  as  well  as  to  the  threat  of  direct
attack.  Unless  substantial  outside  aid  were  forthcoming,  it  is  possible  that  in
such  a  case,  political  pressure  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  bring  about  the  ac-
commodation of  Thailand  to  international  communism  within  a  year.  However,
substantial  aid,  together  with  assurance  of  support  by  the  United  States  and
the  UN  might  be  sufficient  to  preserve  a  non-communist  government  in  Thai-
land in  spite  of  any  form  of  pressure  short  of  overt  attack.

13.  Thailand  would  be  difficult  to  defend  against  an  overt  attack  from  the
east  by  way  of  the  traditional  invasion  route  through  Cambodia.  Thailand  is
more  defensible  against  attack  from  Burma  owing  to  the  mountainous  terrain
and  poor  communications  of  the  Thai-Burmese  border.  In  either  case  it  might
be  possible  to  defend  an  area  in  southern  Thailand  centering  on  Bangkok.  Since
any  attack  on  Thailand  would  necessarily  be  preceded  by  communist  encroach-
ment on  Indochina  or  Burma,  the  defense  of  Thailand  would  probably  be  part
of  a  broader  pattern  of  hostilities.

14.  If  the  loss  of  Thailand  followed  the  loss  of  Burma,  the  defense  of  Indo-
china would  be  out-flanked;  and  any  substantial  communist  forces  based  on
Thailand  would  render  the  position  of  the  French  Union  Forces  in  Indochina
untenable  in  the  long  run.  If  the  collapse  of  Thailand  followed  the  loss  of  Indo-
china, the  psychological  and  political  consequences  would  accelerate  the  de-
terioration of  Burma.  However,  the  military  consequences  in  such  a  case  would
be  less  immediate,  owing  to  the  difficult  terrain  of  the  Thai-Burmese  border
country.

15.  Communist  control  of  Thailand  would  aggravate  the  already  serious
security  problem  presented  by  the  Thai-Malayan  border  and  greatly  increase
the  difficulties  of  the  British  security  forces  in  Malaya.  However,  assuming  con-
trol of  the  sea  by  the  Western  Powers,  Malaya  offers  a  defensible  position
against  even  a  full-scale  land  attack.  The  Kra  Isthmus  of  the  Malayan  Peninsula
would  afford  the  best  secondary  line  of  defense  against  total  communist  domi-
nation of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  East  Indies.  Such  a  defense  would  effectively
protect  Indonesia  against  external  communist  pressure.  By  thus  defending  Ma-
laya and  Indonesia,  the  anti-communist  forces  would  continue  to  hold  the  most
important  strategic  material  resources  of  the  area,  as  well  as  strategic  air  and
naval  bases  and  lines  of  communication.

16.  The  strategic  interdependence  of  the  countries  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  the
cumulative  effect  of  a  successful  communist  penetration  in  any  one  area,  point  to
the  importance  of  action  designed  to  forestall  any  aggression  by  the  Chinese


378 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon'  Papers /Vol.  I

Communists.  The  most  effective  possible  deterrent  would  be  a  joint  warning  by
the  United  States  and  certain  other  governments  regarding  the  grave  conse-
quences of  Chinese  aggression  against  Southeast  Asia,  and  implying  the  threat
of  retaliation  against  Communist  China  itself.  Such  a  warning  should  be  issued
in  conjunction  with  other  nations,  including  at  least  the  United  Kingdom,
France,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Participation  in  such  a  warning  involves
all  the  risks  and  disadvantages  of  a  precommitment  to  take  action  in  future  and
unknown  circumstances.  However,  these  disadvantages  must  be  weighed  against
the  alternative  of  a  costly  effort  to  repel  Chinese  invasion  after  it  has  actually
occurred.  A  second,  but  probably  less  effective,  means  of  attempting  to  deter
such  an  invasion  would  be  to  focus  world  attention  on  the  continuing  threat
of  Chinese  Communist  aggression  against  Southeast  Asia  and  to  make  clear  to
the  Soviet  and  Chinese  Communist  Governments  the  fact  that  the  United  States
views  the  situation  in  Southeast  Asia  with  great  concern.  In  fact,  statements
along  these  lines  have  already  been  made.  Such  means  might  also  include  a
Peace  Observation  Commission,  if  desired  and  requested  by  the  countries  con-
cerned, public  addresses  by  U.S.  officials,  and  "show  the  flag"  visits  by  naval
and  air  units.

17.  The  Chinese  Nationalist  forces  represent  considerable  reserve  upon  which
to  draw  in  the  event  of  military  action  against  Communist  China.  The  de-
ficiency in  equipment  and  training  seriously  limits  the  possible  employment  of
these  forces  at  present,  however,  continuation  of  our  training  and  supply  efforts
should  serve  to  alleviate  these  deficiencies.  The  manner  of  employment  of  these
forces  is  beset  not  only  with  military  but  also  with  political  difficulties.  Hence
the  decision  as  to  the  best  use  of  these  forces  cannot  be  made  at  this  time.
Nevertheless,  we  should  be  prepared  to  make  the  best  practicable  use  of  this
military  augmentation  in  light  of  the  circumstances  existing  at  the  time.

III.  INDOCHINA

18.  In  the  long  run,  the  security  of  Indochina  against  communism  will  de-
pend upon  the  development  of  native  governments  able  to  command  the  sup-
port of  the  masses  of  the  people  and  national  armed  forces  capable  of  relieving
the  French  of  the  major  burden  of  maintaining  internal  security.  Some  progress
is  being  made  in  the  formation  and  development  of  national  armies.  However,
the  Vietnamese  Government  has  been  slow  to  assume  its  responsibilities  and  has
continued  to  suffer  from  a  lack  of  strong  leadership.  It  has  had  to  contend
with:  (a)  lingering  Vietnamese  suspicion  of  any  French-supported  regime,  com-
bined with  the  apathetic  and  "fence  sitting"  attitude  of  the  bulk  of  the  people;
(b)  the  difficulty,  common  to  all  new  and  inexperienced  governments,  of  train-
ing the  necessary  personnel  and  building  an  efficient  administration;  and  (c)
the  failure  of  factional  and  sectional  groups  to  unite  in  a  concerted  national
effort.

19.  The  U.S.  economic  aid  program  for  Indochina  has  as  its  objectives  to
increase  production  and  thereby  offset  the  military  drain  on  the  economy  of
the  Associated  States;  to  increase  popular  support  for  the  Government  by  im-
proving the  effectiveness  of  Government  services;  to  make  the  Government  and
the  people  aware  of  America's  interest  in  their  independence  and  welfare;  and  to
use  economic  aid  as  a  means  of  supporting  the  military  effort.  Because  of  their
strained  budgetary  situation,  the  Associated  States  cannot  meet  the  local  cur-
rency costs  of  the  projects;  about  60  percent  of  the  program  funds  is,  therefore,
devoted  to  importing  needed  commodities  which  are  sold  to  generate  counter-
part.


Documents  379


20.  The  military  situation  in  Indochina  continues  to  be  one  of  stalemate.  In-
creased U.S.  aid  to  the  Franco-Vietnamese  forces  has  been  an  essential  factor
in  enabling  them  to  withstand  recent  communist  attacks.  However,  Chinese
aid  to  the  Viet  Minh  in  the  form  of  logistic  support,  training,  and  technical  ad-
visors is  increasing  at  least  at  a  comparable  rate.  The  prospect  is  for  a  continu-
ation of  the  present  stalemate  in  the  absence  of  intervention  by  important  forces
other  than  those  presently  engaged.

21.  While  it  is  unlikely  under  the  present  circumstances  that  the  French  will
suffer  a  military  defeat  in  Indochina,  there  is  a  distinct  possibility  that  the
French  Government  will  soon  conclude  that  France  cannot  continue  indefinitely
to  carry  the  burden  of  her  total  military  commitments.  From  the  French  point  of
view,  the  possible  means  of  lessening  the  present  burden  include:  (1)  a  settle-
ment with  the  communists  in  Indochina;  (2)  an  agreement  to  internationalize
the  action  in  Indochina;  (3)  reduction  of  the  NATO  obligations  of  France.

22.  A  settlement  based  on  a  military  armistice  would  be  more  complicated
in  Indochina  than  in  the  case  of  Korea.  Much  of  Indochina  is  not  firmly  under
the  control  of  either  side,  but  subject  to  occasional  forays  from  both.  Areas
controlled  by  the  opposing  sides  are  interspersed,  and  lines  of  contact  are  fluid.
Because  of  the  weakness  of  the  native  governments,  the  dubious  attitudes  of
the  population  even  in  areas  under  French  control,  and  the  certainty  of  con-
tinued communist  pressure,  it  is  highly  probable  that  any  settlement  based  on
a  withdrawal  of  French  forces  would  be  tantamount  to  handing  over  Indochina
to  communism.  The  United  States  should  therefore  continue  to  oppose  any
negotiated  settlement  with  the  Viet  Minh.

23.  In  the  event  that  information  and  circumstances  point  to  the  conclusion
that  France  is  no  longer  prepared  to  carry  the  burden  in  Indochina,  or  if  France
presses  for  a  sharing  of  the  responsibility  for  Indochina,  whether  in  the  UN  or
directly  with  the  U.S.  Government,  the  United  States  should  oppose  a  French
withdrawal  and  consult  with  the  French  and  British  concerning  further  measures
to  be  taken  to  safeguard  the  area  from  communist  domination.  In  anticipation
of  these  possibilities,  the  United  States  should  urgently  re-examine  the  situation
with  a  view  to  determining:

a.  Whether  U.S.  participation  in  an  international  undertaking  would  be
warranted.

b.  The  general  nature  of  the  contributions  which  the  United  States,  with
other  friendly  governments,  might  be  prepared  to  make.

24.  A  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Korea  would  greatly  increase  the  logistical
capabihty  of  the  Chinese  Communists  to  support  military  operations  in  Indo-
china. A  Korean  peace  would  have  an  even  more  decisive  effect  in  increasing
Chinese  air  capabilities  in  that  area.  Recent  intelligence  reports  indicate  in-
creased Chinese  Communist  military  activity  in  the  Indochinese  border  area.
If  the  Chinese  Communists  directly  intervene  with  large  forces  over  and  above
those  introduced  as  individuals  or  in  small  units,  the  French  would  probably  be
driven  back  to  a  beachhead  around  Haiphong.  The  French  should  be  able  to
hold  this  beachhead  for  only  a  limited  time  at  best  in  the  absence  of  timely  and
substantial  outside  support.

25.  In  view  of  the  world-wide  reaction  to  overt  aggression  in  Korea,  Com-
munist China  may  prefer  to  repeat  in  Indochina  the  method  of  "volunteer"  inter-
vention. Inasmuch  as  the  French  do  not  control  the  border  between  China  and
Indochina  nor  large  areas  north  of  Hanoi,  it  may  be  difficult  to  detect  the  ex-
tent of  preparation  for  such  intervention.  It  is  important  to  U.S.  security  inter-


380 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

ests  to  maintain  the  closest  possible  consultation  with  the  French  Government
on  the  buildup  of  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  Indochina.  The  Govern-
ment of  France  has  agreed  to  consult  with  the  United  States  before  it  requests
UN  or  other  international  action  to  oppose  Chinese  Communist  aggression  in
Indochina  in  order  that  the  two  countries  may  jointly  evaluate  the  extent  of
Chinese  Communist  intervention.

26.  If  it  is  thus  determined  that  Chinese  Communist  forces  (including  volun-
teers) have  overtly  intervened  in  the  conflict  in  Indochina,  or  are  covertly  par-
ticipating to  such  an  extent  as  to  jeopardize  retention  of  the  Tonkin  Delta  by
the  French  forces,  the  United  States  should  support  the  French  to  the  greatest
extent  possible,  preferably  under  the  auspices  of  the  UN.  It  is  by  no  means
certain  that  an  appropriate  UN  resolution  could  be  obtained.  Favorable  action
in  the  UN  would  depend  upon  a  change  in  the  attitude  of  those  governments
which  view  the  present  regime  in  Indochina  as  a  continuation  of  French  colonial-
ism. A  new  communist  aggression  might  bring  about  a  reassessment  of  the
situation  on  the  part  of  these  governments  and  an  increased  recognition  of  the
danger.  Accordingly,  it  is  believed  that  a  UN  resolution  to  oppose  the  aggression
could  be  passed  in  the  General  Assembly  by  a  small  margin.

27.  Even  if  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  a  UN  resolution  in  such  a  case,  the
United  States  should  seek  the  maximum  possible  international  support  for  and
participation  in  any  international  collective  action  in  support  of  France  and  the
Associated  States.  The  United  States  should  take  appropriate  military  action
against  Communist  China  as  part  of  a  UN  collective  action  or  in  conjunction
with  France  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  other  friendly  governments.  However,
in  the  absence  of  such  support,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  United  States  would
act  unilaterally.  It  is  probable  however,  that  the  United  States  would  find  some
support  and  token  participation  at  least  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  other
Commonwealth  countries.

28.  The  U.S.  forces  which  would  be  committed,  and  the  manner  of  their
employment,  as  well  as  the  military  equipment  which  could  be  furnished  to
bolster  the  French  Union  forces,  would  be  dependent  upon  certain  factors
which  cannot  now  be  predicted  with  accuracy.  These  include  the  extent  of
progress  in  U.S.  rearmament,  whether  or  not  hostilities  in  Korea  were  continu-
ing, and  strategic  developments  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  It  would  be  desira-
ble to  avoid  the  use  of  major  U.S.  ground  forces  in  Indochina.  Other  effective
means  of  opposing  the  aggression  would  include  naval,  air  and  logistical  sup-
port of  the  French  Union  forces,  naval  blockade  of  Communist  China,  and  at-
tacks by  land-  and  carrier-based  aircraft  on  military  targets  in  Communist  China.
The  latter  could  be  effective  against  the  long,  tenuous,  and  vulnerable  supply
lines  by  which  Chinese  operations  in  Indochina  would  have  to  be  supported.
In  the  event  of  a  forced  evacuation,  U.S.  forces  might  provide  cover  and  as-
sistance. United  Kingdom  participation  in  these  measures  might  well  result  in
the  seizure  of  Hong  Kong  by  the  Chinese  Communists.

29.  It  is  recognized  that  the  commitment  of  U.S.  military  forces  against
Communist  China  would:  (a)  increase  the  risk  of  general  hostilities  in  the  Far
East,  including  Soviet  participation  under  cover  of  the  existing  Sino-Soviet
agreements;  (b)  involve  U.S.  military  forces  in  another  Asiatic  peripheral  ac-
tion, thus  detracting  from  U.S.  capabilities  to  conduct  a  global  war  in  the  near
future;  (c)  arouse  public  opposition  to  "another  Korea"]  and  (d)  imply  will-
ingness to  use  U.S.  military  forces  in  other  critical  areas  subject  to  communist
aggression.  Nevertheless,  by  failing  to  take  action,  the  United  States  would
permit  the  communists  to  obtain,  at  little~b7  no  oost,  a  victory  of  major  world
consequence.


Documents  381


30.  Informed  public  opinion  might  support  use  of  U.S.  forces  in  Indochina
regardless  of  sentiment  against  "another  Korea"  on  the  basis  that:  (a)  Indo-
china is  of  far  greater  strategic  importance  than  Korea;  (b)  the  confirmation  of
UN  wilhngness  to  oppose  aggression  with  force,  demonstrated  at  such  a  high
cost  in  Korea,  might  be  nullified  by  the  failure  to  commit  UN  forces  in  Indo-
china; and  (c)  a  second  instance  of  aggression  by  the  Chinese  Communists
would  justify  measures  not  subject  to  the  limitations  imposed  upon  the  UN
action  in  Korea.

31.  The  military  action  contemplated  herein  would  constitute,  in  effect,  a
war  against  Communist  China  which  would  be  limited  only  as  to  its  objectives,  but
would  not  be  subject  to  any  geographic  limitations.  Employment  of  U.S.  forces
in  a  de  facto  war  without  a  formal  declaration  would  raise  questions  which
would  make  it  desirable  to  consult  with  key  members  of  both  parties  in  Congress
in  order  to  obtain  their  prior  concurrence  in  the  courses  of  action  contemplated.


[Document  11]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
THE  SECRETARY

June  17,  1952

Following  his  telephone  conversation  with  Sir  Oliver  Franks  today,  which  is
reported  separately,  the  Secretary  saw  General  Bradley  and  Mr.  Perkins.  Later
Sir  Oliver  dropped  in  at  the  office  following  a  meeting  in  Mr.  Jessup's  office.  He
asked  if  he  could  see  the  Secretary  for  a  few  minutes  to  get  the  further  report  on
the  matter  of  talks  on  Southeast  Asia.  He  repeated  what  he  told  us  earlier  that
he  had  had  a  second  message  from  London  following  the  report  which  the  Em-
bassy had  sent  of  Mr.  Perkin's  conversation  with  Mr.  Steele.

The  Secretary  said  that  he  had  talked  about  this  matter  with  General  Bradley
this  afternoon  and  that  Friday  was  the  only  day  which  General  Bradley  could
possibly  meet  and  that  was  very  inconvenient  for  Mr.  Acheson.  He  said,  therefore,
he  thought  that  any  talks  were  impossible  to  arrange.  He  then  said  that  he  would
be  glad  to  talk  to  Sir  Oliver  right  at  that  moment  and  see  where  we  stood.

The  Secretary  reviewed  the  situation  and  the  talks  which  took  place  in  Paris.
He  said  that  in  the  earlier  meetings  which  had  taken  place  on  Southeast  Asia,
everyone  had  started  from  a  different  point  and  there  had  been  little  in  the  way
of  conclusion  reached.  He  said  that  he  felt  what  was  needed  now  was  political
decisions.

The  Secretary  then  analyzed  the  situation  as  we  saw  it.  He  said  that  if  the  Chi-
nese came  into  Indochina  in  force,  we  would  have  to  do  something.  We  could
not  remain  passive.  He  said  that  none  of  the  things  we  could  do  were  very
pleasant  ones  and  we  felt  that  a  warning  was  highly  desirable.  He  said  that
we  felt  we  should  not  give  a  warning,  however,  if  there  had  been  no  agreement
on  what  we  did  in  the  event  the  Communists  moved  in  anyway.  He  said  this
would  make  us  look  very  silly  and  would  weaken  the  effect  of  any  other  warn-
ings.

He  said  it  was  clear  that  it  was  futile  and  a  mistake  to  defend  Indochina  in
Indochina.  He  said  could  not  have  anothejlKorea^. JHe  said  it  was  also  true
we  could  not  put  ground  forces  in  Indochina.  We  do  not  have  them  and  we  could
not  afford  to  immobilize  such  forces  as  we  had.  He  said  we  could  take  air  and


382 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


naval  action,  however,  and  had  discussed  whether  this  should  be  confined  to
approaches.

He  concluded  that  our  only  hope  was  of  changing  the  Chinese  mind.  He  said
that  we  could  strike  where  it  hurts  China  or  we  could  set  up  a  blockade  against
trade.  He  said  we  had  concluded  that  our  mission  would  not  be  to  destroy
the  Communist  regime.  He  also  said  that  we  fully  realized  the  danger  of  bringing
the  USSR  into  the  show.

The  Secretary  concluded  that  there  was  no  point  in  getting  our  military  people
into  any  talks.  He  said  we  must  get  political  decisions  first.  He  said  that  if  firm
decisions  could  not  be  reached  that  we  perhaps  could  reach  tentative  decisions.  He
said  that  it  had  been  clear  at  Paris  that  he  was  somewhat  "ahead  of  the  play"
while  the  French  and  the  British  had  urged  us  to  discuss  these  matters  and  had
wanted  discussions  before  decisions  were  made.  When  the  question  actually  came
up,  they  were  not  ready  to  talk.

The  Secretary  remarked  that  Mr.  Letourneau  had  said  in  Paris  that  the  mili-
tary talks  had  reached  some  decision  as  to  how  to  evacuate  the  wounded,  etc.,
in  the  event  of  difficulties.  He  said  that  our  Navy  had  talked  to  Mr.  Letourneau
regarding  port  sizes,  capacity  of  ships,  etc.,  with  regard  to  evacuation.

Sir  Oliver  said  he  thought  he  understood  the  point,  would  report  back  to  Lon-
don and  would  let  us  know  if  there  were  anything  further  on  it.

Mr.  Acheson  said  that  if  his  analysis  were  wrong  and  the  British  Chiefs  of
Staff  had  any  different  one,  he  would  be  glad  to  hear  of  it.

S:LDBattle


[Document  12]

DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE
FOR  THE  PRESS

JUNE  18,  1952  NO.  473

Secretary  Acheson  made  the  following  statement  at  his  news  conference  to-
day:

VISIT  OF  M.  JEAN  LETOURNEAU

As  you  are  aware,  M.  Jean  Letourneau,  Minister  of  the  Associated  States  for
the  French  Government,  has  been  spending  the  last  few  days  in  Washington  ex-
changing views  with  representatives  of  various  agencies  of  this  Government.  The
Ambassadors  of  Cambodia  and  Vietnam  have  also  participated  in  conversations
with  M.  Letourneau  and  with  our  own  representatives.

A  communique  covering  the  substance  of  the  talks  will  be  issued  later  today
and  I  will  therefore  not  go  into  details  now.  Yet  I  would  like  to  share  with  you
the  feeling  of  encouragement  and  confidence  which  M.  Letourneau  inspires.  His
thorough  grasp  of  the  situation  and  his  constructive  approach  to  the  problems
involved — military,  political  and  economic — have  impressed  us  all.

As  you  know,  the  Communist  aggression  in  Indochina  has  been  going  on  for
six  years.  It  has  been  greatly  stepped  up  because  of  assistance  received  from
Communist  China  during  the  past  two  years.  Yet,  under  French  leadership,  the
threat  to  this  part  of  the  free  world  has  been  met  with  great  courage  and  ad-


Documents  383


mirable  resourcefulness.  The  military  situation  appears  to  be  developing  favor-
ably. It  has  been  good  to  hear  from  M.  Letourneau  of  the  part  played  in  achiev-
ing this  result  by  the  considerable  quantities  of  American  arms  and  material
which  the  magnificent  fighting  qualities  of  the  French  Union  forces,  including
those  of  the  Associated  States,  have  justified  us  in  devoting  to  this  area  of  the
struggle  against  Communist  aggression.  The  effort  to  make  of  Vietnam,  Laos  and
Cambodia  secure  and  prosperous  members  of  the  free  world  community  has  made
great  progress.

I  have  been  particularly  impressed  by  what  M.  Letourneau  has  told  me  of
what  is  being  done  to  enable  the  people  of  the  three  Associated  States  to  play
the  constantly  greater  role  in  their  own  defense  to  which  they  rightly  aspire.  Much
has  been  accomplished  toward  the  creation,  training  and  equipping  of  the
national  armies.  Units  of  these  armies  have  distinguished  themselves  in  battle
and  are  performing  vital  security  functions  in  many  parts  of  the  country.  They
look  forward  with  confidence  and  determination  to  assuming  an  increasing  share
of  the  burden  of  carrying  on  the  struggle.  Their  effectiveness  fully  justifies  the  pro-
gram of  expansion  to  which  the  governments  concerned  are  committed  and
underlines,  I  believe  the  soundness  of  our  own  decision,  subject  of  course  to  the
availability  of  Congressional  appropriations,  to  render  increasing  assistance  in
building  these  armies.  M.  Letourneau  described  these  programs  in  the  course
of  his  address  before  the  Overseas  Writers  yesterday.

Favorable  developments  have  not  been  confined  to  the  fighting  fronts  and  to
the  national  armies.  There  are  increasing  evidences  of  the  growing  vitality  of
the  Associated  States  in  handling  their  political,  financial  and  economic  affairs.
M.  Letourneau's  account  of  the  manner  in  which  these  new  member  states  of
the  French  Union  are  envisaging  and  meeting  their  responsibilities  was  heart-
ening. I  do  not  think  it  is  generally  realized  to  what  extent  these  new  states  in
fact  control  their  own  affairs.  Only  a  limited  number  of  services  related  to  the
necessities  of  the  war  remain  temporarily  in  French  hands.

We  in  the  United  States  are  aware  of  the  vital  importance  of  the  struggle  in
Indochina  to  the  cause  of  the  free  world.  We  have  earmarked  for  Indochina
economic  and  materiel  aid  to  a  considerable  amount  during  the  past  two  years.
We  are  doing  our  best  to  activate  deliveries:  as  you  are  aware  the  150th  ship
bearing  American  arms  and  munitions  to  Indochina  arrived  in  Saigon  within
the  last  few  weeks.  We  are  now  bearing  a  considerable  portion  of  the  total  burden
of  the  war  in  Indochina  expressed  in  financial  terms,  although  of  course  the  en-
tire combat  burden  is  being  carried  by  the  French  Union  and  the  Associated
States  with  the  latter  assuming  a  constantly  increasing  share.

The  Communists  have  made  a  most  determined  effort  in  Indochina.  Their  ag-
gression has  been  checked  and  recent  indications  warrant  the  view  that  the  tide  is
now  moving  in  our  favor.  Once  again  the  policy  of  meeting  aggression  with  force
is  paying  off  and  we  can  I  believe  be  confident  that  as  we  carry  out  the  plans
upon  which  we  have  agreed  we  can  anticipate  continued  favorable  developments
in  the  maintenance  and  consolidation  of  the  free  world  bulwark  in  Indochina.


384 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  13]

June  25,  1952
NSC  124/2

NOTE  BY  THE  EXECUTIVE  SECRETARY
to  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES
OF  ACTION  WITH  RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

References:  A.  NSC  124/1

B.  NSC  124  and  Annex  to  NSC  124

C.  NSC  Action  Nos.  597,  614  and  655

D.  Memos  for  NSC  from  Executive  Secretary,  same  subject,  dated
June  24  and  June  25,  1952

E.  Memos  for  NSC  from  Executive  Secretary,  subject,  "United
States  Objectives  and  Courses  of  Action  With  Respect  to  Com-
munist Aggression  in  Southeast  Asia,"  dated  March  4,  April  15,
April  30  and  May  21,  1952

F.  NSC  48/5

G.  NSC  64

H.  SE-22  and  SE-27


At  the  120th  Council  meeting  with  the  President  presiding,  the  National  Se-
curity Council  and  the  Acting  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  adopted  NSC  124/1,
subject  to  changes  in  paragraphs  2-^z,  3,  5,  10-c-(2),  10-c-(3),  ll-(l),  11 -(3),  and
12  thereof,  as  incorporated  in  the  enclosure  (NSC  Action  No.  655).

In  adopting  NSC  124/1,  as  amended,  the  Council  and  the  Acting  Secretary
of  the  Treasury  noted  the  following  statement  by  the  Acting  Secretary  of  De-
fense with  respect  to  the  views  of  the  Joint  Secretaries  regarding  NSC  124/1:

In  our  opinion,  if  this  policy  is  to  be  truly  effective,  it  must  be  clearly
recognized  that  the  U.S.  policy  "to  make  it  possible  for  the  French  to  re-
duce the  degree  of  their  participation  in  the  military,  economic  and  political
affairs  of  the  Associated  States"  (par.  S-d)  must  be  emphasized  and  re-
emphasized  to  the  French  at  each  and  every  political,  economic  or  military
negotiation  which  the  U.S.  Government  enters  into  with  the  Government  of
France,  especially  those  negotiations  which  deal  with  the  providing  of  U.S.
economic  or  military  aid  to  France  or  to  Indochina.

The  report,  as  amended  and  adopted,  was  subsequently  submitted  to  the
President  for  consideration.  The  President  has  this  date  approved  NSC  124/1,  as
amended  and  enclosed  herewith,  and  directs  its  implementation  by  all  appropriate
executive  departments  and  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Government  under  the  coordi-
nation of  the  Secretaries  of  State  and  Defense.

Accordingly,  NSC  64  and  paragraph  14  of  NSC  48/5  are  superseded  by  the
enclosed  report.  The  enclosure  does  not  supersede,  but  supplements  the  state-
ment of  the  current  objective  with  respect  to  Southeast  Asia  contained  in  para-
graph 6-g  of  NSC  48/5.


Documents  385

It  is  requested  that  special  security  precautions  be  observed  in  the  handling
of  the  enclosure,  and  that  access  to  it  be  restricted  on  a  need-to-know  basis.

JAMES  S.  LAY,  Jr.
Executive  Secretary

cc: The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury

The  Acting  Director  of  Defense  Mobilization

25  June  1952
STATEMENT  OF  POLICY
by  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION
WITH  RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA*

OBJECTIVE

1.  To  prevent  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  from  passing  into  the  com-
munist orbit,  and  to  assist  them  to  develop  the  will  and  ability  to  resist  com-
munism from  within  and  without  and  to  contribute  to  the  strengthening  of  the
free  world.

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS

2.  Communist  domination,  by  whatever  means,  of  all  Southeast  Asia  would
seriously  endanger  in  the  short  term,  and  critically  endanger  in  the  longer  term,
United  States  security  interests.

a.  The  loss  of  any  of  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  communist  con-
trol as  a  consequence  of  overt  or  covert  Chinese  Communist  aggression
would  have  critical  psychological,  political  and  economic  consequences.  In
the  absence  of  effective  and  timely  counteraction,  the  loss  of  any  single
country  would  probably  lead  to  relatively  swift  submission  to  or  an  align-
ment with  communism  by  the  remaining  countries  of  this  group.  Further-
more, an  alignment  with  communism  of  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  and
India,  and  in  the  longer  term,  of  the  Middle  East  (with  the  probable  ex-
ceptions of  at  least  Pakistan  and  Turkey)  would  in  all  probability  progres-
sively follow.  Such  widespread  alignment  would  endanger  the  stability  and  se-
curity of  Europe.

b.  Communist  control  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia  would  render  the  U.S.  po-
sition in  the  Pacific  offshore  island  chain  precarious  and  would  seriously  jeop-
ardize fundamental  U.S.  security  interests  in  the  Far  East.

c.  Southeast  Asia,  especially  Malaya  and  Indonesia,  is  the  principal
world  source  of  natural  rubber  and  tin,  and  a  producer  of  petroleum  and
other  strategically  important  commodities.  The  rice  exports  of  Burma  and
Thailand  are  critically  important  to  Malaya,  Ceylon  and  Hong  Kong  and

*Southeast  Asia  is  used  herein  to  mean  the  area  embracing  Burma,  Thailand,  Indo-
china, Malaya  and  Indonesia.


386 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

are  of  considerable  significance  to  Japan  and  India,  all  important  areas  of
free  Asia.

d.  The  loss  of  Southeast  Asia,  especially  of  Malaya  and  Indonesia,
could  result  in  such  economic  and  political  pressures  in  Japan  as  to  make
it  extremely  difficult  to  prevent  Japan's  eventual  accommodation  to  com-
munism.

3.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  an  overt  attack  on  Southeast  Asia  by  the
Chinese  Communists  be  vigorously  opposed.  In  order  to  pursue  the  military
courses  of  action  envisaged  in  this  paper  to  a  favorable  conclusion  within  a
reasonable  period,  it  will  be  necessary  to  divert  military  strength  from  other
areas  thus  reducing  our  military  capability  in  those  areas,  with  the  recognized
increased  risks  involved  therein,  or  to  increase  our  military  forces  in  being,  or
both.

4.  The  danger  of  an  overt  military  attack  against  Southeast  Asia  is  inherent
in  the  existence  of  a  hostile  and  aggressive  Communist  China,  but  such  an
attack  is  less  probable  than  continued  communist  efforts  to  achieve  domination
through  subversion.  The  primary  threat  to  Southeast  Asia  accordingly  arises  from
the  possibility  that  the  situation  in  Indochina  may  deteriorate  as  a  result  of  the
weakening  of  the  resolve  of,  or  as  a  result  of  the  inability  of  the  governments
of  France  and  of  the  Associated  States  to  continue  to  oppose  the  Viet  Minh  re-
bellion, the  military  strength  of  which  is  being  steadily  increased  by  virtue  of  aid
furnished  by  the  Chinese  Communist  regime  and  its  allies.

5.  The  successful  defense  of  Tonkin  is  critical  to  the  retention  in  non-Com-
munist hands  of  mainland  Southeast  Asia.  However,  should  Burma  come  under
communist  domination,  a  communist  military  advance  through  Thailand  might
make  Indochina,  including  Tonkin,  militarily  indefensible.  The  execution  of  the
following  U.S.  courses  of  action  with  respect  to  individual  countries  of  the  area
may  vary  depending  upon  the  route  of  communist  advance  into  Southeast  Asia.

6.  Actions  designed  to  achieve  our  objections  in  Southeast  Asia  require  sen-
sitive selection  and  application,  on  the  one  hand  to  assure  the  optimum  efficiency
through  coordination  of  measures  for  the  general  area,  and  on  the  other,  to
accommodate  to  the  greatest  practicable  extent  to  the  individual  sensibilities  of  the
several  governments,  social  classes  and  minorities  of  the  area.

COURSES  OF  ACTION

Southeast  Asia

7.  With  respect  to  Southeast  Asia,  the  United  States  should:

a.  Strengthen  propaganda  and  cultural  activities,  as  appropriate,  in  re-
lation to  the  area  to  foster  increased  alignment  of  the  people  with  the  free
world.

b.  Continue,  as  appropriate,  programs  of  economic  and  technical  assist-
ance designed  to  strengthen  the  indigenous  non-communist  governments
of  the  area.

c.  Encourage  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  restore  and  expand  their
commerce  with  each  other  and  with  the  rest  of  the  free  world,  and  stimulate
the  flow  of  the  raw  material  resources  of  the  area  to  the  free  world.

d.  Seek  agreement  with  other  nations,  including  at  least  France,  the  UK,
Australia  and  New  Zealand,  for  a  joint  warning  to  Communist  China  re-
garding the  grave  consequences  of  Chinese  aggression  against  Southeast


Documents  387


Asia,  the  issuance  of  such  a  warning  to  be  contingent  upon  the  prior  agree-
ment of  France  and  the  UK  to  participate  in  the  courses  of  action  set
forth  in  paragraphs  10c,  12,  14/  (1)  and  (2),  and  15c  (1)  and  (2),  and
such  others  as  are  determined  as  a  result  of  prior  trilateral  consultation,  in
the  event  such  a  warning  is  ignored.

e.  Seek  UK  and  French  agreement  in  principle  that  a  naval  blockade
of  Communist  China  should  be  included  in  the  minimum  courses  of  action
set  forth  in  paragraph  10c  below.

/.  Continue  to  encourage  and  support  closer  cooperation  among  the
countries  of  Southeast  Asia,  and  between  those  countries  and  the  United
States,  Great  Britain,  France,  the  Philippines,  Australia,  New  Zealand,
South  Asia  and  Japan.

g.  Strengthen,  as  appropriate,  covert  operations  designed  to  assist  in  the
achievement  of  U.S.  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia.

h.  Continue  activities  and  operations  designed  to  encourage  the  overseas
Chinese  communities  in  Southeast  Asia  to  organize  and  activate  anti-
communist  groups  and  activities  within  their  own  communities,  to  resist
the  effects  of  parallel  pro-communist  groups  and  activities  and,  generally,
to  increase  their  orientation  toward  the  free  world.

/.  Take  measures  to  promote  the  coordinated  defense  of  the  area,  and
encourage  and  support  the  spirit  of  resistance  among  the  peoples  of  South-
east Asia  to  Chinese  Communist  aggression  and  to  the  encroachments  of
local  communists.

/.  Make  clear  to  the  American  people  the  importance  of  Southeast  Asia
to  the  security  of  the  United  States  so  that  they  may  be  prepared  for  any
of  the  courses  of  action  proposed  herein.

Indochina

8.  With  respect  to  Indochina  the  United  States  should:

a.  Continue  to  promote  international  support  for  the  three  Associated
States.

b.  Continue  to  assure  the  French  that  the  U.S.  regards  the  French  effort
in  Indochina  as  one  of  great  strategic  importance  in  the  general  interna-
tional interest  rather  than  in  the  purely  French  interest,  and  as  essential
to  the  security  of  the  free  world,  not  only  in  the  Far  East  but  in  the  Middle
East  and  Europe  as  well.

c.  Continue  to  assure  the  French  that  we  are  cognizant  of  the  sacrifices
entailed  for  France  in  carrying  out  her  effort  in  Indochina  and  that,  without
overlooking  the  principle  that  France  has  the  primary  responsibility  in
Indochina,  we  will  recommend  to  the  Congress  appropriate  military,  eco-
nomic and  financial  aid  to  France  and  the  Associated  States.

d.  Continue  to  cultivate  friendly  and  increasingly  cooperative  relations
with  the  Governments  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  at  all  levels  with
a  view  to  maintaining  and,  if  possible,  increasing  the  degree  of  influence  the
U.S.  can  bring  to  bear  on  the  policies  and  actions  of  the  French  and  Indo-
chinese  authorities  to  the  end  of  directing  the  course  of  events  toward  the
objectives  we  seek.  Our  influence  with  the  French  and  Associated  States
should  be  designed  to  further  those  constructive  political,  economic  and
social  measures  which  will  tend  to  increase  the  stability  of  the  Associated
States  and  thus  make  it  possible  for  the  French  to  reduce  the  degree  of


388 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

their  participation  in  the  miHtary,  economic  and  poHtical  affairs  of  the
Associated  States.

e.  Specifically  we  should  use  our  influence  with  France  and  the  Asso-
ciated States  to  promote  positive  political,  military,  economic  and  social
policies,  among  which  the  following  are  considered  essential  elements:

(1)  Continued  recognition  and  carrying  out  by  France  of  its  primary
responsibility  for  the  defense  of  Indochina.

(2)  Further  steps  by  France  and  the  Associated  States  toward  the
evolutionary  development  of  the  Associated  States.

(3)  Such  reorganization  of  French  administration  and  representation
in  Indochina  as  will  be  conducive  to  an  increased  feeling  of  responsi-
bility on  the  part  of  the  Associated  States.

(4)  Intensive  efforts  to  develop  the  armies  of  the  Associated  States,
including  independent  logistical  and  administrative  services.

(5)  The  development  of  more  effective  and  stable  Governments  in  the
Associated  States.

(6)  Land  reform,  agrarian  and  industrial  credit,  sound  rice  market-
ing systems,  labor  development,  foreign  trade  and  capital  formation.

(7)  An  aggressive  military,  political,  and  psychological  program  to
defeat  or  seriously  reduce  the  Viet  Minh  forces.

(8)  US-French  cooperation  in  publicizing  progressive  developments
in  the  foregoing  policies  in  Indochina.

9.  In  the  absence  of  large  scale  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  Indochina,
the  United  States  should:

a.  Provide  increased  aid  on  a  high  priority  basis  for  the  French  Union
forces  without  relieving  French  authorities  of  their  basic  military  responsi-
bility for  the  defense  of  the  Associated  States  in  order  to:

( 1 )  Assist  in  developing  indigenous  armed  forces  which  will  eventually
be  capable  of  maintaining  internal  security  without  assistance  from
French  units.

(2)  Assist  the  French  Union  forces  to  maintain  progress  in  the  restora-
tion of  internal  security  against  the  Viet  Minh.

(3)  Assist  the  forces  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  to  defend
Indochina  against  Chinese  Communist  aggression.

b.  In  view  of  the  immediate  urgency  of  the  situation,  involving  possible
large-scale  Chinese  Communist  intervention,  and  in  order  that  the  United
States  may  be  prepared  to  take  whatever  action  may  be  appropriate  in
such  circumstances,  make  the  plans  necessary  to  carry  out  the  courses  of
action  indicated  in  paragraph  10  below.

c.  In  the  event  that  information  and  circumstances  point  to  the  conclu-
sion that  France  is  no  longer  prepared  to  carry  the  burden  in  Indochina,
or  if  France  presses  for  an  increased  sharing  of  the  responsibility  for  Indo-
china, whether  in  the  UN  or  directly  with  the  U.S.  Government,  oppose  a
French  withdrawal  and  consult  with  the  French  and  British  concerning
further  measures  to  be  taken  to  safeguard  the  area  from  communist  domina-
tion.

10.  In  the  event  that  it  is  determined,  in  consultation  with  France,  that  Chinese
Communist  forces  (including  volunteers)  have  overtly  intervened  in  the  conflict


Documents  389


in  Indochina,  or  are  covertly  participating  to  such  an  extent  as  to  jeopardize
retention  of  the  Tonkin  Delta  area  by  French  Union  forces,  the  United  States
should  take  the  following  measures  to  assist  these  forces  in  preventing  the  loss
of  Indochina,  to  repel  the  aggression  and  to  restore  peace  and  security  in  Indo-
china.

a.  Support  a  request  by  France  or  the  Associated  States  for  immediate
action  by  the  United  Nations  which  would  include  a  UN  resolution  declar-
ing that  Communist  China  has  committed  an  aggression,  recommending
that  member  states  take  whatever  action  may  be  necessary,  without  geo-
graphic limitation,  to  assist  France  and  the  Associated  States  in  meeting  the
aggression.

b.  Whether  or  not  UN  action  is  immediately  forthcoming,  seek  the  maxi-
mum possible  international  support  for,  and  participation  in,  the  minimum
courses  of  military  action  agreed  upon  by  the  parties  to  the  joint  warning.
These  minimum  courses  of  action  are  set  forth  in  sub-paragraph  c  immedi-
ately below.

c.  Carry  out  the  following  minimum  courses  of  military  action,  either
under  the  auspices  of  the  UN  or  in  conjunction  with  France  and  the  United
Kingdom  and  any  other  friendly  governments:

(1)  A  resolute  defense  of  Indochina  itself  to  which  the  United  States
would  provide  such  air  and  naval  assistance  as  might  be  practicable.

(2)  Interdiction  of  Chinese  Communist  communication  lines  includ-
ing those  in  China.

(3)  The  United  States  would  expect  to  provide  the  major  forces  for
task  (2)  above;  but  would  expect  the  UK  and  France  to  provide  at
least  token  forces  therefor  and  to  render  such  other  assistance  as  is
normal  between  allies,  and  France  to  carry  the  burden  of  providing,  in
conjunction  with  the  Associated  States,  the  ground  forces  for  the  defense
of  Indochina.

11.  In  addition  to  the  courses  of  action  set  forth  in  paragraph  10  above,  the
United  States  should  take  the  following  military  actions  as  appropriate  to  the
situation :

a.  If  agreement  is  reached  pursuant  to  paragraph  1-e,  establishment  in
conjunction  with  the  UK  and  France  of  a  naval  blockade  of  Communist
China.

b.  Intensification  of  covert  operations  to  aid  anti-communist  guerrilla
forces  operating  against  Communist  China  and  to  interfere  with  and  dis-
rupt Chinese  Communist  lines  of  communication  and  military  supply  areas.

c.  Utilization,  as  desirable  and  feasible,  of  anti-communist  Chinese  forces,
including  Chinese  Nationalist  forces  in  military  operations  in  Southeast
Asia,  Korea,  or  China  proper.

d.  Assistance  to  the  British  to  cover  an  evacuation  from  Hong  Kong,
if  required.

e.  Evacuation  of  French  Union  civil  and  military  personnel  from  the
Tonkin  delta,  if  required.

12.  If,  subsequent  to  aggression  against  Indochina  and  execution  of  the
'minimum  necessary  courses  of  action  listed  in  paragraph  10-c  above,  the  United
States  determines  jointly  with  the  UK  and  France  that  expanded  military  action


390 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I


against  Communist  China  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  situation,  the  United
States  should  take  air  and  naval  action  in  conjunction  with  at  least  France  and
the  U.K.  against  all  suitable  military  targets  in  China,  avoiding  insofar  as  prac-
ticable those  targets  in  areas  near  the  boundaries  of  the  USSR  in  order  not  to
increase  the  risk  of  direct  Soviet  involvement.

13.  In  the  event  the  concurrence  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  France  to  ex-
panded military  action  against  Communist  China  is  not  obtained,  the  United
States  should  consider  taking  unilateral  action.


[Document  14]

July  14,  1952

MINISTERIAL  TALKS  IN  LONDON,  JUNE  1952

Summary  Minutes

3.00-4:30  P.M.,  Thursday,  June  26,  1952
British  Foreign  Office

EXTRACT

MR.  EDEN  opened  the  conversation  on  Indo-China  by  stating  that  it  might
be  well,  during  the  bilateral  discussions,  to  go  03'er  together  what  could  be
said  to  Mr.  Schuman  in  the  trilateral  discussions.  He  anticipated  that  Mr.
Schuman  might  take  the  by  now  familiar  line  that  there  was  little  prospect  for
victory  in  Indo-China  and  that,  unless  a  general  settlement  were  reached,  the
best  we  could  hope  for  would  be  a  stalemate.  This  did  not  accord  to  the  under-
standing of  the  British  Government,  which  has  the  impression  that  the  situation
is  improving  somewhat;  certainly  there  is  a  better  government,  there  is  wider
representation  in  the  government,  and  active  Vietnamese  participation.  MR.
EDEN  said  that  he  planned  to  discuss  the  situation  with  Mr.  Schuman  along
such  lines  in  the  hope  of  stimulating  his  morale  and  divorcing  him  from  his
relatively  defeatist  attitude.  THE  SECRETARY  replied  that  he  had  been  dis-
cussing Indo-China  with  the  French  along  the  lines  he  and  Mr.  Eden  had
taken  in  the  tripartite  discussions  in  Paris.  He  expressed  the  opinion  that  the
only  avenue  to  success  in  Indo-China  is  the  rapid  build-up  of  native  armed
forces  and  the  assumption  by  the  people  of  Vietnam  of  an  increasing  share  of
the  financial  and  military  burden.  THE  SECRETARY  announced  that  the
French  had  been  informed  that  the  United  States  was  prepared  to  increase  its
military  assistance  program  for  Indo-China  by  $150  million.  He  added  that  the
United  States,  feeling  that  the  French  military  training  program  was  badly
strained,  had  offered  to  assist  them  in  this  respect,  but  that  the  French,  always
skittish  over  what  they  might  regard  as  undue  American  interference,  had  not
taken  up  this  offer.  Certainly  it  is  not  up  to  the  Americans  to  press  on  the
French  assistance  along  these  lines.  THE  SECRETARY  said  that  it  was  obvious
that  Mr.  Letourneau  was  much  encouraged  as  a  result  of  his  visit  to  Washing-
ton. He  asked  Dr.  Jessup  to  read  the  text  of  the  Department's  telegram  2014,
June  18,  to  Saigon,  summarizing  the  discussions  with  Mr.  Letourneau.

THE  SECRETARY  said  that  he  had  warned  the  French  that  success  in  the
military  field  in  Indo-China  carried  with  it  certain  dangers,  including  the  in-
creased possibility  of  a  large-scale  Chinese  Communist  military  intervention.


Documents  391


He  said  that  this  in  turn  points  up  the  question,  "How  can  we  prevent  this  from
happening?"  He  feh  it  would  be  desirable  to  issue  a  warning  statement  of  some
sort,  whether  public,  private,  detailed  and  specific,  or  otherwise,  but  it  would
be  essential  to  have  a  general  understanding  as  to  the  action  which  we  might
take  if  the  warning  were  to  go  unheeded.  To  issue  a  warning  and  take  no  effec-
tive action  would  be  calamitous.  Perhaps  the  United  States  and  the  United
Kingdom,  preferably  in  conjunction  with  France,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,
can  reach  a  tentative  agreement  on  political  policy  in  this  regard  which  would
form  a  framework  for  joint  military  planning.  This,  in  turn,  leads  to  the  major
question:  "What  form  could  retaliation  against  aggression  take?"  The  American
military  authorities  are  of  the  strong  opinion  that  action  only  against  the  ap-
proaches to  Indo-China  would  be  ineffective.  In  fact,  the  first  problem  which
we  would  likely  have  to  face  would  be  the  evacuation  of  French  military  and
civilians  from  Tongking.  Action  confined  to  the  air  and  naval  arms  directed
against  the  Chinese  Communists  in  Indo-China  would  likewise  be  ineffective  and,
in  the  light  of  world  commitments,  the  United  States  has  no  infantry  available
:  for  operations  within  Indo-China.  The  United  States  thinking  is  along  the  lines
of  a  blockade  of  the  coast  of  China,  combined  with  air  action,  designed  .to  upset
the  economy  of  rnainl and  China  and  to  lessen  the  will  of  the  Chinese  Com-
munists to  continue  their  aggression.  Such  action  would  cease  when  aggression
ceased,  and  this  would  be  made  clear  to  everyone.  Every  effort  should
be  made  to  avoid  action  in  the  areas  of  acute  sensitivity  to  the  Soviet  Union.  We
are  of  the  opinion  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  probably  not  enter  the  conflict
if  it  understood  clearly  that  we  had  no  intention  of  attempting  to  overthrow  the
Chinese  Communist  regime  by  force.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  Chinese
Communists  have  a  formidable  air  force,  and  we  may  be  forced  to  attack  it
wherever  it  is  found.  If  the  Chinese  Communists  do  invade  Indo-China  in  sub-  _
stantial  force,  it  will  be  a  threat  to  the  vital  interests  of  all  of  us.

MR.  EDEN  said  that  he  saw  no  serious  objection  to  the  issuance  of  a  warning;
he  recalled  that  he  had  already  issued  a  public  warning  in  his  speech  at  Colum-
bia University.  He  felt  that,  whether  or  not  a  warning  is  issued,  it  would  be
important  to  have  the  Chinese  Communists  know  that  retaliation  against  further
Chinese  aggression  is  being  urgently  considered.

THE  SECRETARY  reiterated  that  there  was  an  urgent  need  for  basic  political
guidance  on  the  basis  of  which  military  talks  could  proceed.  MR.  EDEN  said
that  he  would  wish  to  consult  the  Cabinet  on  basic  policy,  noting  that  a  naval
blockade  involving  Hong  Kong  was  a  serious  question.

There  was  general  agreement  that  the  Secretary  and  Mr.  Eden  would  con-
duct their  discussions  with  Mr.  Schuman  along  the  above  lines.


[Document  15]

NIE-91,  4  June  1953

PROBABLE  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  INDOCHINA
THROUGH  MID-1954

THE  PROBLEM

„  To  estimate  French  Union  and  Communist  capabilities  and  probable  courses
of  action  with  respect  to  Indochina  and  the  internal  situation  throughout  Indo-
china through  mid- 1954.


392 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I


ASSUMPTION
There  is  no  major  expansion  of  the  Korean  war.

CONCLUSIONS

1.  Unless  there  is  a  marked  improvement  in  the  French  Union  military  posi-
tion in  Indochina,  political  stability  in  the  Associated  States  and  popular  support
of  the  French  Union  effort  against  the  Viet  Minh  will  decline.  We  believe  that
such  marked  improvement  in  the  military  situation  is  notjikely,  though  a  moder-
ate improvement  is  possible.  The  over-all  French  Union  position  in  Indochina
therefore  will  probably  deteriorate  during  the  period  of  this  estimate.

2.  The  lack  of  French  Union  military  successes,  continuing  Indochinese  dis-
trust of  ultimate  French  political  intentions,  and  popular  apathy  will  probably
continue  to  prevent  a  significant  increase  in  Indochinese  will  and  ability  to  resist
the  Viet  Minh.

3.  We  cannot  estimate  the  impact  of  the  new  French  military  leadership.  How-
ever, we  believe  that  the  Viet  Minh  will  retain  the  military  initiative  and  will
continue  to  attack  territory  in  the  Tonkin  delta  and  to  make  incursions  into  areas
outside  the  delta.  The  Viet  Minh  will  attempt  to  consolidate  Communist  con-
trol in  "Free  Laos"  and  will  build  up  supplies  in  northern  Laos  to  support  further
penetrations  and  consolidation  in  that  country.  The  Viet  Minh  will  almost  cer-
tainly intensify  political  warfare,  including  guerrilla  activities,  in  Cambodia.

4.  Viet  Minh  prestige  has  been  increased  by  the  military  successes  of  the  past
year,  and  the  organizational  and  administrative  effectiveness  of  the  regime  will
probably  continue  to  grow.

5.  The  French  Government  will  remain  under  strong  and  increasing  domestic
pressure  to  reduce  the  French  military  commitment  in  Indochina,  and  the  pos-
sibility cannot  be  excluded  that  this  pressure  will  be  successful.  However,  we  be-
lieve that  the  French  will  continue  without  enthusiasm  to  maintain  their  present
levels  of  troop  strength  through  mid- 1954  and  will  support  the  planned  develop-
ment of  the  national  armies  of  the  Associated  States.

6.  We  believe  that  the  Chinese  Communists  will  continue  and  possibly  in-
crease their  present  support  of  the  Viet  Minh.  However,  we  believe  that  whether
or  not  hostilities  are  concluded  in  Korea,  the  Chinese  Communists  will  not  in-
vade Indochina  during  this  period. ^  The  Chinese  Communists  will  almost  cer-
tainly retain  the  capability  to  intervene  so  forcefully  in  Indochina  as  to  overrun
most  of  the  Tonkin  delta  area  before  effective  assistance  could  be  brought  to  bear.

7.  We  believe  that  the  Communist  objective  to  secure  control  of  all  Indochina
will  not  be  altered  by  an  armistice  in  Korea  or  by  Communist  "peace"  tactics.
However,  the  Communists  may  decide  that  "peace"  maneuvers  in  Indochina
would  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  Communist  global  objectives,  and  to  the
objective  of  the  Viet  Minh.

8.  If  present  trends  in  the  Indochinese  situation  continue  through  mid-1954,
the  French  Union  political  and  military  position  may  subsequently  deteriorate
very  rapidly.

^The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  believes  that  the  intelligence
available  is  insufficient  to  permit  a  conclusion  at  this  time  that  the  Chinese  Communists
will  or  will  not  invade  Indochina  prior  to  mid- 1954.


Document  393


DISCUSSION

THE  CURRENT  SITUATION

,  9.  Military  Situation?  The  Viet  Minh  occupation  of  the  mountainous  Thai  coun-
\  try  of  northwestern  Tonkin  in  late  1952  and  the  follow-up  thrust  into  northern

i  Laos  in  April  1953  demonstrate  that  the  Viet  Minh  have  retained  the  military  ini-
j  tiative  in  Indochina.  Although  the  Viet  Minh  did  not  defeat  any  large  French

ii  Union  forces  in  these  operations,  they  did  force  the  French  to  withdraw  the  bulk
I  of  their  offensive  striking  power  from  the  Tonkin  delta  and  disperse  it  in  isolated
'  strong  points,  dependent  on  air  transport  for  logistic  support.  At  the  same  time,

strong  Viet  Minh  guerrilla  elements  plus  two  regular  Viet  Minh  divisions  sufficed
to  contain  the  114,000  regular  French  Union  forces  remaining  in  the  Tonkin
delta.  The  Viet  Minh  now  appear  to  have  withdrawn  the  bulk  of  their  regular
;  forces  from  Laos.  They  probably  have  left  behind  political  cadres,  some  regular
1  forces,  and  well-supplied  guerrilla  units  in  the  areas  which  they  overran  in  order
I  to  consolidate  Communist  political  and  military  control,  to  prepare  bases  for  fu-
ture operations,  and  to  pin  down  French  Union  garrisons,
i  10.  The  invasion  of  Laos  may  have  been  undertaken  as  part  of  a  long-range
i  Communist  design  to  develop  unrest  in  Thailand  and  ultimately  gain  control  of
;  all  Southeast  Asia.  Viewed  solely  in  terms  of  the  Viet  Minh  objective  to  win  all
I,  of  Indochina,  however,  the  Viet  Minh  offensive  in  Laos  is  an  extension  of  the
1952  winter's  offensive  in  northwestern  Tonkin,  and  represents  a  shift  in  Viet
1  Minh  military  tactics.  This  shift  in  tactics  is  probably  largely  explained  by  the
inability  to  defeat  the  main  French  Union  forces  in  the  Tonkin  delta  by  direct
assault.  Faced  with  this  position  of  strength,  the  Viet  Minh  began  during  1952
I  to  turn  the  bulk  of  their  regular  forces  toward  the  conquest  of  northwestern
;  Tonkin  and  northern  Laos,  areas  lightly  held  by  isolated  French  Union  garrisons.
I  11.  In  this  manner,  the  Viet  Minh  probably  hope  to  retain  the  military  and
•  political  initiative  and,  by  dispersing  French  Union  forces,  to  prevent  either  a
clean-up  by  the  French  Union  in  the  Tonkin  delta  or  offensive  operations  by  the
i  French  Union  against  Viet  Minh  troop  concentrations  and  supply  installations
)  outside  the  delta.  The  Viet  Minh  may  well  believe  that  by  gradually  extending
their  base  areas  in  lightly  defended  regions  of  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  central  Viet-
nam they  can  keep  French  Union  forces  dispersed  and  pinned  down  indefinitely.
In  time,  they  probably  expect  to  sap  the  morale  of  the  Vietnamese  and  the  French
I  and  finally  so  alter  the  balance  of  power  as  to  make  possible  successful  Viet
I  Minh  attacks  against  the  key  areas  of  Tonkin  and  south  Vietnam.
12.  The  deployment  of  four  divisions  into  Laos  by  the  Viet  Minh  and  the  fact
that  the  French  did  not  attack  their  long  and  exposed  lines  of  communication
typify  the  over-all  situation  in  Indochina.  French  Union  forces  still  outweigh  the
Viet  Minh  in  numbers,  firepower,  and  materiel.  French  ability  to  air  lift  troops
and  equipment,  although  strained  at  the  present  time,  provides  the  French
Union  with  tactical  flexibility  in  planning  defensive  and  offensive  operations.  The
Viet  Minh,  however,  by  their  skill  in  guerrilla  war,  their  ability  to  move  rapidly

J  ^See  Annex  A  for  Estimated  French  Union  Strengths  and  Dispositions;

j See  Annex  B  for  Estimated  Viet  Minh  Strengths  and  Dispositions;

I See  Annex  C  for  French  Far  Eastern  Air  Force  Strengths  and  Dispositions;  and

^  See  Annex  D  for  French  Far  Eastern  Naval  Strengths  and  Dispositions.


394 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

and  to  infiltrate  and  control  areas  under  nominal  French  occupation,  have
caused  the  French  to  commit  large  forces  throughout  Indochina  to  static  defense,
thus  seriously  reducing  French  ability  to  take  the  offensive.

13.  Viet  Minh  regular  forces  in  northern  Indochina  have  continued  their  grad-
ual evolution  from  lightly  armed  guerrilla  bands  to  a  regularly  organized  mihtary
force.  They  have  made  noticeable  advances  in  the  development  of  field  com-
munications, and  unit  firepower  has  increased  although  they  still  possess  only
limited  amounts  of  artillery.  Viet  Minh  combat  effectiveness  is  still  limited  by  a
lack  of  medical  supplies  and  an  inability  to  sustain  major  military  operations.

14.  Military  aid  from  the  US  has  enabled  the  French  Union  to  equip  ade-
quately their  regular  ground  forces.  The  French  air  forces,  with  US  logistical
support,  and  with  no  air  opposition,  have  maintained  a  fair  degree  of  effective-
ness in  paratroop  operations,  supply  by  air  drops,  and  daylight  attacks  on  enemy
supply  dumps.  French  naval  forces  have  improved  in  combat  effectiveness  and
have  maintained  control  of  the  seacoasts  and  inland  waterways.  However,  the
Viet  Minh  have  the  continuing  capability  to  threaten  control  of  the  inland  water-
ways by  a  mining  campaign.  Some  Vietnamese  National  Army  units  have  per-
formed creditably  in  combat,  but  desertion  and  "missing  in  action"  figures  remain
high.  For  the  most  part,  Vietnamese  National  Guard  and  other  local  security
forces  lack  the  firepower,  discipline,  and  leadership  to  hold  positions  alone  against
regular  Viet  Minh  units  which  infiltrate  the  Tonkin  delta.

15.  Although  French  Union  military  capabilities  have  improved  slightly,  the
French  Union  military  effort  has  been  inhibited  by  considerations  of  domestic
French  politics,  French  security  in  Europe,  and  fear  of  involvement  in  a  war  with
Communist  China.  These  considerations  have  caused  French  commanders  in
Indochina  to  forego  aggressive  military  operations  that  would  entail  heavy  casu-
alties and  have  prevented  them  from  obtaining  reinforcements  on  a  scale  that
might  make  possible  the  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh.

16.  The  development  of  the  Vietnamese  National  Army,  promised  by  the
French  in  1949,  has  been  retarded  by  a  shortage  of  officers  and  non-commissioned
officers,  by  French  lack  of  faith  in  the  Vietnamese  and  by  French  fiscal  problems.
There  has  also  been  an  unwillingness  among  many  Vietnamese  leaders,  not  in-
cluding Premier  Tam,  to  undertake  a  major  mobilization  effort  until  the  French
grant  further  political  concessions  and  until  the  Vietnamese  character  of  the  new
army  is  fully  guaranteed.

17.  Political.  Some  political  progress  has  been  made  in  Vietnam  during  the
past  year.  Premier  Tam's  administration  has  enlisted  the  cooperation  of  the
strongly  nationalist  Dai  Viet  leader  Nguyen  Huu  Tri,  and  nationalist  concern
over  Tam's  francophilia  has  to  some  extent  dissipated.  Tam  has  also  added  to
the  political  vitality  of  Vietnam  by  holding  local  elections  in  secure  areas  of  Viet-
nam. Another  Vietnamese  program,  undertaken  with  US  economic  assistance,
which  involves  the  relocation  of  scattered  villages  in  the  delta  into  centralized  and
defensible  sites  may  be  an  important  step  toward  the  eventual  "pacification"  of
heavily  infiltrated  areas.  The  decisions  of  March  1953  to  increase  the  size  of
the  Vietnamese  National  Army  while  expanding  the  area  of  Vietnamese  strategic
and  operational  responsibility,  could  also  be  of  major  political  significance.

18.  Despite  these  advances,  Vietnam  still  lacks  the  degree  of  political  strength
essential  for  the  mobilization  of  the  country's  resources.  Tam's  "action"  program
remains  more  shadow  than  substance.  Elected  local  councils  have  no  real  power,
promised  land  reform  and  other  social  and  economic  reforms  which  might  gen-
erate popular  support  have  not  left  the  planning  stage,  and  the  Vietnamese  gov-
ernment is  handicapped  by  incompetent  cabinet  ministers  and  the  lack  of  com-

I


Documents  395


petent  administrators.  While  Bao  Dai  refuses  to  assume  active  direction  of  the
affairs  of  state,  he  remains  hostile  toward  new  leadership  and  democratic  activi-
ties.

19.  Of  more  basic  importance  in  the  failure  of  Vietnamese  to  rally  to  the  Viet-
namese government  following  the  French  grant  of  independence  within  the
French  Union  in  1949  have  been  the  following:

a.  Many  Vietnamese  doubt  the  ability  of  French  Union  forces  to  defeat  the
Viet  Minh  and  prefer  to  remain  apart  from  the  struggle.

b.  The  French  Government  has  not  dared  to  promise  complete  national  inde-
pendence at  some  future  date,  as  demanded  by  the  Vietnamese,  because  of  the
fear  that  the  French  national  assembly  would  then  refuse  to  support  a  war  in  a
"lost"  portion  of  the  French  Union.

c.  The  Vietnamese,  despite  many  evolutionary  steps  toward  complete  inde-
pendence since  1949,  are  generally  inclined  to  believe  that  the  French  intend  to
retain  effective  control  over  the  affairs  of  Vietnam.

d.  The  nationalist  appeal  and  military  prestige  of  the  Viet  Minh  remains
strong  among  significant  numbers  of  the  Vietnamese.

20.  In  Cambodia,  internal  political  strife  has  weakened  the  government,  dissi-
dent nationalist  elements  have  continued  to  sap  popular  loyalty  to  the  throne,  and
the  King  is  demanding  greater  independence  from  the  French  in  order  to
strengthen  his  political  position  at  home.  Meanwhile,  the  9,000  Viet  Minh  com-
batants in  Cambodia,  while  under  fairly  constant  attack  by  French  and  Cam-
bodian forces,  are  capable  of  exploiting  disorders  which  may  develop.

21.  Laotian  stabiHty  has  been  upset  by  the  recent  Viet  Minh  incursion.  The
Laotians  are  generally  hostile  to  the  Viet  Minh  but  are  unable  to  contribute  a

1  great  deal  to  the  defense  of  their  homeland.  A  small  group  of  pro-Communist
^  Laotians  returned  to  Laos  with  the  Viet  Minh  during  the  recent  incursion.  It  is

led  by  a  disaffected  Laotian  nobleman.  Prince  Souphanouvong,  and  calls  itself

the  "Free  Government  of  Pathet  Lao"  (Laos) .

22.  Meanwhile,  the  Viet  Minh  leadership,  with  Chinese  Communist  material  and
advisory  assistance  since  1949,  has  demonstrated  the  necessary  zeal,  ruthless-
ness,  and  tenacity  to  exploit  to  the  maximum  the  limited  resources  at  their
command.  The  Viet  Minh  have  expanded  the  area  under  their  complete  control
and  their  prestige  has  probably  increased  throughout  Indochina  as  a  result  of
military  successes  in  northwest  Tonkin  and  Laos.

23.  In  the  areas  of  Viet  Minh  occupation,  Viet  Minh  control  is  believed  to  be
effective,  and  minimum  food  requirements  are  being  met.  The  Viet  Minh  have
taken  on  increasingly  the  conventional  characteristics  of  a  "Peoples  Republic"
and  are  now  engaged  in  programs  to  confiscate  and  redistribute  land  and  to
eliminate  "traitors"  and  "reactionaries."  Although  this  departure  from  national
front  tactics  has  increased  realization  that  the  Viet  Minh  are  under  complete
Communist  domination,  the  Viet  Minh  control  many  villages  within  areas  of
nominal  French  Union  occupation  through  terror,  compulsion,  and  their  con-
tinued nationalist  appeal.

24.  The  Viet  Minh  and  the  Chinese  Communists  continue  to  maintain  close  re-
lations. It  is  estimated  that  there  are  less  than  a  thousand  Chinese  Communist
advisers  and  technicians  with  the  Viet  Minh  in  Indochina.  The  Chinese  Com-
munists are  providing  the  Viet  Minh  with  military  supplies  at  an  estimated  aver-
age level  of  400  to  500  tons  per  month,  and  some  Viet  Minh  troops  are  sent
to  Communist  China  for  training.  Small  Chinese  Communist  units  reportedly
have  entered  the  mountainous  northwest  section  of  Tonkin  on  several  occasions
to  assist  the  Viet  Minh  against  French-supported  native  guerrillas,  but  no  Chinese


396 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

Communist  troops  have  been  identified  in  forward  areas.  There  was  some  evi-
dence during  the  past  year  that  Viet  Minh  poHcy  statements  may  be  "cleared,"
if  not  written,  in  Peiping.  Close  Viet  Minh  relations  with  Communist  China  are
complemented,  superficially  at  least,  by  equally  warm  relations  with  the  Soviet
Union,  but  we  are  unable  to  determine  whether  Peiping  or  Moscow  has  ultimate
responsibility  for  Viet  Minh  policy.

PROBABLE  TRENDS  IN  FRENCH  UNION
CAPABILITIES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION

25.  French  plans  for  dealing  with  the  war  in  Indochina  now  revolve  around  the
development  of  national  armies  in  the  Associated  States,  particularly  in  Vietnam.
In  March  1953,  the  Franco-Vietnamese  High  Military  Council  approved  a  new
program  calling  for  an  increase  in  Vietnamese  strength  during  the  current  year
of  40,000  men,  organized  in  54  "commando"  battalions.-^  A  further  expansion
of  57,000  men  has  been  proposed  for  1954  and  will  probably  be  undertaken  if
the  initial  reinforcement  is  successful  and  if  equipment  is  made  available  by  the
US.  With  these  additional  Vietnamese  forces,  the  French  hope  to  undertake
widespread  clearing  operations  and  subsequently  to  organize  sufficient  mobile
groups  to  begin  by  early  1955  the  destruction  of  the  Viet  Minh  regular  forces  in
Tonkin.

26.  Progress  has  been  made  in  carrying  out  the  troop  reinforcement  program
thus  far,  and  the  Vietnamese  may  have  close  to  40,000  reinforcements  recruited,
trained,  and  available  for  combat  by  early  1954.  However,  the  Viet  Minh  in-
vasion of  Laos  and  the  threat  of  similar  operations  will  probably  keep  French
mobile  reserves  deployed  outside  the  Tonkin  delta  in  isolated  strong  points.  The
addition  of  40,000  untested  and  lightly  armed  Vietnamese  will  not  offset  the
absence  of  these  regular  French  forces,  and  effective  clearing  or  offensive  opera-
tions cannot  be  undertaken  until  French  Union  forces  are  regrouped.  Moreover,
the  French  military  leadership  has  been  so  dominated  by  concepts  of  static  de-
fense as  to  be  unable  to  conduct  the  planned  operations  with  the  vigor  necessary
for  their  success.  How  the  new  military  leadership  may  alter  this  we  cannot
estimate.  Finally,  unless  the  French  Union  forces  prove  strong  enough  to  provide
security  for  the  Vietnamese  population,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  sweep  the
guerrillas  out  of  the  areas  as  planned.  Not  only  will  the  populace  fail  generally
to  provide  the  intelligence  required  to  rout  the  guerrillas  but,  as  in  the  past,  they
will  frequently  give  warning  of  the  presence  of  the  French  Union  forces,  thus
permitting  the  guerrillas  to  take  cover  and  later  to  emerge  when  the  danger  is
past.

27.  The  French  are  fearful  that  they  cannot  achieve  a  military  decision  in  Indo-
china. Unless  the  French  Union  military  plans  achieve  great  success  during  the
period  of  this  estimate,  the  conviction  will  grow  in  France  that  the  Indochina
problem  can  only  be  solved  through  some  over-all  East-West  settlement  in  the
Far  East.  The  difficulties  of  the  French  financial  position  impel  the  French  to
seek  relief  from  the  mounting  costs  of  the  Indochina  war,  and  French  apprehen-
sions concerning  eventual  German  rearmament  not  only  make  them  reluctant  to
increase  the  military  establishment  in  Indochina  but  impel  them  to  seek  the
early  return  of  French  troops  to  Europe.  The  French  Government  will  therefore

^  The  40,000  are  to  be  recruited  and  will  represent  a  net  increase  in  French  Union
strength.  Planned  transfers  of  native  units  from  the  French  Army  to  the  Vietnamese
Army  will  also  strengthen  the  Vietnamese  Army  but  will  not  represent  any  net  increase
in  French  Union  strength.


Documents  397


remain  under  strong  and  increasing  domestic  pressure  to  reduce  its  military
commitment  in  Indochina.  On  the  other  hand,  the  French  Government  is  under
strong  pressure  to  maintain  its  position  in  Indochina.  There  is  still  considerable
sentiment  against  abandoning  the  heavy  investment  which  France  has  poured
into  Indochina.  More  important,  there  is  great  reluctance  to  accept  the  adverse
effects  on  the  cohesion  of  the  French  Union  and  on  French  prestige  as  a  world
power  which  would  accompany  the  loss  of  France's  position  in  Indochina.  In
these  circumstances,  we  believe  that  the  French  will  continue  without  enthusiasm
to  maintain  their  present  levels  of  troop  strength  through  mid- 1954  and  will
support  the  planned  development  of  the  National  Armies  of  the  Associated
States.  At  the  same  time,  France  will  probably  continue  to  seek  maximum  finan-
'  cial  and  material  assistance  for  the  French  Union  effort  while  resisting  any
I  measures  which  would  impair  French  pre-eminence  among  the  Associated  States,
i  including  the  making  of  any  commitments  concerning  the  eventual  political  status
i  of  the  Associated  States.

;  28.  Political  strength  in  Vietnam  may  grow  slightly  during  1953  as  progress  is
made  toward  a  stronger  national  army,  as  the  Vietnamese  assume  increasing
governmental  responsibilities,  and  as  Premier  Tam's  social  and  political  programs
,  serve  to  decrease  distrust  of  French  intentions.  There  will  probably  also  be  a
!  growing  understanding,  and  fear,  of  the  true  Communist  nature  and  purpose  of
the  Viet  Minh.  However,  these  developments  will  not  bring  about  a  significant
I  increase  in  Vietnamese  will  and  ability  to  resist  the  Viet  Minh  during  the  period
j,  of  this  estimate  because  the  Vietnam  leadership  cannot  in  this  brief  period  over-
■  come  popular  apathy  and  mobilize  the  energy  and  resources  of  the  people.  More-
'  over,  if  events  should  persuade  Vietnam  leaders  that  no  progress  toward  national
independence  is  possible  under  the  French  or  that  French  Union  forces  cannot
defeat  the  Viet  Minh,  it  is  probable  that  the  political  strength  of  Vietnam  would
decline  rapidly.  Substantial  Viet  Minh  military  victories  in  the  Tonkin  delta  or
^  elsewhere  in  Indochina  would  also  produce  such  a  decline.

:  29.  In  Cambodia,  political  stability  is  likely  to  decline  as  the  result  of  tension
between  the  monarchy,  the  politically  divided  people,  and  the  French  colonial
administration.  Even  if  French  concessions  to  the  King  insure  his  adherence  to
the  French  Union,  unrest  in  Cambodia  or  a  Viet  Minh  penetration  into  southern
Laos  might  force  the  deployment  of  strong  French  forces  to  Cambodia.

30.  In  Laos,  political  attitudes  will  be  determined  almost  entirely  by  mihtary
developments.  The  Laotians  will  probably  remain  loyal  to  the  French  Union
if  they  are  defended  aggressively.  They  will  not,  however,  offer  effective  resistance
to  Communist  efforts  to  consolidate  political  control  if  French  Union  forces  re-

'  treat  from  the  country  or  if  the  French  Union  forces  defend  only  a  few  strong
points.

PROBABLE  TRENDS  IN  VIET  MINH  AND
CHINESE  COMMUNIST  CAPABILITIES
AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION

31.  Viet  Minh  Capabilities  and  Probable  Courses  of  Action.  Barring  serious  Viet
Minh  military  reverses,  which  could  occur  if  Viet  Minh  forces  should  over-

,  extend  themselves  or  make  frontal  attacks  on  French  Union  strong  points,  the
Viet  Minh  regime  will  probably  increase  its  total  strength  slightly  during  the
;  period  of  this  estimate.  Viet  Minh  prestige  will  be  increased  by  their  recent  gains
j  in  Laos.  The  organizational  and  administrative  effectiveness  of  the  regime  will
I  probably  continue  to  increase  with  experience  and  Chinese  Communist  guidance.


398 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

The  program  of  expropriation  and  distribution  of  lands  to  tenants  now  being
carried  out  probably  weakens  the  Viet  Minh  appeal  among  some  classes,  but  will
probably  strengthen  Viet  Minh  controls  at  the  village  level  and  thus  facilitate
the  collection  of  rice.

32.  Militarily,  the  Viet  Minh  are  unlikely  to  expand  greatly  their  armed  forces
because  they  are  already  experiencing  manpower  difficulties.  Their  combat  ef-
ficiency probably  will  increase,  however,  as  the  result  of  a  modest  augmentation
of  their  unit  firepower  and  a  steady  improvement  in  staff  planning  and  coordina-
tion of  forces.  The  Viet  Minh  probably  will  continue  to  receive  a  steady  flow
of  material  assistance  from  the  Chinese  Communists,  and  the  amount  may  in-
crease at  any  time.  The  Viet  Minh  do  not  have,  and  probably  cannot  develop
within  the  period  of  this  estimate,  the  capability  to  make  such  effective  use  of
heavy  equipment — artillery,  armor,  and  aircraft — from  the  Chinese  Communists
as  to  permit  successful  attacks  against  strong  concentrations  of  regular  French
forces.  Over  a  longer  period,  however,  a  great  increase  in  Viet  Minh  capabilities,
including  the  development  of  an  air  force,  is  possible.

33.  We  believe  that  during  the  period  of  this  estimate  the  Communists  in  Indo-
china will  probably  attempt  to  avoid  combat  except  where  they  can  achieve
surprise  or  great  superiority  in  numbers.  They  will  attempt  to  consolidate  Com-
munist controls  in  "Free  Laos"  and  will  build  up  supplies  in  northern  Laos  to
support  further  penetrations  and  consolidation  in  that  country.  If  they  reach
the  Thai  border,  they  probably  will  attempt  to  organize  guerrilla  forces  among
the  Vietnamese  in  northeastern  Thailand,  but  we  do  not  believe  they  will  have
the  capability  to  provide  much  material  assistance  to  such  forces  through  mid-
1954.  The  Viet  Minh  forces  in  Laos  may  hope  to  receive  assistance  from  the
Vietnamese  population  in  Thailand.  The  Viet  Minh  will  almost  certainly  in-
tensify political  warfare,  including  guerrilla  activities  in  Cambodia.

34.  We  believe  that  neither  the  French  Union  nor  the  Viet  Minh  will  be  able  to
win  a  final  military  decision  in  Indochina  through  mid- 1954.  The  Viet  Minh,
with  their  principal  striking  forces  operating  from  the  Tonkin  base  area,  will
probably  retain  the  initiative  during  the  period  of  this  estimate  by  maintaining
attacks  against  lightly  defended  French  Union  territory.  The  French  Union
can  hold  key  positions  in  Laos  and  may  attempt  by  attacks  against  Viet  Minh
lines  of  communication,  to  prevent  the  Viet  Minh  from  moving  southward  in
force  towards  southern  Laos  and  Cambodia.  We  believe,  however,  that  Viet
Minh  guerrillas  in  southern  Laos  will  develop  sufficient  strength  to  control  much
of  the  countryside  and  that  guerrilla  activities  in  Cambodia  will  be  intensified.
The  French  Union  probably  will  reduce,  but  not  eliminate,  Viet  Minh  strength
in  south  Vietnam.  Viet  Minh  infiltration  of  the  Tonkin  delta  will  probably  be
maintained  at  a  high  level  and  the  Viet  Minh  may  undertake  major  attacks
against  the  delta  if  they  can  weaken  French  defenses  by  drawing  French  strength
elsewhere.

35.  Unless  there  is  a  marked  improvement  in  the  French  Union  military  position
in  Indochina,  political  stability  in  the  Associated  States  and  popular  support  of
the  French  Union  effort  against  the  Viet  Minh  will  decline.  We  believe  that  such
marked  improvement  in  the  miUtary  situation  is  not  likely,  though  a  moderate
improvement  is  possible.  The  over-all  French  Union  position  in  Indochina  there-
fore will  probably  deteriorate  during  the  period  of  this  estimate.

36.  Chinese  Communist  Capabilities  and  Probable  Courses  of  Action.  The
Chinese  Communists  will  have  the  capability  during  the  period  of  this  estimate


Documents  399


!  to  improve  airfields  in  south  China,  to  train  Viet  Minh  pilots,  to  continue  im-
S  provement  of  transportation  facilities,  and  to  increase  their  present  level  of
\  logistic  support  for  the  Viet  Minh.  The  Chinese  Communists  will  probably  re-
tain their  present  capability  to  commit  and  support  logistically  150,000  Chinese
!  Communist  troops  for  an  invasion  of  Indochina.  The  combat  efficiency  of  this
;  potential  invasion  force  could  probably  be  increased  considerably  by  the  use  of
combat-seasoned  troops  who  have  been  rotated  from  Korea  in  the  past  year.
The  ability  of  Chinese  Communist  forces  to  sustain  offensive  operations  in  Indo-
[  china  would  probably  be  increased  should  logistic  requirements  in  Korea  remain
j  at  low  levels  for  a  prolonged  period.

j  37.  A  Chinese  Communist  force  of  150,000,  added  to  Viet  Minh  forces,  would
probably  be  able  to  overrun  the  Tonkin  delta  area  before  effective  assistance

{  could  be  brought  to  bear.  The  Chinese  Communists  now  have,  and  will  probably

!  continue  to  have  during  the  period  of  this  estimate,  sufficient  jet  and  piston  air-
craft, independent  of  operations  in  Korea,  for  small-scale  but  damaging  attacks
against  French  Union  installations  in  Tonkin.  With  surprise,  they  probably  could

:  neutralize  the  French  Air  Forces  in  Tonkin.  The  Chinese  Communist  air  forces
do  not  appear,  however,  to  possess  the  capability  at  present  of  conducting  sus-

ii  tained  air  operations  in  Indochina  because  of  a  lack  of  improved  airfields  in

I  south  China  and  stockpiles  of  supplies.  Such  preparations  would  take  several

I  months.

i  38.  We  believe  that  whether  or  not  hostilities  are  concluded  in  Korea,  the
I  Chinese  Communists  will  not  invade  Indochina  during  the  period  of  this  esti-
mate.^ Although  they  possess  the  capability,  the  following  considerations  militate
against  intervention  by  regular  Chinese  Communist  forces  or  by  large  numbers
of  Chinese  Communist  "volunteers" :

a.  The  Communists  probably  consider  that  their  present  strategy  in  Indo-
china promises  success  in  a  prolonged  struggle  and  produces  certain  immediate
advantages.  It  diverts  badly  needed  French  and  US  resources  from  Europe  at
relatively  small  cost  to  the  Communists.  It  provides  opportunities  to  advance

;  international  Communist  interests  while  preserving  the  fiction  of  "autonomous"
national  liberation  movements,  and  it  provides  an  instrument,  the  Viet  Minh,
with  which  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  can  indirectly  exert  military  and

,  psychological  pressures  on  the  peoples  and  governments  of  Laos,  Cambodia,  and
Thailand.

b.  Communist  leadership  is  aware  that  the  West,  and  in  particular  the  US,
would  probably  retaliate  against  Communist  China  if  Chinese  Communist  forces
should  invade  Indochina.  We  believe  that  fear  of  such  retaliation  and  of  the

,  major  war  which  might  result  are  important  deterrents  to  open  Chinese  Com-
i  munist  intervention  in  Indochina.

39.  We  believe  that  the  Communist  objective  to  secure  control  of  all  Indo-
I  china  will  not  be  altered  by  an  armistice  in  Korea  or  by  Communist  "peace"
tactics.  However,  the  Communists  may  decide  that  "peace"  maneuvers  in  Indo-
china would  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  Communist  global  objectives,  and
to  the  objective  of  the  Viet  Minh.

*The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  believes  that  the  intelligence
li  available  is  insufficient  to  permit  a  conclusion  at  this  time  that  the  Chinese  Communists
'  will  or  will  not  invade  Indochina  prior  to  mid- 1954.


400 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

ANNEX  A


ESTIMATED  GROUND  FORCE  STRENGTHS
AND  DISPOSITIONS  AS  OF 1 APRIL 1953  ^

INDOCHINA


A.  FRENCH  UNION  FORCES


Annam  &

Cochin-

Component

Tonkin

Plateaux

china

Cambodia

Laos

Regulars-

French  Expeditionary

9 1 ,000

20,000

45,000

8,000

7,500

CorDS  (CEF)

Associated  States

27,000

33,000

20,000

8,500

8,000

Armies

Associated  States

6,000

4,000

10,000

4,000

5,500

National  Guards

Semi-Military

CEF  Auxiliaries

23,000

6,500

18,000

3,300

2,400

Vietnam  Auxiliaries

8,000

10,000

34,000

Other  Semi-Military

27,000

7,000

30,000

9,000

6,500

Totals

182,000

80,500

157,000

32,800

29,900

Total


53,200
52,000
79,500


^  These  strengths  and  dispositions  were  effective  before  the  Viet  Minh  invasion  of
Laos.  Since  that  time  French  Expeditionary  Corps  (CEF)  strength  in  Laos  has  been
increased  to  17,500  and  CEF  strength  in  Tonkin  reduced  to  81,000.
"French  Union  regular  forces  are  organized  into  a  total  of  118  CEF  battalions  and
95  Associated  States  battalions.  The  CEF  has  83  infantry,  7  parachute,  8  armored,
and  19  artillery  battalions  and  1  AAA  battalion.  The  Associated  States  have  87  infantry
and  4  artillery  battalions  and  4  parachute  battalions.

^  Does  not  include  6,000  French  personnel  detached  for  duty  with  the  Associated  States
forces  as  cadres  and  advisers.  Composition  of  the  172,000  is  as  follows:  French —
51,000;  Foreign  Legion— 19,000;  African— 17,000;  North  African— 30,000;  native
Indochinese — 55,000.


Documents  401


ANNEX  B

ESTIMATED  VIET  MINH  GROUND  FORCE  STRENGTHS
AND  DISPOSITIONS  AS  OF 1 APRIL 1953  ^

B.  VIET  MINH  FORCES

Annam  &  Cochin-
Component  Tonkin Plateaux china Cambodia Laos  Total

Regulars^

Army  81,000 25,000 13,000 1,000 3,000  123,000

Regional  Forces 35,000 14,500 7,500 3,000 2,000  62,000
(Full-time)

Semi-Military

People's  Militia  50,000  34,000 25,000 5,000 1,000  115,000
(Armed)

Totals  166,000  73,500 45,500 9,000-^ 6,000  300,000

^  These  strengths  and  dispositions  changed  during  the  Viet  Minh  incursion  into  Laos
in  April.  An  estimated  30,000  Viet  Minh  regulars  moved  from  Tonkin  into  Laos  and
an  estimated  10,000  moved  from  Annam.  By  mid-May,  however,  it  is  believed  that  all
but  15,000  of  the  Viet  Minh  regulars  had  returned  to  their  base  areas  in  Tonkin  and
Annam.

^The  Viet  Minh  are  organized  into  6  infantry  divisions,  1  artillery  division,  14  inde-
pendent regiments,  and  15  independent  battalions.  Regional  forces  are  organized  in
44  battalions.

'Some  3,000  dissident  Khmer  Issaraks  are  also  active  in  Cambodia.


402


II


00  00  OO I I 00 I I 1  I


(N

I

PQ

m

tin  |Jh  <N  I
OO  00 I  □

pQ


(N  »o (N  >n


00

o

^  ^  J.

ti.  u  !=;

00  Tt


.J-  top  6J0
O  C3  C
GOO

^

h2  ^
j3  w  ffi

:^

43  m  PQ

PQ  U  U


C3  G  O
O  o  S

*c3  'cS

.^-.^-^

PQ  PQ  X

CTj

U  U  PQ


MO


.2  O


^  ^  ^

C  G  »-i


^1

O  03

H  PQ


73  T3

<<
<u  0)
C  G

H  H  Z


G


G  G  G

o  o  o

(5X)  &JQ  OX)

C/5  C/3  C/5

D  D  "3
^  43  ^

G  G  G

o  o  o

C/D  C/3  C/3
G  G  G

H  H  H


G

2

03
C/3


o

03

03  p

J=J  OX)
00

oo  \
t«  G


G
O
U^

T3

03

C/D
i-i
(D

X>

B
o
PQ


^  73

OX)  o3  .

^  ^  OS

\  «  \

.  o  ,

C  «  G

03  <N  en


03

O  G

Pi  ^-

o  c


c  §


H  2

G  CO
G

C  o3

Ih


(U (U  5


G

2

73

03

C/5


OX)


D  On

.2  G

OX)  oJ


G

2

73

03

:3
a"

G  CO

o  .

73  G

03  03

12

o  -

«  G

0)

J  s

ON  -g

\5


CO

G  §
O  O  '1

CO  to


«  G

OX)rr


403


^5
8  8

.52


>^  o
o  o  .a

St/5  .22
03  O

-.Is

S|  o

^  «  e

4-j O-i  (L)


O  o

.52  o


CO


404 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


ANNEX  D

FRENCH  NAVAL  FORCES  IN  INDOCHINA

Small  Aircraft  Carrier  (CVL)i  1

Gunboat  (PG)  2

Escort  (PCE)  8

Submarine  Chaser  (PC)  11

Submarine  Chaser  (SC)  5

Motor  Minesweeper  (AMS)  6

Amphibious  Vessels:
LST

LSIL  13

LSSL  6

LCU  19

Miscellaneous  small  landing  craft  211

Auxiliary  Vessels:

ARL  1-

AG  1

AGS  1

AR  m

AFDL  1

AVP  2

AO  1

Service  Craft  54

French  Navy  Personnel  9,760

Vietnam  Navy  Personnel  277

Mission  Aircraft:

F6F-52  22

SB2C-52  12

PB4Y-2  8

JRF-5  11

S-51  2

Morane  500  "0"  6

C-47A  1

^  The  French  have  attempted  to  keep  one  of  their  two  carriers  in  Indochina  waters,

subject  to  overhaul  and  repair  schedules.  The  ARROMANCHES  (CVL)  and  the
LAFAYETTE  (CVL)  departed  for  France  in  February  and  May  1953,  respectively,  for
overhaul  and  repairs,
^  Carrier-based  aircraft.


Documents  405


[Document  16]

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
WASHINGTON

August  5,  1953

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL

SUBJECT:  Further  United  States  Support  for  France  and  the  Asso-

ciated States  of  Indochina

REFERENCES: A. NSC  124/2

B.  NSC  Action  Nos.  758,  773  and  780

C.  NIE-63  and  NIE-91

The  enclosed  report  by  the  Department  of  State  on  the  subject  is  transmitted
herewith  for  consideration  by  the  National  Security  Council  of  the  recommenda-
tion contained  in  paragraph  9  thereof  at  its  meeting  on  Thursday,  August  6,
1953.

JAMES  S.  LAY,  Jr.
Executive  Secretary

cc:  The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury

The  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

[Opening  sections  missing]
The  winding  up  of  the  Indochina  war  is  a  necessary  condition  to  enable  France
to  check  both  these  trends  and  reassume  a  more  confident  and  positive  role  on
the  continent.

4.  The  lack  of  success  so  far  in  Indochina  is  traceable  largely  to  French
failure:

a.  by  timely  grants  of  sovereignty  and  impressive  military  success,  to  win
a  sufficient  native  support  to  permit  more  rapid  development  of  larger  and
more  effective  native  armies,  and  to  frustrate  nationalist  appeal  of  the
Viet  Minh.

b.  to  plan  and  execute  aggressive  military  operations.

5.  The  present  French  government  is  the  first  in  seven  years  which  seems
prepared  to  do  what  needs  to  be  done  to  wind  up  the  war  in  Indochina.  Its
plans  offer  the  United  States  at  last  an  opportunity  to  attack  the  major  Indo-
chinese  and  Metropolitan  French  problems  as  a  whole.  The  French  Premier  has
assured  our  representatives  that  his  government  is  anxious  to  continue  the
struggle  and  to  press  on  to  win,  but  he  can  carry  through  his  program  against
political  opposition  only  if  he  offers  a  "package"  solution,  not  only  of  Indochina
but  of  the  related  French  weakness  in  Europe  and  at  home.  For  this  purpose
the  new  government  has  developed  the  following  program:

a.  Military  Initiative.  A  new  commander.  General  Navarre,  has  taken
over  in  Indochina  and  is  determined  to  assume  the  offensive.  The  initial
operations  under  his  command  testify  to  this  resolve.  He  has  revised  the
^ plan  originally  presented  in  outline  to  us  by  M.  Letourneau  in  March  1953
for  breaking  the  back  of  Viet  Minh  resistance  during  the  campaign  season


406 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

f  of  1954-55.  His  plans  include  an  increase  in  the  native  armies  by  approxi-
mately the  following  figures:  59,600  in  1953;  76,000  in  1954,  and  20,000  ;
in  1955  for  a  total  of  331,650  by  January  1956.  At  his  request,  the  French
government  is  prepared,  despite  popular  opposition,  to  send  nine  more
regular  infantry  battalions  plus  ancillary  units  from  France,  if  the  rest  of  ;
the  program  is  agreed  on.  The  Navarre  operational  plans  drawn  up  on
Indochina  were  approved  by  Lt.  Gen.  O'Daniel,  USA,  in  his  report  on  his
recent  mission.

b.  Political  Program.  Pursuant  to  the  French  declaration  of  July  3,
M.  Laniel  has  assured  U.S.  representatives  of  his  determination  to  grant
genuine  independence  to  the  Associated  States  without  the  strings  which
have  marked  the  previous  grants  of  "independence."  He  apparently  en-
visages something  very  much  like  Dominion  status,  retaining  only  such
French  authority  and  privileges  as  may  be  agreed.  ;

c.  Fiscal  Rehabilitation.  Laniel  conceives  his  project  for  Indochina  as  |
an  integral  part  of  a  new  and  supreme  effort  by  France  to  "put  its  house
in  order."  He  plans  to  approach  a  balanced  budget  during  CY  1954.  This
will  involve  a  cut  in  French  military  as  well  as  civil  expense  for  that  year.
At  the  same  time  he  contemplates  a  greater  effort  in  Indochina.  To  do
this  he  asks  the  U.S.  for  additional  assistance  amounting  to  about  $400
million  for  FY  1954.  |

6.  a.  Attached  are  two  tables  showing  (1)  the  financing  of  the  Indochina
war  in  CY  1953  and  as  proposed  for  CY  1954;  and  (2)  U.S.  aid  for  France
and  Indochina  under  1953  program  and  1954  appropriations.  They  contain
tentative  figures  for  1954.

b.  As  the  first  table  makes  clear,  under  the  proposed  program,  the  United
States  would  assume  about  50  per  cent  of  the  1954  budgetary  expenditures
($829  million  out  of  $1,676  million)  and,  if  end-item  aid  is  included,
would  be  carrying  about  61  per  cent  of  the  total  financing.  This  would
represent  about  two  and  one-third  times  the  amount  of  U.S.  aid  for  CY
1953.

c.  As  shown  by  the  second  table,  this  program  would  entail  an  increase
of  $403  million  over  the  assistance  now  planned  for  France  ($1,286  mil-
lion). Of  the  total  French  military  budget  for  both  Indochina  and  NATO,
the  presently  planned  U.S.  aid,  including  end  items,  would  be  26  per  cent;
if  the  aid  were  increased  as  requested,  such  U.S.  assistance,  including  end
items,  would  be  34  per  cent  of  the  total.

d.  Finally,  as  the  first  table  indicates,  under  the  program,  the  total
expenditures  for  Indochina  for  1954,  including  end  items,  would  be
$2,160  million  as  compared  with  $1,700  for  CY  1953.


7.  The  program  presents  substantial  risks.  Under  it,  the  French  build-up  in
Europe  would  be  slowed  down  in  some  degree,  both  by  the  limited  troop  diver-
sion and  the  cut  in  the  French  military  budget.  Moreover,  in  the  best  of  cir-
cumstances, the  Indo-Chinese  war  cannot  be  successfully  closed  out  before  the
1954-55  fighting  season.  Consequently,  in  addition  to  any  supplemental  aid


Documents  407


furnished  now,  we  would  have  to  contemplate  a  comparable  further  contribution
a  year  from  now  to  assure  a  satisfactory  conclusion.  Furthermore,  there  is  the
risk  that  the  French  Union  forces  in  Indo-China  might  suffer  reverses  before
the  projected  additional  effort  can  be  brought  to  bear.

8.  Despite  these  risks  and  uncertainties  it  is  believed  that  the  U.S.  should  agree,
in  its  own  security  interests,  to  furnish  the  additional  $400  million  of  aid  to
France.  Various  factors  lead  to  this  conclusion:

a.  The  Laniel  government  is  almost  certainly  the  last  French  government
which  would  undertake  to  continue  the  war  in  Indo-China.  If  it  fails,  it  will
almost  certainly  be  succeeded  by  a  government  committed  to  seek  a  settle-
ment on  terms  dangerous  to  the  security  of  the  U.S.  and  the  Free  World.
The  negotiation  of  a  truce  in  Korea,  added  to  the  frustrations  and  weariness
of  the  seven  years'  war,  has  markedly  increased  the  sentiment  in  France
for  some  kind  of  negotiated  peace  in  Indo-China.  In  the  recent  protracted
French  governmental  crisis,  every  leading  candidate  bid  for  popular  sup-
port with  some  kind  of  promise  to  reduce  the  Indo-China  commitment  in
some  way.  For  the  first  time  in  seven  years,  latent  defeatist  impulses
emerged  into  real  efforts  by  political  and  parliamentary  leaders  to  "pull
out."

b.  Under  present  conditions  any.  negotiated  settlement  would  mean  the
eventual  loss^to  Communism  not  only  of  Indo-China  but  of  the  whole  of
Soiitheast  Asia.

c.  The  loss  of  Indo-China  would  be  critical  to  the  security  of  the  U.S.
Communist  control  of  Indo-China  would  endanger  vital  raw^ ^material
sources;  it  would  weaken  the  confidence  of  other  Southeast  Asian  states  in
Western  leadership;  it  would  make  more  difficult  and  more  expensive  the
defense  of  Japan,  Formosa  and  the  Philippines;  and  complicate  the  creation
of  viable  Japanese  economy.  If  the  French  actually  decided  to  withdraw,
the  U.S.  would  have  to  consider  most  seriously  whether  to  take  over  in  this
area.

d.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  proposed  program  does  succeed,  and  the
French  are  able  to  achieve  victory  in  Indo-China  within  two  years,  the
effect  will  be  to  strengthen  the  Free  World  and  our  coalition  in  Europe  as
well  as  Southeast  Asia.  France  will  be  enabled  to  adopt  in  Europe  the  active
role  which  her  weakness  has  undermined  in  the  preceding  period.

Recommendation

9.  Accordingly  it  is  recommended  that  the  National  Security  Council  agree
to  an  increase  in  aid  to  France  in  the  current  fiscal  year  by  an  amount  not
exceeding  $400  million  above  that  already  committed,  provided  only  that  (a)
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  inform  the  National  Security  Council  that  in  their  view
the  French  plan  holds  the  promise  of  military  success;  and  (b)  the  Director  of
the  Foreign  Operations  Administration  ascertain  the  available  sources  within
currently  appointed  funds,  and  the  extent  to  which  a  special  supplementary
appropriation  will  be  necessary  when  Congress  reconvenes  in  January  1954.


408 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon'  Papers/Vol.  I


TAB  A

FINANCING  THE  WAR  IN  INDOCHINA
{millions  of  dollars)

Present  estimate  of  requirements
French  Expeditionary  Corps
Reinforcements  under  Navarre  plan
French  Air  Force  and  Navy
Total  French  forces

Associated  States  forces
Regular  Armies

Light  battalions  and  support  troops
Air  and  naval  forces
Total

Total  budgetary  requirement

Financing  of  requirements
French  budget  or  equivalent
French  fiscal  resources
U.S.  financial  assistance
Presently  available
Requirement  yet  to  be  financed
Total

Total  French  budget  or  equivalent  including  U.S.

financial  assistance
Associated  States  fiscal  resources
Total  budgetary  resources

Total  U.S.  aid  for  Indochina
Financial  assistance  (as  above)
Military  end-item  program
Common-use  program
Economic  aid  to  Associated  States
Total

Total  financing  by  France,  Associated  States  and  the  U.S.
Budgetary
Other
Total

Total  U.S.  financing  as  percent  of  total  program  33%  61%


1953

1954

866

866

0

54

137

137

1003

1057

335

400

43

196

9

23

387

619

1390

1676

975

690

426

0

40^

258

829

1233

1519

157

157

1390

1676

^  c  o

258

829

255

429

30

30

25

25

568

1313

1390

1676

310

484

1700

2160

NOTE:  U.S.  fiscal  year  1954  aid  program  is  related  to  French  calendar  year
1954  budget  program.


Documents  409


TAB  B

U.S.  AID  TO  FRANCE  AND  INDOCHINA
(millions  of  dollars)


Program
1953


Proposed
1954


Appro-
priated
1954


169

100

85

48

400

400

217

500

485

158

0

0

0

0

368

0

0

0

100

26b

585

600

511

829
426

403


I.  Aid  related  to  April  memorandum''
Mutual  defense  financing

Attributed  French  NATO  budget
Attributed  Indochina  budget
Total

Defense  support  assistance

Attributed  French  NATO  budget
Attributed  Indochina  budget
Total

"Kitty"  to  cover  partial  costs  of  ex-
pansion

Indochina  forces

Total  aid  related  to  April  memorandum

11.  Laniel  request  for  aid  to  finance  proposed
Indochina  program

Total  U.S.  aid  now  available  for  Indo-
china in  relation  to  April  memorandum
Requirement  yet  to  be  financed.

III.  U.S.  aid  in  addition  to  April  memoran-
dum

Military  end-item  program:  France
Military  end-item  program:  Indochina
Common-use  program  for  Indochina
Economic  aid  to  Associated  States
Total

IV.  Total  U.S.  aid  for  France  and  Indochina

Presently  available  funds
Requirement  yet  to  be  financed
Total

V.  Total  military  program  of  France  and  the
Associated  States,  including  U.S.  assist-
ance in  all  forms  French  military  budget

NATO  and  other  areas  Indochina

Present  French  budget  plan

Additional  U.S.  financing  requested

Total

Total  French  budget  with  U.S.  support
Associated  States  mihtary  budgets
U.S.  aid  outside  April  memorandum
Total  program  with  U.S.  aid

*  Memorandum  on  aid  prepared  by  U.S.  delegation  to  the  North  Atlantic  Council
meeting  in  Paris  and  handed  to  the  French  Government  by  the  U.S.  delegation  on
April  26,  1953.


0^1

364

291^

255

429

429

30

30

30

25

25

25

310

848

775

895

1448

1286

403

1689

2730

2444

1233

1090

0

429

1233

1519

3963

3963

157

157

310

775

4430

4895

410 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/ Vol.  I


TAB  B  (Cont'd.)

Appro-
Program Proposed  priated
1953  1954  1954

VI.  Total  U.S.  aid  as  percent  total  programs
financed  by  U.S.,  France  and  Associated
States

Presently  available  funds  20%  26%

Including  requirement  yet  to  be

financed  34%
NOTES:

U.S.  fiscal  1954  aid  program  is  related  to  French  calendar  1954  budget  pro-
gram.

a.  Figure  arbitrary  since  attribution  has  not  yet  taken  place:  figure  based  upon
1952  experience,  and  also  includes  counterpart  of  $60  million  provided  out
of  fiscal  1953  appropriation,  under  April  memorandum.

b.  Available  from  unprogrammed  portion  of  carry-over  into  fiscal  1954  of
unobligated  fiscal  1953  appropriations  for  Far  East  military  aid.

c.  Arbitrarily  reduced  20  percent  to  reflect  proportionate  reduction  in  Euro-
pean military  aid  appropriation  below  figures  proposed  to  Congress.

d.  This  figure  shown  as  zero  because  of  reprogramming  which  took  place  in
course  of  the  year,  because  of  over-programming  for  France  for  the  period
FY  1950-1953;  in  effect,  no  net  additional  funds  were  therefore  necessary
for  the  French  end-item  program  out  of  the  1953  appropriations.


[Document  17]

28  August  1953

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
Subject:  The  Navarre  Concept  for  Operations  in  Indochina.

1.  In  a  memorandum  for  you,  dated  21  April  1953,  subject:  "Proposed
French  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Successful  Conclusion  of  the  War  in  Indochina,"
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  pointed  out  certain  weaknesses  in  the  LeTourneau-
Allard  plan,  but  felt  that  it  was  workable.  During  the  visit  of  the  U.S.  Joint
Military  Mission  to  Indochina,  Lieutenant  General  Navarre  submitted  in  writing
to  Lieutenant  General  O'Daniel,  Chief  of  the  Mission,  a  paper  entitled  "Princi-
ples for  the  Conduct  of  the  War  in  Indochina"  appended  hereto,  which  appears
to  correct  these  weaknesses  and  which  presents  a  marked  improvement  in  French
military  thinking  concerning  operations  in  Indochina.

2.  In  his  report  Lieutenant  General  O'Daniel  stated  that,  in  his  opinion,  the
new  French  command  in  Indochina  will  accomplish  under  the  Navarre  concept
the  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  by  1955  and  that  the  addition  of  two  or
more  French  divisions  from  outside  of  Indochina  would  expedite  this  defeat.
Additions  other  than  in  divisional  organization  would  be  in  error  since  it  is  the
divisional  team,  with  its  combat  proven  effectiveness,  which  is  sorely  needed  in
Indochina.  Lieutenant  General  O'Daniel  further  reported  that  French  military


Documents  411


leaders  were  most  cooperative  with  the  mission,  that  several  agreements  were
accomplished  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposed  military  operations,
and  that  repeated  invitations  were  extended  to  the  U.S.  mission  to  return  in  a
few  months  to  witness  the  progress  the  French  will  have  made.

3.  Based  on  past  performances  by  the  French,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have
reservations  in  predicting  actual  results  which  can  be  expected  pending  addi-
tional proof  by  demonstration  of  continued  French  support  and  by  further
French  performance  in  Indochina.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  of  the  opinion
that  a  basic  requirement  for  military  success  in  Indochina  is  one  of  creating  a
political  climate  in  that  country  which  will  provide  the  incentive  for  natives  to
support  the  French  and  supply  them  with  adequate  intelHgence  which  is  vital
to  the  successful  conduct  of  operations  in  Indochina.  If  this  is  accomplished
and  if  the  Navarre  concept  is  vigorously  pursued  militarily  in  Indochina  and
given  wholehearted  political  support  in  France,  it  does  offer  a  promise  of  mili-
tary success  sufficient  to  warrant  appropriate  additional  U.S.  aid  required  to
assist.  U.S.  support  of  the  Navarre  concept  should  be  based  on  needs  of  the
French  Union  Forces  in  Indochina  for  additional  equipment  necessary  to  im-
plement the  organization  of  the  "Battle  Corps"  envisaged  by  the  Navarre  con-
cept and  necessary  support  of  the  planned  expansion  of  indigenous  forces,  such
needs  to  be  screened  by  the  Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group  in  Indochina.
In  addition,  to  improve  the  chances  of  success,  this  support  should  include  con-
tinued close  liaison  and  coordination  with  French  military  authorities  together
with  friendly  but  firm  encouragement  and  advice  where  indicated.

4.  In  furtherance  of  the  O'Daniel  Mission  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  re-
ceiving Progress  Reports  from  Indochina.  Information  received  from  Indochina
indicates  the  French  are  not  pursuing  agreements  reached  between  General
O'Daniel  and  General  Navarre  (including  the  Navarre  concept)  as  vigorously
as  expected  by  General  O'Daniel  and  as  contemplated  by  him  in  his  report.
Progress  reports  state  that  (a)  the  French  have  "no  plans  for  a  general  fall
offensive  beyond  limited  objective  operations  designed  to  keep  the  enemy  off
balance,"  (b)  reorganization  into  regiments  and  division-size  units  "is  still  in
the  planning  stages,"  (c)  there  is  "no  sense  of  urgency  in  the  training  of  senior
Vietnamese  commanders  and  staff  officers,"  (d)  the  organization  of  a  training
command  is  awaiting  the  solution  of  "political  problems"  and  (e)  the  "organiza-
tion of  the  amphibious  plan  has  not  gone  beyond  the  planning  stages."

5.  In  light  of  the  apparent  slowness  of  the  French  in  following  up  the  Navarre
concept  and  other  agreements  reached  between  General  Navarre  and  General
O'Daniel,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  believe  that  additional  U.S.  support  should
be  conditioned  upon  continued  implementation  of  French  support,  demonstra-
tion of  French  intent  by  actual  performance  in  Indochina,  and  continued  French
willingness  to  receive  and  act  upon  U.S.  military  advice.  Further,  the  French
should  be  urged  at  all  levels  to  support  and  vigorously  prosecute  the  Navarre
concept  to  the  maximum  extent  of  their  capabilities.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:
ARTHUR  RADFORD,
Chairman,
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.

Enclosure [material  missing]


412 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I


[Document  18]

October  30,  1953
NOTE  BY  THE  EXECUTIVE  SECRETARY
to  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

BASIC  NATIONAL  SECURITY  POLICY

NSC  162  and  NSC  162/1
NSC  Action  Nos.  853,  868,  886,  926  and  944
Memo  for  NSC  from  Executive  Secretary,  subject,  "Review  of
Basic  National  Security  Policy,"  dated  October  28,  1953
NSC  153/1

Memo  for  NSC  from  Executive  Secretary,  subject,  "Project
Solarium,"  dated  July  23,  1953

The  National  Security  Council,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  the  Attorney
General,  the  Director,  Bureau  of  the  Budget,  the  Chairman,  Council  of  Eco-
nomic Advisers,  and  the  Chairman,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  at  the  168th
Council  meeting  on  October  29,  1953,  adopted  the  statement  of  policy  con-
tained in  NSC  162/1  subject  to  the  changes  which  are  set  forth  in  NSC  Action
No.  944-a.

In  connection  with  this  action  the  Council  also  noted:

a.  The  President's  statement  that  if  the  Department  of  Defense  hereafter
finds  that  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  9-a-{l),  when  read  in  the  con-
text of  the  total  policy  statement,  operate  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  na-
tional security,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  should  bring  this  finding  before
the  Council  for  reconsideration.

b.  That  action  should  be  promptly  taken  to  conform  existing  arrange-
ments regarding  atomic  weapons  to  subparagraph  39-b.

c.  That  the  policy  in  NSC  162/1  does  not  contemplate  any  fixed  date  for
D-Day  readiness.

d.  That  the  Planning  Board  would  submit  for  Council  consideration  a  re-
vision of  "U.S.  Objectives  vis-a-vis  the  USSR  in  the  Event  of  War,"  as  pres-
ently stated  in  the  Annex,  in  the  light  of  the  provisions  of  NSC  162/1,  as
amended.

The  President  has  this  date  approved  the  statement  of  policy  contained  in
NSC  162/1,  as  amended  and  adopted  by  the  Council  and  enclosed  herewith,
and  directs  its  implementation  by  all  appropriate  executive  departments  and
agencies  of  the  U.S.  Government.  As  basic  policy,  this  paper  has  not  been
referred  to  any  single  department  or  agency  for  special  coordination.

Accordingly,  NSC  153/1  is  hereby  superseded.

//  is  requested  that  special  security  precautions  be  observed  in  the  handling


References:  A.

B.
C.

D.

—  E.


Documents  413


of  the  enclosure  and  that  access  to  it  be  very  strictly  limited  on  an  absolute
need-to-know  basis.

JAMES  S.  LAY,  Jr.
Executive  Secretary

cc:  The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury
The  Attorney  General
The  Director,  Bureau  of  the  Budget
The  Chairman,  Council  of  Economic  Advisers
The  Chairman,  Atomic  Energy  Commission
The  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administrator
The  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

REVIEW  OF  BASIC  NATIONAL  SECURITY  POLICY
Table  of  Contents

Page


General  Considerations 1

Basic  Problems  of  National  Security  Policy 1

The  Soviet  Threat  to  the  United  States 1

Defense  Against  the  Soviet  Threat 5

Present  State  of  the  Coalition 10

The  Uncommitted  Areas  of  the  World 13

U.S.  Ability  to  Support  Security  Expenditures 14

The  Situation  as  to  U.S.  Manpower 16

Morale 17

Policy  Conclusions 18

Basic  Problems  of  National  Security  Policy 18

Nature  of  the  Soviet  Threat 18

Defense  Against  Soviet  Power  and  Action 19

Defense  Against  the  Threat  to  the  U.S.  Economy  and  Institutions 23

Reduction  of  the  Soviet  Threat 24

Annex  (U.S.  Objectives  vis-a-vis  the  USSR  in  the  Event  of  War) 26


STATEMENT  OF  POLICY
by  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

BASIC  NATIONAL  SECURITY  POLICY

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS

Basic  Problems  of  National  Security  Policy

1. a.  To  meet  the  Soviet  threat  to  U.S.  security.

b.  In  doing  so,  to  avoid  seriously  weakening  the  U.S.  economy  or  under-
mining our  fundamental  values  and  institutions.


414 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

The  Soviet  Threat  to  the  United  States

2.  The  primary  threat  to  the  security,  free  institutions,  and  fundamental  values
of  the  United  States  is  posed  by  the  combination  of:

a.  Basic  Soviet  hostility  to  the  non-communist  world,  particularly  to  the
United  States.

b.  Great  Soviet  military  power.

c.  Soviet  control  of  the  international  communist  apparatus  and  other
means  of  subversion  or  division  of  the  free  world.

3.  a.  The  authority  of  the  Soviet  regime  does  not  appear  to  have  been  im-
paired by  the  events  since  Stalin's  death,  or  to  be  likely  to  be  appreciably
weakened  during  the  next  few  years.  The  transfer  of  power  may  cause  some
uncertainty  in  Soviet  and  satellite  tactics  for  some  time,  but  will  probably
not  impair  the  basic  economic  and  military  strength  of  the  Soviet  bloc.  The
Soviet  rulers  can  be  expected  to  continue  to  base  their  policy  on  the  con-
viction of  irreconcilable  hostility  between  the  bloc  and  the  non-communist
world.  This  conviction  is  the  compound  product  of  Marxist  belief  in  their
historically  determined  conflict  with,  and  inevitable  triumph  over,  "world
capitalism"  led  by  the  United  States,  of  fear  for  the  security  of  the  regime
and  the  USSR,  especially  in  the  face  of  a  hostile  coalition,  of  distrust  of
U.S.  aims  and  intentions,  and  of  long-established  reliance  on  techniques
of  conspiracy  and  subversion.  Accordingly,  the  basic  Soviet  objectives  con-
tinue to  be  consolidation  and  expansion  of  their  own  sphere  of  power  and
the  eventual  domination  of  the  non-communist  world.

b.  Soviet  strategy  has  been  flexible  and  will  probably  continue  so,  allowing
for  retreats  and  delays  as  well  as  advances.  The  various  "peace  gestures"  so
far  have  cost  the  Soviets  very  little  in  actual  concessions  and  could  be  merely
designed  to  divide  the  West  by  raising  false  hopes  and  seeking  to  make
the  United  States  appear  unyielding.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  the  USSR,
for  internal  and  other  reasons,  may  desire  a  settlement  of  specific  issues  or
a  relaxation  of  tensions  and  military  preparations  for  a  substantial  period.
Thus  far,  there  are  no  convincing  signs  of  readiness  to  make  important  con-
cessions to  this  end.

4.  a.  The  capability  of  the  USSR  to  attack  the  United  States  with  atomic
weapons  has  been  continuously  growing  and  will  be  materially  enhanced
by  hydrogen  weapons.  The  USSR  has  sufficient  bombs  and  aircraft,  using
one-way  missions,  to  inflict  serious  damage  on  the  United  States,  especially
by  surprise  attack.  The  USSR  soon  may  have  the  capability  of  dealing  a
crippling  blow  to  our  industrial  base  and  our  continued  ability  to  prosecute
a  war.  Effective  defense  could  reduce  the  likelihood  and  intensity  of  a
hostile  attack  but  not  eliminate  the  chance  of  a  crippling  blow.

b.  The  USSR  now  devotes  about  one-sixth  of  its  gross  national  product
to  military  outlays  and  is  expected  to  continue  this  level.  It  has  and  will
continue  to  have  large  conventional  military  forces  capable  of  aggression
against  countries  of  the  free  world.  Within  the  next  two  years,  the  Soviet
bloc  is  not  expected  to  increase  the  size  of  its  forces,  but  will  strengthen
them  with  improved  equipment  and  training  and  the  larger  atomic  stock-
pile.

c.  The  Soviet  bloc  now  has  the  capability  of  strong  defense  against  air
attack  on  critical  targets  within  the  USSR  under  favorable  weather  condi-
tions, and  is  likely  to  continue  to  strengthen  its  all-weather  air  defenses.


Documents  415


5.  a.  The  recent  uprisings  in  East  Germany  and  the  unrest  in  other  Euro-
pean satellites  evidence  the  failure  of  the  Soviets  fully  to  subjugate  these
peoples  or  to  destroy  their  desire  for  freedom;  the  dependence  of  these  satel-
lite governments  on  Soviet  armed  forces;  and  the  relative  unreliability  of  sat-
ellite armed  forces  (especially  if  popular  resistance  in  the  satellites  should
increase).  These  events  necessarily  have  placed  internal  and  psychological
strains  upon  the  Soviet  leadership.  Nevertheless,  the  ability  of  the  USSR  to
exercise  effective  control  over,  and  to  exploit  the  resources  of,  the  Euro-
pean satellites  has  not  been  appreciably  reduced  and  is  not  likely  to  be
so  long  as  the  USSR  maintains  adequate  military  forces  in  the  area.

b.  The  detachment  of  any  major  European  satellite  from  the  Soviet  bloc
does  not  now  appear  feasible  except  by  Soviet  acquiescence  or  by  war.
Such  a  detachment  would  not  decisively  affect  the  Soviet  military  capability
either  in  delivery  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction  or  in  conventional  forces,
but  would  be  a  considerable  blow  to  Soviet  prestige  and  would  impair  in
some  degree  Soviet  conventional  military  capabilities  in  Europe.

c.  The  Chinese  Communist  regime  is  firmly  in  control  and  is  unlikely
to  be  shaken  in  the  foreseeable  future  by  domestic  forces  or  rival  regimes,
short  of  the  occurrence  of  a  major  war.  The  alliance  between  the  regimes
of  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  is  based  on  common  ideology  and
current  community  of  interests.  With  the  death  of  Stalin  and  the  Korean
truce,  Communist  China  may  tend  more  to  emphasize  its  own  interests,
though  limited  by  its  present  economic  and  military  dependence  on  the
USSR,  and,  in  the  long  run,  basic  differences  may  strain  or  break  the
alliance.  At  present,  however,  it  appears  to  be  firmly  established  and  adds
strategic  territory  and  vast  reserves  of  military  manpower  to  the  Soviet  bloc.

6.  a.  The  USSR  does  not  seem  likely  deliberately  to  launch  a  general  war
against  the  United  States  during  the  period  covered  by  current  estimates
(through  mid- 1955).  The  uncertain  prospects  for  Soviet  victory  in  a  general
war,  the  change  in  leadership,  satellite  unrest,  and  the  U.S.  capability  to
retaliate  massively,  make  such  a  course  improbable.  Similarly,  an  attack
on  NATO  countries  or  other  areas  which  would  be  almost  certain  to  bring
on  general  war  in  view  of  U.S.  commitments  or  intentions  would  be  un-
likely. The  Soviets  will  not,  however,  be  deterred  by  fear  of  general  war
from  taking  the  measures  they  consider  necessary  to  counter  Western
actions  which  they  view  as  a  serious  threat  to  their  security.

b.  When  both  the  USSR  and  the  United  States  reach  a  stage  of  atomic
plenty  and  ample  means  of  delivery,  each  will  have  the  probable  capacity  to
inflict  critical  damage  on  the  other,  but  is  not  likely  to  be  able  to  prevent
major  atomic  retaliations.  This  could  create  a  stalemate,  with  both  sides
reluctant  to  initiate  general  warfare;  although  if  the  Soviets  believed  that
initial  surprise  held  the  prospect  of  destroying  the  capacity  for  retaliation,
they  might  be  tempted  into  attacking.

c.  Although  Soviet  fear  of  atomic  reaction  should  still  inhibit  local  ag-
gression, increasing  Soviet  atomic  capability  may  tend  to  diminish  the
deterrent  effect  of  U.S.  atomic  power  against  peripheral  Soviet  aggression.
It  may  also  sharpen  the  reaction  of  the  USSR  to  what  it  considers  provoca-
tive acts  of  the  United  States.  If  either  side  should  miscalculate  the  strength
of  the  other's  reaction,  such  local  conflicts  could  grow  into  general  war,
even  though  neither  seeks  nor  desires  it.  To  avoid  this,  it  will  in  general
be  desirable  for  the  United  States  to  make  clear  to  the  USSR  the  kind  of
actions  which  will  be  almost  certain  to  lead  to  this  result,  recognizing,  how-


416 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

I ever,  that  as  general  war  becomes  more  devastating  for  both  sides  the
threat  to  resort  to  it  becomes  less  available  as  a  sanction  against  local
aggression.

7.  The  USSR  will  continue  to  rely  heavily  on  tactics  of  division  and  sub-
version to  weaken  the  free  world  alliances  and  will  to  resist  the  Soviet  power.
Using  both  the  fear  of  atomic  warfare  and  the  hope  of  peace,  such  political  war-
fare will  seek  to  exploit  differences  among  members  of  the  free  world,  neutralist
attitudes,  and  anti-colonial  and  nationalist  sentiments  in  underdeveloped  areas.
For  these  purposes,  communist  parties  and  other  cooperating  elements  will
be  used  to  manipulate  opinion  and  control  governments  wherever  possible.  This
aspect  of  the  Soviet  threat  is  likely  to  continue  indefinitely  and  to  grow  in
intensity.

8.  Over  time,  changes  in  the  outlook  and  policies  of  the  leadership  of  the
USSR  may  result  from  such  factors  as  the  slackening  of  revolutionary  zeal,  the
growth  of  vested  managerial  and  bureaucratic  interests,  and  popular  pressures
for  consumption  goods.  Such  changes,  combined  with  the  growing  strength  of
the  free  world  and  the  failure  to  break  its  cohesion,  and  possible  aggravation
of  weaknesses  within  the  Soviet  bloc  through  U.S.  or  allied  action  or  otherwise,
might  induce  a  willingness  to  negotiate.  The  Soviet  leadership  might  find  it
desirable  and  even  essential  to  reach  agreements  acceptable  to  the  United  States
and  its  allies,  without  necessarily  abandoning  its  basic  hositility  to  the  non-Soviet


Defense  Against  the  Soviet  Threat

9.  In  the  face  of  the  Soviet  threat,  the  security  of  the  United  States  requires:

a.  Development  and  maintenance  of:

(1)  A  strong  military  posture,  with  emphasis  on  the  capability  of
inflicting  massive  retaliatory  damage  by  offensive  striking  power;

(2)  U.S.  and  allied  forces  in  readiness  to  move  rapidly  initially  to
counter  aggression  by  Soviet  bloc  forces  and  to  hold  vital  areas  and  lines
of  communication;  and

(3)  A  mobilization  base,  and  its  protection  against  crippling  damage,
adequate  to  insure  victory  in  the  event  of  general  war.

b.  Maintenance  of  a  sound,  strong  and  growing  economy,  capable  of  pro-
viding through  the  operation  of  free  institutions,  the  strength  described  in
a  above  over  the  long  pull  and  of  rapidly  and  effectively  changing  to  full
mobilization.

c.  Maintenance  of  morale  and  free  institutions  and  the  willingness  of  the
U.S.  people  to  support  the  measures  necessary  for  national  security.

10.  In  support  of  these  basic  security  requirements,  it  is  necessary  that  the
United  States:

a.  Develop  and  maintain  an  intelligence  system  capable  of:

(1)  Collecting  and  analyzing  indications  of  hostile  intentions  that
would  give  maximum  prior  warning  of  possible  aggression  or  subversion
in  any  area  of  the  world.

(2)  Accurately  evaluating  the  capabilities  of  foreign  countries,  friendly
and  neutral  as  well  as  enemy,  to  undertake  military,  political,  economic,
and  subversive  courses  of  action  affecting  U.S.  security.


Documents  417


(3)  Forecasting  potential  foreign  developments  having  a  bearing  on
U.S.  national  security.

b.  Develop  an  adequate  manpower  program  designed  to:

(1)  Expand  scientific  and  technical  training.

(2)  Provide  an  equitable  military  training  system.

(3)  Strike  a  feasible  balance  between  the  needs  of  an  expanding  peace-
time economy  and  defense  requirements.

(4)  Provide  for  an  appropriate  distribution  of  services  and  skills  in
the  event  of  national  emergency.

c.  Conduct  and  foster  scientific  research  and  development  so  as  to  insure
superiority  in  quantity  and  quality  of  weapons  systems,  with  attendant  con-
tinuing review  of  the  level  and  composition  of  forces  and  of  the  industrial
base  required  for  adequate  defense  and  for  successful  prosecution  of  general
war.

d.  Continue,  for  as  long  as  necessary,  a  state  of  limited  defense  mobiliza-
tion to  develop  military  readiness  by:

(1)  Developing  and  maintaining  production  plant  capacity,  dispersed
with  a  view  to  minimizing  destruction  by  enemy  attack  and  capable  of
rapid  expansion  or  prompt  conversion  to  essential  wartime  output.

(2)  Creating  and  maintaining  minimum  essential  reserve  stocks  of
selected  end-items,  so  located  as  to  support  promptly  and  effectively  the
war  effort  in  areas  of  probable  commitment  until  war  production  and
shipping  capacity  reaches  the  required  wartime  levels.

(3)  Maintaining  stockpiling  programs,  and  providing  additional  produc-
tion facilities,  for  those  materials  the  shortage  of  which  would  affect
critically  essential  defense  programs;  meanwhile  reducing  the  rates  of
other  stockpile  materials.

e.  Provide  reasonable  internal  security  against  covert  attack,  sabotage,
subversion,  and  espionage,  particularly  against  the  clandestine  introduction
and  detonation  of  atomic  weapons.

11.  Within  the  free  world,  only  the  United  States  can  provide  and  maintain,  for
a  period  of  years  to  come,  the  atomic  capability  to  counterbalance  Soviet  atomic
power.  Thus,  sufficient  atomic  weapons  and  effective  means  of  delivery  are  in-
dispensable for  U.S.  security.  Moreover,  in  the  face  of  Soviet  atomic  power,
defense  of  the  continental  United  States  becomes  vital  to  effective  security:  to
protect  our  striking  force,  our  mobilization  base,  and  our  people.  Such  atomic
capability  is  also  a  major  contribution  to  the  security  of  our  allies,  as  well  as  of
this  country.

12.  The  United  States  cannot,  however,  meet  its  defense  needs,  even  at
exorbitant  cost,  without  the  support  of  allies.

a.  The  effective  use  of  U.S.  strategic  air  power  against  the  USSR  will  re-
quire overseas  bases  on  foreign  territory  for  some  years  to  come.  Such  bases
well  continue  indefinitely  to  be  an  important  additional  element  of  U.S.
strategic  air  capability  and  to  be  essential  to  the  conduct  of  the  military
operations  on  the  Eurasian  continent  in  case  of  general  war.  The  availability
of  such  bases  and  their  use  by  the  United  States  in  case  of  need  will  depend,
in  most  cases,  on  the  consent  and  cooperation  of  the  nations  where  they  are
located.  Such  nations  will  assume  the  risks  entailed  only  if  convinced  that
their  own  security  will  thereby  be  best  served.


8 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

b.  The  United  States  needs  to  have  aligned  on  its  side  in  the  world
struggle,  in  peace  and  in  war,  the  armed  forces  and  economic  resources  and
materials  of  the  major  highly-industrialized  non-communist  states.  Pro-
gressive loss  to  the  Soviet  bloc  of  these  states  would  so  isolate  the  United
States  and  alter  the  world  balance  as  to  endanger  the  capacity  of  the  United
States  to  win  in  the  event  of  general  war  or  to  maintain  an  adequate  defense
without  undermining  its  fundamental  institutions.

c.  U.S.  strategy  including  the  use  of  atomic  weapons,  therefore,  can  be
successfully  carried  out  only  if  our  essential  allies  are  convinced  that  it  is
conceived  and  will  be  implemented  for  the  purpose  of  mutual  security  and
defense  against  the  Soviet  threat.  U.S.  leadership  in  this  regard,  however,
does  not  imply  the  necessity  to  meet  all  desires  of  our  allies.

d.  Our  allies  are,  in  turn,  dependent  on  the  United  States  for  their
security:  (1)  they  lack  that  atomic  capability  which  is  the  major  deterrent
to  Soviet  aggression;  (2)  most  lack  political  and  economic  stability  sufficient
to  support  their  military  forces.  The  United  States  should  be  able  for  the
foreseeable  future  to  provide  military  aid,  in  more  limited  amounts  than
heretofore,  to  our  essential  allies.  It  should  be  possible  in  the  near  future,
however,  generally  to  eliminate  most  grant  economic  aid,  if  coupled  with
appropriate  U.S.  economic  and  trade  policies.

13.  a.  Under  existing  treaties  or  policies,  an  attack  on  the  NATO  countries.
Western  Germany,  Berlin,  Japan,  the  Philippines,  Australia,  New  Zealand,
and  the  American  Republics,  or  on  the  Republic  of  Korea,  would  involve
the  United  States  in  war  with  the  USSR,  or  at  least  with  Communist  China
if  the  aggression  were  Chinese  alone.

b.  Certain  other  countries,  such  as  Indochina  or  Formosa,  are  of  such
strategic  importance  to  the  United  Stateslhat  an  attack  on  them  probably
would  compel  the  United  States  to  react  with  military  force  either  locally  at
the  point  of  attack  or  generally  against  the  military  power  of  the  aggressor.
Moreover,  the  principle  of  collective  security  through  the  United  Nations,  if
it  is  to  continue  to  survive  as  a  deterrent  to  continued  piecemeal  aggres-
sion and  a  promise  of  an  eventual  effective  world  security  system,  should
be  upheld  even  in  areas  not  of  vital  strategic  importance.

c.  The  assumption  by  the  United  States,  as  the  leader  of  the  free  world,
of  a  substantial  degree  of  responsibility  for  the  freedom  and  security  of  the
free  nations  is  a  direct  and  essential  contribution  to  the  maintenance  of  its
own  freedom  and  security.

14.  a.  The  United  States  should  keep  open  the  possibility  of  settlements  with
the  U.S.S.R.,  compatible  with  basic  U.S.  security  interests,  which  would
resolve  specific  conflicts  or  reduce  the  magnitude  of  the  Soviet  threat.  More-
over, to  maintain  the  continued  support  of  its  allies,  the  United  States  must
seek  to  convince  them  of  its  desire  to  reach  such  settlements.  But,  in  doing
so,  we  must  not  allow  the  possibility  of  such  settlements  to  delay  or  reduce
efforts  to  develop  and  maintain  adequate  free  world  strength,  and  thus
enable  the  Soviets  to  increase  their  relative  strength.

b.  It  must  be  recognized,  however,  that  the  prospects  for  acceptable
negotiated  settlements  are  not  encouraging.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
Soviet  leadership  is  prepared  to  modify  its  basic  attitudes  and  accept  any
permanent  settlement  with  the  United  States,  although  it  may  be  pre-
pared for  a  modus  vivendi  on  certain  issues.  Atomic  and  other  major
weapons  can  be  controlled  only  by  adequate  and  enforceable  safeguards
which  would  involve  some  form  of  international  inspection  and  supervision.


Documents  419


Acceptance  of  such  serious  restrictions  by  either  side  would  be  extremely
difficult  under  existing  conditions  of  suspicion  and  distrust.  The  chances  for
such  disarmament  would  perhaps  be  improved  by  agreements  on  other
conflicts  either  beforehand  or  at  the  same  time,  or  by  possible  realization
by  the  Soviets,  in  time,  that  armament  limitation  will  serve  their  own  in-
terests and  security.

c.  The  United  States  should  promptly  determine  what  it  would  accept  as
an  adequate  system  of  armament  control  which  would  effectively  remove  or
reduce  the  Soviet  atomic  and  military  threat,  and  on  what  basis  the  United
States  would  be  prepared  to  negotiate  to  obtain  it.


Present  State  of  the  Coalition''

15.  a.  The  effort  of  the  United  States,  especially  since  1950,  to  build  up  the
strength,  cohesion  and  common  determination  of  the  free  world  has  suc-
ceeded in  increasing  its  relative  strength  and  may  well  have  prevented  overt
military  aggression  since  Korea.

b.  In  Western  Europe  the  build-up  of  military  strength  and  the  progress
of  economic  recovery  has,  at  least  partially,  remedied  a  situation  of  glaring
weakness  in  a  vital  area.  NATO  and  associated  forces  are  now  sufficient
to  make  aggressive  action  in  Europe  costly  for  the  USSR  and  to  create  a
greater  feeling  of  confidence  and  security  among  the  Western  European
peoples.  However,  even  though  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  build-
ing up  these  forces,  the  military  strength  in  Western  Europe  is  presently
not  sufficient  to  prevent  a  full-scale  Soviet  attack  from  overrunning  Western
Europe.  Even  with  the  availability  of  those  German  forces  presently  planned
within  the  framework  of  EDC,  present  rates  of  defense  spending  by  Euro-
pean Nations  and  present  rates  of  U.S.  Military  Assistance  certainly  could
not  be  expected  to  produce  forces  adequate  to  prevent  the  initial  loss  of  a
considerable  portion  of  the  territory  of  Western  Europe  in  the  event  of  a
full-scale  Soviet  attack.  Therefore,  since  U.S.  Military  Assistance  must
eventually  be  reduced,  it  is  essential  that  the  Western  European  states,  in-
cluding West  Germany,  build  and  maintain  maximum  feasible  defensive
strength.  The  major  deterrent  to  aggression  against  Western  Europe  is  the
manifest  determination  of  the  United  States  to  use  its  atomic  capability
and  massive  retaliatory  striking  power  if  the  area  is  attacked.  However,  the
presence  of  U.S.  forces  in  Western  Europe  makes  a  contribution  other  than
military  to  the  strength  and  cohesion  of  the  free  world  coalition.

c.  In  the  Far  East,  the  military  strength  of  the  coalition  now  rests  largely
on  U.S.  military  power  plus  that  of  France  in  Indochina,  the  UK  in  Malaya
and  Hong  Kong,  and  the  indigenous  forces  of  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Viet-
nam, and  Nationalist  China.  Any  material  increase  will  require  the  revival  of
the  economic  and  military  strength  of  Japan.

d.  The  strength  and  cohesion  of  the  coalition  depends,  and  will  continue
to  depend,  on  the  continuing  strength  and  will  of  the  United  States  as  its
leader,  and  upon  the  assumption  by  each  coalition  member  of  a  proper
share  of  responsibility.

*  The  term  "coalition"  refers  to  those  states  which  are  parties  to  the  network  of
security  treaties  and  regional  alliances  of  which  the  United  States  is  a  member  (NATO,
OAS,  ANZUS,  Japan,  etc.)  or  are  otherwise  actively  associated  in  the  defense  of  the
free  world.


420 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Voi  I


16.  While  the  coalition  is  founded  on  common  interest  and  remains  basically
sound,  certain  factors  tend  to  weaken  its  cohesion  and  to  slow  down  the  necessary
build-up  of  strength.

a.  Some  of  these  factors  are  inherent  in  the  nature  of  a  coalition  led  by
one  strong  power.  The  economic  and  military  recovery  by  our  NATO
allies  from  their  low  point  of  a  few  years  ago,  and  the  revival  of  Germany
and  Japan,  has  given  them  a  greater  sense  of  independence  from  U.S.  guid-
ance and  direction.  Specific  sources  of  irritation  are  trade  with  the  Soviet
bloc,  the  level  of  the  defense  effort,  use  of  bases  and  other  facilities,  and
the  prospect  of  discontinuance  of  U.S.  economic  aid  without  a  corresponding
change  in  U.S.  trade  policies.

b.  The  coalition  also  suffers  from  certain  other  weaknesses  and  dilemmas.
A  major  weakness  is  the  instability  of  the  governments  of  certain  NATO
partners,  such  as  Italy  and  France.  The  colonial  issue  in  Asia  and  Africa,
for  example,  has  not  only  weakened  our  European  allies  but  has  left  those
areas  in  a  state  of  ferment  which  weakens  the  whole  free  world.  Efforts  by
the  United  States  to  encourage  orderly  settlements  tend  to  leave  both  sides
dissatisfied  and  to  create  friction  within  the  alliance.  Age-old  issues  such  as
divide  France  and  Germany,  or  Italy  and  Yugoslavia,  still  impede  creation
of  a  solid  basis  of  cooperation  against  the  Soviet  threat.

c.  Moreover,  allied  opinion,  especially  in  Europe,  has  become  less  willing
to  follow  U.S.  leadership.  Many  Europeans  fear  that  American  policies,  par-
ticularly in  the  Far  East,  may  involve  Europe  in  general  war,  or  will  in-
definitely prolong  cold-war  tensions.  Many  consider  U.S.  attitudes  toward
the  Soviets  as  too  rigid  and  unyielding  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  unstable,
holding  risks  ranging  from  preventive  war  and  "liberation"  to  withdrawal
into  isolation.  Many  consider  that  these  policies  fail  to  reflect  the  perspective
and  confidence  expected  in  the  leadership  of  a  great  nation,  and  reflect  too
great  a  preoccupation  with  anti-communism.  Important  sectors  of  allied
opinion  are  also  concerned  over  developments  within  the  United  States
which  seem  to  them  inconsistent  with  our  assumed  role  of  leader  in  the
cause  of  freedom.  These  allied  attitudes  materially  impair  cooperation  and,
if  not  overcome,  could  imperil  the  coalition.

d.  Fear  of  what  a  general  war  will  mean  for  them  is  deeply  rooted  and
widespread  among  our  allies.  They  tend  to  see  the  actual  danger  of  Soviet
aggression  as  less  imminent  than  the  United  States  does,  and  some  have  a
fatalistic  feeling  that  if  it  is  coming  they  will  not  be  able  to  do  much  about
it.  In  the  NATO  countries,  many  have  serious  doubts  whether  the  defense
requirements  can  be  met  without  intolerable  political  and  economic  strains.
Certain  of  our  allies  fear  the  rearmament  of  Germany  and  Japan  on  any
large  scale,  and  in  Germany  and  Japan  themselves  strong  currents  of  opinion
oppose  it  as  unnecessary  or  dangerous.  Moreover,  in  certain  countries,  par-
ticularly France  and  Italy,  grave  domestic  problems  have  called  into  question
not  only  the  authority  of  the  governments,  but  also  the  basic  foreign  policies
and  alignments  which  they  have  followed.  All  these  factors  lead  to  allied
pressure  in  favor  of  new  major  efforts  to  negotiate  with  the  USSR,  as  the
only  hope  of  ending  the  present  tension,  fear  and  frustration.  This  pressure
has  increased  with  recent  "peace  gestures"  of  the  new  Soviet  leadership,
which  has  made  every  endeavor  to  exploit  it.  Whether  these  hopes  are
illusory  or  well-founded,  they  must  be  taken  into  consideration  by  the
United  States.


Documents  421


The  Uncommitted  Areas  of  the  World

17.  Despite  the  Soviet  threat,  many  nations  and  societies  outside  the  Soviet
bloc,  mostly  in  the  underdeveloped  areas,  are  so  unsure  of  their  national  inter-
ests, or  so  preoccupied  with  other  pressing  problems,  that  they  are  presently  un-
willing to  align  themselves  actively  with  the  United  States  and  its  allies.  Although
largely  undeveloped,  their  vast  manpower,  their  essential  raw  materials  and  their
potential  for  growth  are  such  that  their  absorption  within  the  Soviet  system  would
greatly,  perhaps  decisively,  alter  the  world  balance  of  power  to  our  detriment.
Conversely,  their  orderly  development  into  more  stable  and  responsible  nations,
able  and  willing  to  participate  in  defense  of  the  free  world,  can  increasingly  add
to  its  strength.

18.  In  many  of  these  uncommitted  areas,  forces  of  unrest  and  of  resentment
against  the  West  are  strong.  Among  these  sources  are  racial  feelings,  anti-
colonialism,  rising  nationalism,  popular  demand  for  rapid  social  and  economic
progress,  over-population,  the  breakdown  of  static  social  patterns,  and,  in  many
cases,  the  conflict  of  local  religious  and  social  philosophies  with  those  of  the
West.  The  general  unreliability  of  the  governments  of  these  states  and  the  volatil-
ity of  their  political  life  complicate  the  task  of  building  firm  ties  with  them,  of
counteracting  neutralism  and,  where  appropriate  and  feasible,  of  responding  to
requests  for  assistance  in  solving  their  problems.  Outside  economic  assistance
alone  cannot  be  counted  on  either  to  solve  their  basic  problems  or  to  win  their
cooperation  and  support.  Constructive  political  and  other  measures  will  be  re-
quired to  create  a  sense  of  mutuality  of  interest  with  the  free  world  and  to  counter
the  communist  appeals.

U.S.  Ability  to  Support  Security  Expenditures

19.  The  United  States  must  maintain  a  sound  economy  based  on  free  private
enterprise  as  a  basis  both  for  high  defense  productivity  and  for  the  maintenance
of  its  living  standards  and  free  institutions.  Not  only  the  world  position  of  the
United  States,  but  the  security  of  the  whole  free  world,  is  dependent  on  the
avoidance  of  recession  and  on  the  long-term  expansion  of  the  U.S.  economy.
Threats  to  its  stability  or  growth,  therefore,  constitute  a  danger  to  the  security  of
the  United  States  and  of  the  coalition  which  it  leads.  Expenditures  for  national
security,  in  fact  all  federal,  state  and  local  governmental  expenditures,  must  be
carefully  scrutinized  with  a  view  to  measuring  their  impact  on  the  national
economy.

20.  The  economy  of  the  country  has  a  potential  for  long-term  economic
growth.  Over  the  years  an  expanding  national  income  can  provide  the  basis  for
higher  standards  of  living  and  for  a  substantial  military  program.  But  economic
growth  is  not  automatic  and  requires  fiscal  and  other  policies  which  will  foster
and  not  hamper  the  potential  for  long-term  growth  and  which  will  operate  to
reduce  cyclical  fluctuations.

21.  Excessive  government  spending  leads  to  inflationary  deficits  or  to  re-
pressive taxation,  or  to  both.  Persistent  inflation  is  a  barrier  to  long-term  growth
because  it  undermines  confidence  in  the  currency,  reduces  savings,  and  makes
restrictive  economic  controls  necessary.  Repressive  taxation  weakens  the  incen-
tives for  efficiency,  effort,  and  investment  on  which  economic  growth  depends.

^ 22.  In  spite  of  the  reimposition  of  tax  rates  at  approximately  the  peak  levels
, of  World  War  II,  expenditures  have  risen  faster  than  tax  receipts,  with  a  resulting
deficit  of  $9.4  billion  in  fiscal  year  1953.  Despite  anticipated  larger  receipts,


422 Gravel  Edition/ The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

without  the  imposition  of  new  taxes,  and  assuming  substantially  unchanged  world
conditions,  a  deficit  of  $3.8  billion  is  estimated  for  fiscal  year  1954.

23.  a.  Under  existing  law,  tax  reductions  of  $5  billion  a  year  will  become
effective  next  January.  A  proposal  to  impose  substitute  taxes  therefor  would
be  a  reversal  of  policy.

b.  Additional  revenue  losses  of  $3  billion  a  year  are  due  to  occur  on
April  1,  1954.  Congress  has  not  acted  on  the  President's  recommendation
that  these  reductions  be  rescinded.  Even  if  the  $3  billion  reduction  is  re-
scinded, or  offset  by  revenue  from  new  sources,  large  deficits  would  occur
in  FY  1955  and  FY  1956  at  present  levels  of  expenditures.

c.  The  economic  problem  is  made  more  difficult  by  the  need  to  reform
the  tax  system  in  the  interests  of  long-term  economic  growth.  Inevitably,
many  of  the  changes  necessary  to  reduce  the  barriers  to  growth  will  lead
to  a  loss  of  revenue  in  the  years  immediately  following  their  adoption.

24.  Any  additional  revenue  will  have  to  be  secured  by  new  taxation  on  a
broad  base.

25.  The  present  high  level  of  the  Government  debt  further  complicates  the
financial  and  economic  problems  of  the  country.  Substantial  additional  borrowing
could  come  only  from  sources  which  would  be  inflationary.

26.  There  is  no  precise  level  or  duration  of  government  expenditures  which
can  be  determined  in  advance,  at  which  an  economic  system  will  be  seriously
damaged  from  inflationary  borrowing  on  the  one  hand  or  from  repressive  taxa-
tion on  the  other.  The  higher  the  level  of  expenditures,  the  greater  is  the  need  for
sound  policies  and  the  greater  are  the  dangers  of  miscalculations  and  mischance.
These  dangers  are  now  substantial.

27.  The  requirements  for  funds  to  maintain  our  national  security  must  thus
be  considered  in  the  light  of  these  dangers  to  our  economic  system,  including  the
danger  to  industrial  productivity  necessary  to  support  military  programs,  arising
from  excessive  levels  of  total  Government  spending,  taxing  and  borrowing.

28.  Modifications  of  the  foregoing  fiscal  policies  to  promote  long-term  growth
may  be  necessitated  for  a  limited  period:  (1)  to  deal  with  short-term  cyclical
problems  or  (2)  to  achieve  overriding  national  objectives  that  justify  departure
from  sound  fiscal  policies.

The  Situation  as  to  U.S.  Manpower

29.  a.  The  national  security  programs  of  the  United  States  rest  upon  the
manpower  to  operate  them,  the  economy  to  produce  the  material  for  them,
and  the  financial  resources  to  pay  for  them.

b.  The  qualified  manpower  annually  coming  of  military  age  is  adequate
to  carry  out  our  existing  military  programs.  However,  the  continuing  de-
velopment of  more  complicated  weapons,  machines,  and  devices  used  by
the  military  greatly  increases  the  need  for  military  manpower  possessed  of
higher  skills,  and  for  their  better  utilization,  and  emphasizes  the  need  for
expanded  technical  training  and  retention  of  technically  trained  personnel.

c.  Any  considerable  increase  in  the  need  for  military  manpower  would
require  consideration  of :

(1)  Broadening  the  present  criteria  governing  draft  eligibility.

(2)  Broadening  the  physical  requirements  for  enlistment,  particularly
to  secure  technicians.


Documents  423


(3)  Extension  of  the  average  length  of  military  service,  including  in-
creased incentives  for  re-enlistment.

(4)  Increased  recruitment  of  long-term  volunteers  and  of  women.

(5)  Greater  use  of  civilians  for  technical  maintenance  work.

(6)  Leadership  to  develop  a  national  response  to  increased  needs,  in-
cluding steps  to  make  military  service  a  matter  of  patriotic  pride  and  to
increase  the  attractiveness  of  a  military  career.

d.  Any  decisions  on  these  matters  should  be  made  in  the  light  of  a
comprehensive  study,  to  be  submitted  to  the  President  by  the  Office  of
Defense  Mobilization  by  December  1,  on  manpower  availability  under
varying  assumptions  as  to  the  degree  and  nature  of  mobilization  require-
ments.

Morale

30.  Support  for  the  necessary  security  programs,  based  upon  a  sound  pro-
ductive system,  is  ultimately  dependent  also  upon  the  soundness  of  the  national
morale  and  the  political  willingness  of  the  country  to  support  a  government  which
it  feels  is  holding  the  proper  balance  between  the  necessary  sacrifices  and  the
necessary  defense.  Accordingly,  the  American  people  must  be  informed  of  the
nature  of  the  Soviet-Communist  threat,  in  particular  the  danger  inherent  in  the
increasing  Soviet  atomic  capability;  of  the  basic  community  of  interest  among  the
nations  of  the  free  world;  and  of  the  need  for  mobilizing  the  spiritual  and  ma-
terial resources  necessary  to  meet  the  Soviet  threat.

POLICY  CONCLUSIONS

Basic  Problems  of  National  Security  Policy

31.  a.  To  meet  the  Soviet  threat  to  U.S.  security.

b.  In  doing  so,  to  avoid  seriously  weakening  the  U.S.  economy  or  under-
mining our  fundamental  values  and  institutions.

Nature  of  the  Soviet  Threat

32.  a.  With  increasing  atomic  power,  the  Soviets  have  a  mounting  capability
of  inflicting  very  serious  and  possibly  crippling  damage  on  the  United
States.  The  USSR  will  also  continue  to  have  large  military  forces  capable
of  aggressive  action  against  countries  of  the  free  world.  Present  estimates
are,  however,  that  the  USSR  will  not  deliberately  initiate  general  war  dur-
ing the  next  several  years,  although  general  war  might  result  from  mis-
calculation. In  the  absence  of  general  war,  a  prolonged  period  of  tension
may  ensue,  during  which  each  side  increases  its  armaments,  reaches  atomic
plenty  and  seeks  to  improve  its  relative  power  position.

b.  In  any  case,  the  Soviets  will  continue  to  seek  to  divide  and  weaken
the  free  world  coalition,  to  absorb  or  win  the  allegiance  of  the  presently
uncommitted  areas  of  the  world,  and  to  isolate  the  United  States,  using
cold  war  tactics  and  the  communist  apparatus.  Their  capacity  for  political
warfare  against  the  United  States  as  well  as  its  allies  will  be  enhanced  by
their  increased  atomic  capability.

33.  a.  A  sound,  strong,  and  growing  U.S.  economy  is  necessary  to  support
over  the  long  pull  a  satisfactory  posture  of  defense  in  the  free  world  and  a


424 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

U.S.  capability  rapidly  and  effectively  to  change  to  full  mobilization.  The
United  States  should  not  weaken  its  capacity  for  high  productivity  for  de-
fense, its  free  institutions,  and  the  incentives  on  which  its  long-term  eco-
nomic growth  depends.

b.  A  recession  in  the  level  of  U.S.  economic  activity  could  seriously
prejudice  the  security  of  the  free  world.

Defense  Against  Soviet  Power  and  Action

34.  In  the  face  of  these  threats,  the  United  States  must  develop  and  main-
tain, at  the  lowest  feasible  cost,  requisite  military  and  non-military  strength  to
deter  and,  if  necessary,  to  counter  Soviet  military  aggression  against  the  United
States  or  other  areas  vital  to  its  security.

a.  The  risk  of  Soviet  aggression  will  be  minimized  by  maintaining  a
strong  security  posture,  with  emphasis  on  adequate  offensive  retaliatory
strength  and  defensive  strength.  This  must  be  based  on  massive  atomic
capability,  including  necessary  bases;  an  integrated  and  effective  continental
defense  system;  ready  forces  of  the  United  States  and  its  allies  suitably
deployed  and  adequate  to  deter  or  initially  to  counter  aggression,  and  to
discharge  required  initial  tasks  in  the  event  of  a  general  war;  and  an  ade-
quate mobilization  base;  all  supported  by  the  determined  spirit  of  the  U.S.
people.

b.  This  strong  security  posture  must  also  be  supported  by  an  effective
U.S.  intelligence  system,  an  adequate  manpower  program,  superior  scientific
research  and  development,  a  program  of  limited  defense  mobilization,  rea-
sonable internal  security,  and  an  informed  American  people.

c.  Such  a  strong  security  posture  is  essential  to  counter  the  Soviet  di-
visive tactics  and  hold  together  the  coalition.  If  our  allies  were  uncertain
about  our  ability  or  will  to  counter  Soviet  aggression,  they  would  be  strongly
tempted  to  adopt  a  neutralist  position,  especially  in  the  face  of  the  atomic
threat.

35.  In  the  interest  of  its  own  security,  the  United  States  must  have  the  sup-
port of  allies.

a.  The  military  striking  power  necessary  to  retaliate  depends  for  the
foreseeable  future  on  having  bases  in  allied  countries.  Furthermore,  the
ground  forces  required  to  counter  local  aggressions  must  be  supplied  largely
by  our  allies.

b.  The  loss  of  major  allies  by  subversion,  divisive  tactics,  or  the  growth
of  neutralist  attitudes,  would  seriously  affect  the  security  of  the  United
States.

36.  United  States  policies  must,  therefore,  be  designed  to  retain  the  coopera-
tion of  our  allies,  to  seek  to  win  the  friendship  and  cooperation  of  the  presently
uncommitted  areas  of  the  world,  and  thereby  to  strengthen  the  cohesion  of  the
free  world.

a.  Our  allies  must  be  genuinely  convinced  that  our  strategy  is  one  of
collective  security.  The  alliance  must  be  rooted  in  a  strong  feeling  of  a
community  of  interest  and  firm  confidence  in  the  steadiness  and  wisdom
of  U.S.  leadership.


Documents  425


b.  Cooperative  efforts,  including  equitable  contributions  by  our  allies,
will  continue  to  be  necessary  to  build  the  military,  economic  and  political
strength  of  the  coalition  and  the  stability  of  the  free  world.

c.  Constructive  U.S.  policies,  not  related  solely  to  anti-communism,  are
needed  to  persuade  uncommitted  countries  that  their  best  interests  lie  in
greater  cooperation  and  stronger  affiliations  with  the  rest  of  the  free  world.

d.  To  enhance  the  capacity  of  free  world  nations  for  self-support  and
defense,  and  to  reduce  progressively  their  need  for  U.S.  aid,  the  United
States  should  assist  in  stimulating  international  trade,  freer  access  to  markets
and  raw  materials,  and  the  healthy  growth  of  underdeveloped  areas.  In
this  connection,  it  should  consider  a  modification  of  its  tariff  and  trade
policies.

e.  In  subsequent  fiscal  years  economic  grant  aid  and  loans  by  the  United
States  to  other  nations  of  the  free  world  should  be  based  on  the  best  in-
terests of  the  United  States.

37.  a.  In  Western  Europe,  a  position  of  strength  must  be  based  mainly  on
British,  French,  and  German  cooperation  in  the  defense  of  the  continent.
To  achieve  a  stronger  Europe,  the  United  States  should  support,  as  long
as  there  is  hope  of  early  success,  the  building  of  an  integrated  European
Community  (including  West  Germany  and  if  possible  a  united  Germany),
linked  to  the  United  States  through  NATO.  The  United  States  should  press
for  a  strong,  united  stable  Germany,  oriented  to  the  free  world  and  mili-
tarily capable  of  overcoming  internal  subversion  and  disorder  and  also
of  taking  a  major  part  in  the  collective  defense  of  the  free  world  against
aggression.  The  United  States  must  continue  to  assist  in  creating  and  main-
taining mutually  agreed  European  forces,  but  should  reduce  such  assistance
as  rapidly  as  United  States  interests  permit.

b.  In  the  Far  East,  strength  must  be  built  on  existing  bilateral  and
multilateral  security  arrangements  until  more  comprehensive  regional  ar-
rangements become  feasible.  The  United  States  should  stress  assistance  in
developing  Japan  as  a  major  element  of  strength.  The  United  States  should
maintain  the  security  of  the  off-shore  island  chain  and  continue  to  develop
the  defensive  capacity  of  Korea  and  Southeast  Asia  in  accordance  with
existing  commitments.

c.  In  the  Middle  East,  a  strong  regional  grouping  is  not  now  feasible.
In  order  to  assure  during  peace  time  for  the  United  States  and  its  allies  the
resources  (especially  oil)  and  the  strategic  positions  of  the  area  and  their
denial  to  the  Soviet  bloc,  the  United  States  should  build  on  Turkey,  Paki-
stan and,  if  possible,  Iran,  and  assist  in  achieving  stability  in  the  Middle
East  by  political  actions  and  limited  military  and  economic  assistance,  and
technical  assistance,  to  other  countries  in  the  area.

d.  In  other  areas  of  the  free  world  the  United  States  should  furnish
limited  military  aid,  and  limited  technical  and  economic  assistance,  to
other  free  nations,  according  to  the  calculated  advantage  of  such  aid  to
the  U.S.  world  position.

38.  a.  As  presently  deployed  in  support  of  our  commitments,  the  armed
forces  of  the  United  States  are  over-extended,  thereby  depriving  us  of
mobility  and  initiative  for  future  military  action  in  defense  of  the  free  world.

b.  Under  present  conditions,  however,  any  major  withdrawal  of  U.S.
forces  from  Europe  or  the  Far  East  would  be  interpreted  as  a  diminution
of  U.S.  interest  in  the  defense  of  these  areas  and  would  seriously  under-
mine the  strength  and  cohesion  of  the  coalition.


426 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

c.  Our  diplomacy  must  concentrate  upon  clarifying  to  our  allies  in  parts
of  the  world  not  gripped  by  war  conditions  that  the  best  defense  of  the
free  world  rests  upon  a  deployment  of  U.S.  forces  which  permits  initiative,
flexibility  and  support;  upon  our  political  commitment  to  strike  back  hard
directly  against  any  aggressor  who  attacks  such  allies;  and  upon  such  allies'
own  indigenous  security  efforts.

39.  a.  In  specific  situations  where  a  warning  appears  desirable  and  feasible
as  an  added  deterrent,  the  United  States  should  make  clear  to  the  USSR
and  Communist  China,  in  general  terms  or  with  reference  to  specific  areas
as  the  situation  requires,  its  intention  to  react  with  military  force  against
any  aggression  by  Soviet  bloc  armed  forces.

b.  ( 1 )  In  the  event  of  hostilities,  the  United  States  will  consider  nuclear
weapons  to  be  as  available  for  use  as  other  munitions.  Where  the  con-
sent of  an  ally  is  required  for  the  use  of  these  weapons  from  U.S.  bases  on
the  territory  of  such  ally,  the  United  States  should  promptly  obtain  the
advance  consent  of  such  ally  for  such  use.  The  United  States  should  also
seek,  as  and  when  feasible,  the  understanding  and  approval  of  this  policy
by  free  nations.

(2)  This  policy  should  not  be  made  public  without  further  consider-
ation by  the  National  Security  Council.

Defense  Against  the  Threat  to  the  U.S.  Economy  and  Institutions

40.  a.  A  strong,  healthy  and  expanding  U.S.  economy  is  essential  to  the
security  and  stability  of  the  free  world.  In  the  interest  of  both  the  United
States  and  its  allies,  it  is  vital  that  the  support  of  defense  expenditures
should  not  seriously  impair  the  basic  soundness  of  the  U.S.  economy  by
undermining  incentives  or  by  inflation.

b.  The  United  States  must,  however,  meet  the  necessary  costs  of  the
policies  essential  for  its  security.  The  actual  level  of  such  costs  cannot  be
estimated  until  further  study,  but  should  be  kept  to  the  minimum  con-
sistent with  the  carrying  out  of  these  policies.

c.  Barring  basic  change  in  the  world  situation,  the  Federal  Government
should  continue  to  make  a  determined  effort  to  bring  its  total  annual  ex-
penditures into  balance,  or  into  substantial  balance  with  its  total  annual
revenues  and  should  maintain  over-all  credit  and  fiscal  policies  designed  to
assist  in  stabilizing  the  economy.

d.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  eliminate  waste,  duplication,  and  un-
necessary overhead  in  the  Federal  Government,  and  to  minimize  Federal
expenditures  for  programs  that  are  not  essential  to  the  national  security.

e.  The  United  States  should  seek  to  maintain  a  higher  and  expanding
rate  of  economic  activity  at  relatively  stable  price  levels.

/.  The  economic  potential  of  private  enterprise  should  be  maximized  by
minimizing  governmental  controls  and  regulations,  and  by  encouraging  pri-
vate enterprise  to  develop  natural  and  technological  resources  (e.g.  nuclear
power).

41.  To  support  the  necessarily  heavy  burdens  for  national  security,  the  morale
of  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  must  be  based  both  on  responsibility  and
freedom  for  the  individual.  The  dangers  from  Soviet  subversion  and  espionage
require  strong  and  effective  security  measures.  Eternal  vigilance,  however,  is
needed  in  their  exercise  to  prevent  the  intimidation  of  free  criticism.  It  is


Documents  All


essential  that  necessary  measures  of  protection  should  not  be  so  used  as  to
destroy  the  national  unity  based  on  freedom,  not  on  fear.

Reduction  of  the  Soviet  Threat

42.  a.  The  United  States  must  seek  to  improve  the  power  position  of  itself
and  the  rest  of  the  free  world  in  relation  to  the  Soviet  bloc.

b.  The  United  States  must  also  keep  open  the  possibility  of  negotiating
with  the  USSR  and  Communist  China  acceptable  and  enforceable  agree-
ments, whether  limited  to  individual  issues  now  outstanding  or  involving
a  general  settlement  of  major  issues,  including  control  of  armaments.

c.  The  willingness  of  the  Soviet  leadership  to  negotiate  acceptable  settle-
ments, without  necessarily  abandoning  hostility  to  the  non-Soviet  world,
may  tend  to  increase  over  time,  if  the  United  States  and  its  allies  develop
and  increase  their  own  strength,  determination  and  cohesion,  maintain  re-
taliatory power  sufficient  to  insure  unacceptable  damage  to  the  Soviet  sys-
tem should  the  USSR  resort  to  general  war,  and  prove  that  the  free  world
can  prosper  despite  Soviet  pressures,  or  if  for  any  reason  Soviet  stability
and  influence  are  reduced.

d.  The  policy  of  the  United  States  is  to  prevent  Soviet  aggression  and
continuing  domination  of  other  nations,  and  to  establish  an  effective  con-
trol of  armaments  under  proper  safeguards;  but  is  not  to  dictate  the  in-
ternal political  and  economic  organization  of  the  USSR.*

43.  As  a  means  of  reducing  Soviet  capabilities  for  extending  control  and
influence  in  the  free  world,  the  United  States  should:

a.  Take  overt  and  covert  measures  to  discredit  Soviet  prestige  and
ideology  as  effective  instruments  of  Soviet  power,  and  to  reduce  the  strength
of  communist  parties  and  other  pro-Soviet  elements.

b.  Take  all  feasible  diplomatic,  political,  economic  and  covert  measures
to  counter  any  threat  of  a  party  or  individuals  directly  or  indirectly  re-
sponsive to  Soviet  control  to  achieve  dominant  power  in  a  free  world
country.

c.  Undertake  selective,  positive  actions  to  eliminate  Soviet-Communist
control  over  any  areas  of  the  free  world.

44.  a.  Measures  to  impose  pressures  on  the  Soviet  bloc  should  take  into
account  the  desirability  of  creating  conditions  which  will  induce  the  Soviet
leadership  to  be  more  receptive  to  acceptable  negotiated  settlements.

b.  Accordingly,  the  United  States  should  take  feasible  political,  eco-
nomic, propaganda  and  covert  measures  designed  to  create  and  exploit
troublesome  problems  for  the  USSR,  impair  Soviet  relations  with  Com-
munist China,  complicate  control  in  the  satellites,  and  retard  the  growth
of  the  military  and  economic  potential  of  the  Soviet  bloc.

45.  In  the  face  of  the  developing  Soviet  threat,  the  broad  aim  of  U.S.  security
policies  must  be  to  create,  prior  to  the  achievement  of  mutual  atomic  plenty,
conditions  under  which  the  United  States  and  the  free  world  coalition  are  pre-
pared to  meet  the  Soviet-Communist  threat  with  resolution  and  to  negotiate  for

*  This  paragraph  does  not  establish  policy  guidance  for  our  propaganda  or  informa-
tional activities.


428 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


its  alleviation  under  proper  safeguards.  The  United  States  and  its  allies  must
always  seek  to  create  and  sustain  the  hope  and  confidence  of  the  free  world
in  the  ability  of  its  basic  ideas  and  institutions  not  merely  to  oppose  the  com-
munist threat,  but  to  provide  a  way  of  life  superior  to  Communism.

46.  The  foregoing  conclusions  are  valid  only  so  long  as  the  United  States
maintains  a  retaliatory  capability  that  cannot  be  neutralized  by  a  surprise  Soviet
attack.  Therefore,  there  must  be  continuing  examination  and  periodic  report  to
the  National  Security  Council  in  regard  to  the  likelihood  of  such  neutralization
of  U.S.  retaliatory  capability.

ANNEX

U.S.  OBJECTIVES  VIS-A-VIS  THE  USSR  IN  THE  EVENT  OF  WAR

(The  following  paragraphs  are  taken  verbatim  from  NSC  20/4,  approved  in
November,  1 94.8-.  They  also  formed  an  annex  to  NSC  153/1,  approved  in  June,
19^ .-This  subject  is  currently  under  review  by  the  NSC  Planning  Board.)

1.  In  the  event  of  war  with  the  USSR  we  should  endeavor  by  successful  mili-
tary and  other  operations  to  create  conditions  which  would  permit  satisfactory
accomplishment  of  U.S.  objectives  without  a  predetermined  requirement  for
unconditional  surrender.  War  aims  supplemental  to  our  peace-time  aims  should
include:


a.  Eliminating  Soviet  Russian  domination  in  areas  outside  the  borders  of
any  Russian  state  allowed  to  exist  after  the  war.

b.  Destroying  the  structure  of  relationships  by  which  leaders  of  the  AU-
Union  Communist  Party  have  been  able  to  exert  moral  and  disciplinary
authority  over  individual  citizens,  or  groups  of  citizens,  in  countries  not
under  communist  control.

c.  Assuring  that  any  regime  or  regimes  which  may  exist  on  traditional
Russian  territory  in  the  aftermath  of  a  war:

( 1 )  Do  not  have  sufficient  military  power  to  wage  aggressive  war.

(2)  Impose  nothing  resembling  the  present  iron  curtain  over  contacts
with  the  outside  world.

d.  In  addition,  if  any  bolshevik  regime  is  left  in  any  part  of  the  Soviet
Union,  insuring  that  it  does  not  control  enough  of  the  military-industrial
potential  of  the  Soviet  Union  to  enable  it  to  wage  war  on  comparable  terms
with  any  other  regime  or  regimes  which  may  exist  on  traditional  Russian
territory.

e.  Seeking  to  create  postwar  conditions  which  will:

(1)  Prevent  the  development  of  power  relationships  dangerous  to  the
security  of  the  United  States  and  international  peace.

(2)  Be  conducive  to  the  successful  development  of  an  effective  world
organization  based  upon  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United  Na-
tions.

(3)  Permit  the  earliest  practicable  discontinuance  within  the  United
States  of  wartime  controls.

2.  In  pursuing  the  above  war  aims,  we  should  avoid  making  irrevocable  or
premature  decisions  or  commitments  respecting  border  rearrangements,  admin-
istration of  government  within  enemy  territory,  independence  for  national  minori-


Documents  429


ties,  or  post-war  responsibility  for  the  readjustment  of  the  inevitable  political,
economic,  and  social  dislocations  resulting  from  the  war.


[Document  19]

SPECIAL  ESTIMATE

PROBABLE  COMMUNIST  REACTIONS  TO  CERTAIN
POSSIBLE  US  COURSES  OF  ACTION  IN
INDOCHINA  THROUGH  1954

SE-53

Approved  15  December  1953
Published  18  December  1953
LIMITED  DISTRIBUTION

The  Intelligence  Advisory  Committee  concurred  in  this
estimate  on  15  December  1953.  The  FBI  abstained,  the
subject  being  outside  of  its  jurisdiction.

The  following  member  organizations  of  the  Intelligence
Advisory  Committee  participated  with  the  Central  Intel-
ligence Agency  in  the  preparation  of  this  estimate:  The
intelligence  organizations  of  the  Departments  of  State,
the  Army,  the  Navy,  the  Air  Force,  and  The  Joint  Staff.

CENTRAL  INTELLIGENCE  AGENCY

THE  PROBLEMi

To  estimate  the  probable  reactions  of  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  to:

a.  The  commitment  in  Indochina,  before  the  end  of  1954,  of  US  ground,  air,
and  naval  forces  on  a  scale  sufficient  to  defeat  decisively  the  field  forces  of  the
Viet  Minh.

b.  The  commitment  in  Indochina,  before  the  end  of  1954,  of  US  ground,
air,  and  naval  forces  on  a  scale  sufficient  to  hold  the  Viet  Minh  in  check  until
such  time  as  US-developed  Vietnamese  forces  could  decisively  defeat  the  field
forces  of  the  Viet  Minh.

ASSUMPTIONS^

For  both  a.  and  b.  above:

1.  No  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  force  in  Indochina  had  taken  place.

2.  Commitment  of  US  forces  had  been  publicly  requested  by  the  French  and
Vietnamese  governments.

3.  At  the  time  of  the  US  commitment  French  Union  forces  still  retained
essentially  their  present  position  in  the  Tonkin  Delta.

4.  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  would  have  prior  knowledge  of  the  US
intent  to  commit  its  forces  in  Indochina.


^The  Problem  and  the  Assumptions  have  been  provided  to  the  intelligence  com-
munity as  a  basis  for  the  estimate.


430 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

5.  Following  the  US  commitment,  there  would  be  a  phased  withdrawal  of
French  forces  from  Indochina.

6.  The  US  will  warn  the  Chinese  Communists  that  if  they  openly  intervene^
in  the  fighting  in  Indochina,  the  US  will  not  limit  its  military  action  to
Indochina.

ESTIMATE

1.  We  believe  that  the  Communists  would  assume  that  the  purpose  of  com-
mitting US  forces  in  Indochina  was  the  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh.  Con-
sequently, we  believe  that  Communist  reactions  to  such  a  US  commitment  would
be  substantially  the  same  whether  it  were  designed  to  defeat  the  Viet  Minh  with
US  forces  (Problem  a.)  or  eventually  with  US-trained  Vietnam  forces  (Problem
b.).

In  the  Event  of  a  Pending  US  Commitment

2.  We  do  not  believe  that  Communist  China,  upon  learning  of  a  forthcoming
commitment  by  the  US,  would  immediately  intervene  openly  with  substantial
forces  in  Indochina.  The  acceptance  by  Communist  China  of  an  armistice  in
Korea,  its  policies  to  date  with  respect  to  Indochina,  and  its  present  emphasis  on
domestic  problems  seem  to  indicate  a  desire  at  this  time  to  avoid  open  inter-
vention in  the  Indochina  war  or  expansion  of  the  conflict  to  Communist  China.
US  warnings  against  Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  force^  probably  would
have  a  strong  deterrent  effect.  Moreover,  the  political  advantage  to  be  gained
by  portraying  the  US  as  an  "aggressor"  would  probably  appear  both  to  Com-
munist China  and  the  USSR  to  outweigh  the  military  advantage  of  moving  large
Chinese  Communist  forces  into  Indochina  before  the  arrival  of  US  forces.

3.  In  addition.  Communist  leadership  would  probably  estimate  that  they  would
have  time  to  take  a  number  of  steps  which,  without  a  serious  risk  of  expanding
the  war  to  China,  might  deter  a  US  military  commitment  or  seriously  impair
its  effectiveness.  Such  steps  might  include:

a.  Increasing  logistic  and  rear  area  support  to  the  Viet  Minh.

b.  Covertly  committing  Chinese  troops  to  operate  as  "Viet  Minh  guerrillas."

c.  Encouraging  intensified  Viet  Minh  guerrilla  and  sabotage  operations  in  Indo-
china, particularly  in  and  around  the  Tonkin  Delta,  designed  to  inflict  such
damage  on  the  French  Union  position  as  to  increase  the  difficulties  of  the  US
operation.

d.  Building  up  Chinese  Communist  strength  in  south  China,  including  Hainan.

e.  Seeking  by  diplomatic  and  propaganda  means  in  the  UN  and  elsewhere
to  forestall  US  action,  to  gain  the  support  of  non-Communist  countries,  and  to
exploit  differences  between  the  US  and  its  allies  over  preparations  for  this  opera-
tion.

^  For  the  purposes  of  this  estimate,  open  intervention  is  defined  as  the  commitment
of  substantial  Chinese  Communist  combat  forces,  under  any  guise.
^  Such  warnings  would  reinforce  the  warning  already  given  by  Secretary  of  State
Dulles,  in  his  American  Legion  Speech  at  St.  Louis,  2  September  1953:

Communist  China  has  been  and  now  is  training,  equipping  and  supplying  the  Com-
munist forces  in  Indochina.  There  is  the  risk  that,  as  in  Korea,  Red  China  might
send  its  own  army  into  Indochina.  The  Chinese  Communist  regime  should  realize
that  such  a  second  aggression  could  not  occur  without  grave  consequences  which
might  not  be  confined  in  Indochina.  I  say  this  soberly  in  the  interest  of  peace
and  in  the  hope  of  preventing  another  aggressor  miscalculation."


Documents  431


/.  Concluding  a  defense  pact  with  the  Viet  Minh.
Although,  in  response  to  a  US  military  commitment  in  Indochina,  the  Com-
munists might  threaten  to  renew  hostilities  in  Korea,  we  believe  that  they  would
not  actually  take  such  action  as  they  probably  estimate  that  renewed  aggression
in  Korea  would  result  in  expanding  the  conflict  to  Communist  China  itself.

Actual  US  Commitment

4.  In  the  initial  stages  of  an  actual  US  military  commitment,  the  Communists
might  not  feel  compelled  to  intervene  openly  in  force  immediately.  They  would
recognize  the  difficulties  which  the  US  forces  would  face  in  operating  in  the
Indochina  climate  and  terrain.  They  would  also  realize  that  the  xenophobia  of
the  indigenous  population  of  Indochina  might  be  effectively  exploited  to  the
disadvantage  of  US  forces  by  Communist  propaganda;  the  Chinese  Communists
would  therefore  prefer  that  the  US  rather  than  themselves  be  confronted  with
this  antiforeign  attitude.  They  might  estimate  that,  with  increased  aid  from
Communist  China,  the  Viet  Minh  forces,  by  employing  harassing  and  infiltrating
tactics  and  avoiding  major  engagements,  could  make  any  US  advance  at  the  least
slow  and  difficult.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  Chinese  Communists  would
initially  follow  a  cautious  military  policy  while  they  assessed  the  scale,  nature,
and  probable  success  of  the  US  action,  the  effect  of  such  action  on  Vietnamese
national  morale  and  military  capabilities,  the  subsequent  military  and  political
moves  of  the  French,  the  temper  of  US  opinion,  the  reactions  of  US  allies  and
the  neutralist  states,  and  the  position  of  the  UN.  Even  at  this  early  stage,  how-
ever, the  Chinese  Communists  would  probably  take  strong  actions  short  of  open
intervention  in  an  effort  to  prevent  the  US  from  destroying  the  Viet  Minh  armed
forces.^

5.  In  addition  to  the  steps  outlined  in  paragraph  3  above,  the  Chinese  Com-
munists, at  this  early  stage  of  US  commitment,  would  probably  provide  an  in-
creased number  of  military  advisors,  possibly  including  commanders  for  major
Viet  Minh  units.  Moreover,  Peiping  might  covertly  furnish  limited  air  support
for  Viet  Minh  ground  forces,  but  would  be  unlikely  to  undertake  air  opera-
tions which  it  estimated  would  provoke  US  retaliation  against  Communist  China
itself  other  than  retaliation  against  those  airfields  from  which  such  air  attacks
were  launched.

6.  If  the  leaders  of  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  came  to  believe  that  a  pro-
tracted stalemate  in  Indochina  was  likely,  they  would  probably  not  openly
commit  Chinese  Communist  ground,  naval,  or  air  forces  to  an  intervention  in
force  in  Indochina,  nor  would  they  renew  hostilities  in  Korea  or  commit  new
acts  of  armed  aggression  elsewhere  in  the  Far  East.  Peiping  and  Moscow  would
probably  believe  that  a  long  and  indecisive  war  in  Indochina  could  be  exploited
politically  and  that,  in  time7  US  and  Vietnamese  will  to  fight  might  be  worn
down.

7.  If  at  any  time,  however,  the  leaders  of  Communist  China  and  the  USSR  came
'  to  believe  that  a  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  armed  forces  was  likely,  they

would  be  faced  with  the  decision  whether  Communist  China  should  intervene
i  openly  in  force  in  order  to  avert  this  development.

i*The  Special  Assistant,  Intelligence,  Department  of  State,  believes  that  the  timing  of
the  Communist  reaction  to  the  commitment  of  US  forces  in  Indochina  cannot  be
estimated  with  any  degree  of  assurance.  He  therefore  believes  that  a  decision  by  the
Communists  to  follow  a  cautious  policy  in  the  initial  stages  of  the  US  action  should

I  be  presented  as  a  possibility,  rather  than  as  a  probability.


432 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I  \

8.  The  following  considerations  might  induce  the  Communists  to  decide  in  I
favor  of  open  intervention  in  force:  \

a.  Decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  armed  forces  would  be  a  grave  blow  to
Communist  prestige  throughout  the  world  and  would  seriously  diminish  pros- 1
pects  for  the  expansion  of  Communism  in  Asia.  '

b.  A  US  military  commitment  in  Indochina  might  form  part  of  a  larger  plan,
possibly  involving,  in  the  minds  of  the  Communists,  the  resurgence  of  Chinese
Nationalist  strength,  aimed  at  the  destruction  of  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.
In  any  case,  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  armed  forces  would  bring  US
power  to  the  borders  of  China.  \

c.  Whatever  the  initial  intention,  successful  US  military  action  in  Indochina  s
might  encourage  the  US  to  increase  pressure  on  other  points  of  the  Communist
periphery.  \

d.  Many  observers,  particularly  in  the  Asian  neutralist  states,  would  con- :
sider  the  US  in  the  wrong  in  Indochina  and  would  condone  Chinese  Communist
intervention  as  a  move  to  "liberate  Indochina  from  American  imperialism."  >
These  sentiments  could  be  effectively  exploited  by  Communist  propaganda.

e.  The  US,  despite  its  warnings,  might  not  retaliate  strongly  against  Com-
munist China,  because  it  would  fear  that  such  retaliation  would  alienate  its
NATO  allies,  result  in  wider  military  deployment  of  US  forces,  cause  Peiping ;
to  invoke  the  Sino-Soviet  treaty,  and  thereby  increase  the  danger  of  general  war.

/.  By  intervening  openly  in  force  the  Chinese  Communists  might  be  able  to  i
prevent  indefinitely  both  the  successful  accomplishment  of  the  US  mission  and ;
the  disengagement  of  substantial  US  forces  from  Indochina.

9.  On  the  other  hand,  the  following  considerations  might  deter  the  Communists
from  deciding  to  intervene  openly  in  force:

a.  It  would  be  more  important  to  concentrate  upon  domestic  problems  includ-
ing strengthening  of  Communist  China's  economy.

b.  There  would  be  a  grave  risk  of  US  reprisals  against  Communist  China  and
possibly  of  general  war.  '

c.  Indochina  is  remote  from  the  USSR  and  the  centers  of  power  in  Communist
China.  Accordingly,  the  establishment  of  a  strong  US  position  in  Indochina
would  not  constitute,  to  the  same  degree  as  in  Korea,  a  threat  to  Chinese  Com-
munist and  Soviet  power  in  the  Far  East.

d.  Short  of  actual  intervention,  the  Chinese  Communists  could  acquire  a
position  of  strength  by  reinforcing  and  rehabilitating  the  military  facilities  on
Hainan.  This  position  would  dominate  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin,  and  pose  a  distinct
threat  to  sea-air  lines  of  communications  of  US  forces  in  Indochina  and  to  rear
bases.

e.  The  loss  in  prestige  involved  in  the  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  armed  forces
could  in  part  be  offset  by  depicting  the  Viet  Minh  as  an  indigenous  liberation
movement.  Moreover,  the  Viet  Minh  Government  and  its  armed  forces  could  be
preserved  on  Chinese  soil  where  they  could  exercise  constant  military  and  politi-
cal pressure  on  the  forces  of  the  US  and  the  Associated  States.

/.  The  military  and  political  nature  of  the  Indochina  war  is  such  that  even  if
the  US  defeated  the  Viet  Minh  field  forces,  guerrilla  action  could  probably  be
continued  indefinitely  and  preclude  the  establishment  of  complete  non-Commu-
nist control  over  that  area.

g.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  US  might  have  to  maintain  a  military  com-
mitment in  Indochina  for  years  to  come.  Heavy  US  commitments  in  Indochina


Documents  433


over  the  long  run  might  cause  concern  to  US  allies  and  might  create  divergencies
between  the  US  and  neutralist  states.

10.  The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence  and  the  Deputy  Director  for  Intelli-
gence, The  Joint  Staff,  believe  that  the  Communist  reaction  to  commitment  of
US  forces  in  Indochina  would  largely  depend  upon  US  posture  prior  to,  and  at
the  same  time  of,  such  commitment.  If  the  US  posture  made  manifest  to  the
Communists  that  US  naval  and  air  retaliatory  power  would  be  fully  applied  to
Communist  China,  then  Peiping  and  Moscow  would  seek  to  avoid  courses  of
action  which  would  bring  about  such  retaliation.  In  such  circumstances,  the
chances  are  better  than  even  that  the  Chinese  Communists  would  not  openly
intervene  in  Indochina,  even  if  they  believed  that  failure  to  intervene  would
mean  the  defeat  at  that  time  of  the  Viet  Minh  field  forces  in  Indochina.  There-
fore the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence  and  the  Deputy  Director  for  Intelli-
gence, The  Joint  Staff,  believe  that  in  weighing  the  arguments  set  forth  in  para-
graphs 8  and  9  Chinese  Communist  leaders,  in  such  circumstances,  would  esti-
mate that  it  was  more  advantageous  to  them  to  support  a  guerrilla  action  in
Indochina  and  tie  down  large  US  forces  in  such  a  war,  than  to  risk  US  retaliatory
action  against  China  itself  which  open  intervention  would  involve.  However,  the
Communists  would  almost  certainly  continue  to  support  the  remnants  of  the
Viet  Minh,  including  re-equipping  these  remnant  forces  on  the  Chinese  side  of
the  border  and  possibly  augmenting  them  with  Chinese  "volunteers"  so  that  Viet
Minh  resistance  could  be  continued  indefinitely.  Moreover,  they  would  pursue
their  objectives  in  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  by  all  means  short  of  open  military
intervention.

11.  The  Special  Assistant,  Intelligence,  Department  of  State,  the  Director  of
Naval  Intelligence,  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Intelligence,  Department  of
the  Army,  and  the  Director  of  Intelligence,  USAF,  believe  that  the  condition
of  "decisive  defeat  of  the  field  forces  of  the  Viet  Minh"  prescribed  for  consider-
ing this  problem  would  necessarily  result  in  such  a  serious  setback  to  Communist
prestige,  security,  and  expansionism  as  to  lead  to  the  following  conclusions.  In
weighing  the  arguments  presented  in  paragraphs  8  and  9,  the  Communist  leaders
in  both  Peiping  and  Moscow  would  probably  give  greatest  consideration  to:  (a)
the  loss  of  prestige,  the  threat  to  Bloc  security,  and  the  setback  to  Communist
expansionism  in  Southeast  Asia  involved  in  a  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh
armed  forces  and,  (b)  the  risk  of  direct  US  action  against  Communist  China.
To  the  Communists,  the  consequences  of  the  decisive  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh
armed  forces  would  be  both  certain  and  far  reaching.  In  appraising  the  possible
nature  and  scale  of  direct  US  action  against  the  China  mainland,  the  Communists
would  weigh  any  US  warnings  of  probable  consequences  of  intervention,  the
temper  of  US  and  free  world  opinion,  and  the  probable  US  desire  not  to  expand
a  local  action.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  Communists'  appraisal  would  lead  them  to
the  conviction  that  the  US  reaction  to  their  intervention  in  Indochina  would

;  take  the  form  of  extensive  and  intense  warfare  against  Communist  China.  In
any  case,  their  overriding  suspicion  of  the  ultimate  motive  of  US  forces  in
strength  on  or  near  the  borders  of  Communist  China  would  strongly  influence
I  their  courses  of  action.  Thus,  the  thought  foremost  in  their  minds  would  most
i  probably  be  that  failure  to  dislodge  US  military  forces  from  the  Chinese  border
I  would  lead  to  increasing  challenges  to  Communist  power  elsewhere.  We  there-
ji  fore  believe  that  the  chances  are  probably  better  than  even  that  the  Communists
■  would  accept  the  risk  involved  and  that  the  Chinese  Communists  would  intervene
1  openly  and  in  force  in  an  effort  to  save  the  Communist  position  in  Indochina.


434 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  20]

NSC  5405  January  16,  1954

NOTE  BY  THE  EXECUTIVE  SECRETARY
to  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION
WITH  RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

References:  A.  NSC  177

B.  NSC  Action  Nos.  897,  1005  and  1011

C.  Memo  for  NSC  from  Executive  Secretary,  same  subject,
dated  January  12,  1954

D.  NSC  124/2

E.  NSC  171/1

F.  NIE-63/1  and  SE-53

The  National  Security  Council,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  the  Director,
Bureau  of  the  Budget,  at  the  180th  Council  meeting  on  January  14,  1954  adopted
the  statement  of  poUcy  contained  in  NSC  177,  subject  to  the  deletion  of  the  last
sentence  of  paragraph  \-a  thereof  and  to  the  deletion  of  paragraph  46  (NSC
Action  No.  101 1-a).

In  connection  with  this  action  the  Council  also  agreed  that  the  Director  of
Central  Intelligence,  in  collaboration  with  other  appropriate  departments  and
agencies,  should  develop  plans,  as  suggested  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  for  certain
contingencies  in  Indochina.

The  Council  at  its  meeting  on  January  8,  1954,  in  connection  with  its  pre-
liminary consideration  of  NSC  177  also  (NSC  Action  No.  1005-c  and  d) :

a.  Agreed  that  Lieutenant  General  John  Wilson  O'Daniel  should  be  stationed
constinuously  in  Indochina,  under  appropriate  liaison  arrangements  and
with  sufficient  authority  to  expedite  the  flexible  provision  of  U.S.  assist-
ance to  the  French  Union  forces.

b.  Requested  the  Department  of  Defense,  in  collaboration  with  the  Central
Intelligence  Agency,  urgently  to  study  and  report  to  the  Council  all
feasible  further  steps,  short  of  the  overt  use  of  U.S.  forces  in  combat,
which  the  United  States  might  take  to  assist  in  achieving  the  success  of
the  "Laniel-Navarre"  Plan,


The  President  has  this  date  approved  the  statement  of  policy  contained  in  j
NSC  177,  as  amended  and  adopted  by  the  Council  and  enclosed  herewith  as  i
NSC  5405;  directs  its  implementation  by  all  appropriate  executive  departments
and  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Government;  and  designates  the  Operations  Coodinating
Board  as  the  coordinating  agency.  A  financial  appendix  is  enclosed  for  Council
information.

Accordingly  those  portions  of  NSC  124/2  not  previously  superseded  by  NSC  '


Documents  435


171/1  are  superseded  by  the  enclosed  statement  of  policy.  The  enclosure  does
not  supersede  the  current  NSC  policy  on  Indoesia  contained  in  NSC  171/1.

JAMES  S.  LAY,  JR.
Executive  Secretary

cc: The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury

The  Director,  Bureau  of  the  Budget
The  Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
The  Director  of  Central  Intelligence

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION
WITH  RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA

Table  of  Contents

Page


Statement  of  Policy 1

General  Considerations 1

Objective 8

Courses  of  Action 8

Southeast  Asia  in  General 8

Indochina 11

In  the  Absence  of  Chinese  Communist

Aggression 11

In  the  Event  of  Chinese  Communist

Intervention 14

Burma 17

Thailand 19

Malaya 20

Annex  A — Public  Statements  Regarding  Consequences  of  Chinese  Com-
munist Aggression  in  Southeast  Asia 21

Annex  B  —  NSC  Record  of  Action  No.  897,  "Further  Support  for  France

and  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina." 23

Financial  Appendix 26


STATEMENT  OF  POLICY
by  the

NATIONAL  SECURITY  COUNCIL
on

UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION
WITH  RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA*

I.  GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS

1.  Communist  domination,  by_whateverjneans,  of  all  Southeast  Asia  would
seriously  endanger  in  the  short  term,  and  critically  endanger  in  the  longer  term,
United  States  security  interests.

*  Southeast  Asia  is  used  herein  to  mean  the  area  embracing  Burma,  Thailand,  Indo-
china and  Malaya.  Indonesia  is  the  subject  of  a  separate  paper  (NSC  171/1).


436 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

a.  In  the  conflict  in  Indochina,  the  Communist  and  non-Communist  worlds
clearly  confront  one  another  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  lost  of  the  struggle  in
Indochina,  in  addition  to  its  impact  in  Southeast  Asia  and  in  South  Asia,
would  therefore  have  the  most  serious  repercussions  on  U.  S.  and  free  world
interests  in  Europe  and  elsewhere.

h.  Such  is  the  interrelation  of  the  countries  of  the  area  that  effective  coun-
teraction would  be  immediately  necessary  to  prevent  the  loss  of  any  single
country  from  leading  to  submission  to  or  an  alignment  with  communism  by  ,
the  remaining  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  and  Indonesia.  Furthermore,  in
the  event  all  of  Southeast  Asia  falls  under  communism,  an  alignment  with
communism  of  India,  and  in  the  longer  term,  of  the  Middle  East  (with
the  probable  exceptions  of  at  least  Pakistan  and  Turkey)  could  follow
progressively.  Such  widespread  alignment  would  seriously  endanger  the
stability  and  security  of  Europe.

c.  Communist  control  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia  and  Indonesia  would  ;
threaten  the  U.S.  position  in  the  Pacific  offshore  island  chain  and  would
seriously  jeapardize  fundamental  U.S.  security  interests  in  the  Far  East.

d.  The  loss  of  Southeast  Asia  would  have  serious  economic  consequences
for  many  nations  of  the  free  world  and  conversely  would  add  significant
resources  to  the  Soviet  bloc.  Southeast  Asia,  especially  Malaya  and  In-
donesia, is  the  principal  world  source  of  natural  rubber  and  tin,  and  a  -
producer  of  petroleum  and  other  strategically  important  commodities.  The
rice  exports  of  Burma,  Indochina  and  Thailand  are  critically  important  to
Malaya,  Ceylon  and  Hong  Kong  and  are  of  considerable  significance  to  ,
Japan  and  India,  all  important  areas  of  free  Asia.  Furthermore,  this  area
has  an  important  potential  as  a  market  for  the  industrialized  countries  of
the  free  world.

e.  The  loss  of  Southeast  Asia,  especially  of  Malaya  and  Indonesia,  could
result  in  such  economic  and  political  pressures  in  Japan  as  to  make  it  ex-  i
tremely  difficult  to  prevent  Japan's  eventual  accommodation  to  communism.

2.  The  danger  of  an  overt  military  attack  against  Southeast  Asia  is  inher-
ent in  the  existence  of  a  hostile  and  aggressive  Communist  China.  The  use  '
of  U.S.  forces  to  oppose  such  an  attack  would  require  diversion  of  military
strength  from  other  areas,  thus  reducing  our  military  capability  in  those  areas,
as  well  as  over-all,  with  the  recognized  military  risks  involved  therein,  or  an  in-
crease in  our  military  forces  in  being,  or  both.  Toward  deterring  such  an  attack,
the  U.S.  Government  has  engaged  in  consultations  with  France  and  the  United
Kingdom  on  the  desirability  of  issuing  to  Communist  China  a  joint  warning
as  to  the  consequences  to  Communist  China  of  aggression  in  Southeast  Asia.
Although  these  consultations  have  not  achieved  a  full  measure  of  agree-
ment a  warning  to  Communist  China  has  in  fact  been  issued,  particularly  as
to  Indochina,  in  a  number  of  public  statements.  (See  Annex  A  for  texts.)  [Words
illegible]  Kingdom,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand  in  military  talks  on  measures  \
which  might  be  taken  in  the  event  of  overt  Chinese  Communist  aggression  against
Indochina.

3.  However,  overt  Chinese  Communist  attack  on  any  part  of  Southeast  Asia  ?
is  less  probable  than  continued  communist  efforts  to  achieve  domination  through
armed  rebellion  or  subversion.  By  far  the  most  urgent  threat  to  Southeast  Asia
arises  from  the  strong  possibility  that  even  without  overt  Chinese  Communist
intervention  the  situation  in  Indochina  may  deteriorate  anew  as  a  result  of
weakening  of  the  resolve  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina  to
continue  to  oppose  the  Viet  Minh  rebellion,  the  military  strength  of  which  is


Documents  437


increased  by  virtue  of  aid  furnished  by  the  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  re-
gimes. Barring  overt  Chinese  Communist  intervention  or  further  serious  deteriora-
tion in  Indochina,  the  outlook  in  Burma,  Thailand,  and  Malaya  offers  oppor-
tunities for  some  improvement  in  internal  stability  and  in  the  control  of  indige-
nous communist  forces.

4.  The  successful  defense  of  Tonkin  is  the  keystone  of  the  defense  of  mainland
Southeast  Asia  except  possibly  Malaya.  In  addition  to  the  profound  political  and
psychological  factors  involved,  the  retention  of  Tonkin  in  friendly  hands  cuts  off
the  most  feasible  routes  for  any  massive  southward  advance  towards  central  and
Southern  Indochina  and  Thailand.  The  execution  of  U.S.  courses  of  action  with
respect  to  individual  countries  of  the  area  may  vary  depending  upon  the  route  of
communist  advance  into  Southeast  Asia.

5.  Since  1951  the  United  States  has  greatly  increased  all  forms  of  assistance
to  the  French  in  Indochina,  particularly  military  aid,  and  has  consulted  con-
tinuously with  France  with  a  view  to  assuring  effective  use  of  this  aid.  Partly  as
a  result  of  these  efforts,  French  resumption  of  the  initiative  under  the  "Laniel-
Navarre  Plan"  has  checked  at  least  temporarily  deterioration  of  the  French  will
to  continue  the  struggle.  Concurrently  the  French  have  moved  toward  perfecting
the  independence  of  the  Associated  States  within  the  French  Union.  In  September
1953  the  United  States  decided  to  extend  an  additional  $385  million  in  aid,  in
return  for  a  number  of  strong  French  assurances,  including  a  commitment  that
the  French  would  vigorously  carry  forward  the  "Laniel-Navarre  Plan,"  with
the  object  of  eliminating  regular  enemy  forces  in  Indochina,  and  on  the  under-
standing that  if  the  "Laniel-Navarre  Plan"  were  not  executed,  the  United  States
would  retain  the  right  to  terminate  this  additional  assistance.  (See  NSC  Action
No.  897,  Annex  B)

6.  The  French  objective  in  these  efforts  is  to  terminate  the  war  as  soon  as
possible  so  as  to  reduce  the  drain  of  the  Indochina  war  on  France  and  permit  the
maintenance  of  a  position  for  France  in  the  Far  East.  By  a  combination  of
military  victories  and  political  concessions  to  the  Associated  States,  France  hopes
to  strengthen  these  States  to  the  point  where  they  will  be  able  to  maintain  them-
selves against  Communist  pressures  with  greatly  reduced  French  aid.  In  the
absence  of  a  change  in  basic  French  attitudes,  the  Laniel-Navarre  Plan  may  be
the  last  French  major  offensive  effort  in  Indochina.  There  is  not  in  sight  any
desirable  alternative  to  the  success  of  a  Franco-Vietnamese  effort  along  the  lines
of  the  "Laniel-Navarre"  Plan.

7.  Notwithstanding  the  commitment  and  intent  of  the  Laniel  Government  to
seek  destruction  of  Viet  Minh  regular  forces,  a  successor  French  Government
might  well  accept  an  improvement  in  the  military  position  short  of  this  as  a
basis  for  serious  negotiation  within  the  next  year.  Political  pressures  in  France
prevent  any  French  Government  from  rejecting  the  concept  of  negotiations.  If
the  Laniel-Navarre  Plan  fails  or  appears  doomed  to  failure,  the  French  might
seek  to  negotiate  simply  for  the  best  possible  terms,  irrespective  of  whether  these
offered  any  assurance  of  preserving  a  non-Communist  Indochina.  With  continued
U.S.  economic  and  material  assistance,  the  Franco-Vietnamese  forces  are  not  in
danger  of  being  militarily  defeated  by  the  Viet  Minh  unless  there  is  large-scale
Chinese  Communist  intervention.  In  any  event,  apart  from  the  possibility  of

.  bilateral  negotiations  with  the  Communists,  the  French  will  almost  certainly
||  continue  to  seek  international  discussion  of  the  Indochina  issue.

8.  The  Chinese  Communists  will  almost  certainly  continue  their  present  type
I  of  support  for  Viet  Minh.  They  are  unlikely  to  intervene  with  organized  units

even  if  the  Viet  Minh  are  threatened  with  defeat  by  the  Franco-Vietnamese


438 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

forces.  In  the  event  the  United  States  participates  in  the  fighting,  there  is  a  sub-
stantial risk  that  the  Chinese  Communists  would  intervene.  The  Communists  may
talk  of  peace  negotiations  for  propaganda  purposes  and  to  divide  the  anti-Com-
munists believing  that  any  political  negotiations  and  any  settlement  to  which  they
would  agree  would  increase  their  chances  of  eventually  gaining  control  of  Indo-
china.

9.  Actions  designed  to  achieve  our  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia  require  sensi-
tive selection  and  application,  on  the  one  hand  to  assure  the  optimum  efficiency
through  coordination  of  measures  for  the  general  area,  and  on  the  other,  to
accommodate  to  the  greatest  practicable  extent  to  the  individual  sensibilities  of
the  several  governments,  social  classes  and  minorities  of  the  area.

II.  OBJECTIVE

10.  To  prevent  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  from  passing  into  the  com-
munist orbit;  to  persuade  them  that  their  best  interests  lie  in  greater  cooperation
and  stronger  affiliations  with  the  rest  of  the  free  world;  and  to  assist  them  to
develop  toward  stable,  free  governments  with  the  will  and  ability  to  resist  com-
munism from  within  and  without  and  to  contribute  to  the  strengthening  of  the
free  world.

III.  COURSES  OF  ACTION

A. SOUTHEAST  ASIA  IN  GENERAL

11.  Demonstrate  to  the  indigenous  governments  that  their  best  interests  lie
in  greater  cooperation  and  closer  affiliation  with  the  nations  of  the  free  world.

12.  Continue  present  programs  of  limited  economic  and  technical  assistance
designed  to  strengthen  the  indigenous  non-communist  governments  of  the  area
and  expand  such  programs  according  to  the  calculated  advantage  of  such  aid
to  the  U.S.  world  position.

13.  Encourage  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  cooperate  with,  and  restore
and  expand  their  commerce  with,  each  other  and  the  rest  of  the  free  world,
particularly  Japan,  and  stimulate  the  flow  of  raw  material  resources  of  the  area
to  the  free  world.

14.  Continue  to  make  clear,  to  the  extent  possible  in  agreement  with  other
nations  including  France,  the  United  Kingdom,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  the
grave  consequences  to  Communist  China  of  aggression  against  Southeast  Asia
and  continue  current  military  consultations  to  determine  the  military  require-
ments for  countering  such  Chinese  Communist  aggression.

15.  Strengthen,  as  appropriate,  covert  operations  designed  to  assist  in  the
achievement  of  U.S.  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia.

16.  Continue  activities  and  operations  designed  to  encourage  the  overseas
Chinese  communities  in  Southeast  Asia:  (a)  to  organize  and  activate  anti-
communist  groups  and  activities  within  their  own  communities;  (b)  to  resist
the  effects  of  parallel  pro-communist  groups  and  activities;  (c)  generally,  to
increase  their  orientation  toward  the  free  world;  and,  (d)  consistent  with  their
obligations  and  primary  allegiance  to  their  local  governments,  to  extend  sympathy
and  support  to  the  Chinese  National  Government  as  a  symbol  of  Chinese  political
resistance  and  as  a  link  in  the  defense  against  communist  expansion  in  Asia.

17.  Take  measures  to  promote  the  coordinated  defense  of  Southeast  Asia,
recognizing  that  the  initiative  in  regional  defense  measures  must  come  from  the
governments  of  the  area.


Documents  439


18.  Encourage  and  support  the  spirit  of  resistance  among  the  peoples  of
Southeast  Asia  to  Chinese  Communist  aggression,  to  indigenous  Communist
insurrection,  subversion,  infihration,  pohtical  manipulations,  and  propaganda.

19.  Strengthen  propaganda  and  cultural  activities,  as  appropriate,  in  relation
to  the  area  to  foster  increaased  alignment  of  the  people  with  the  free  world.

20.  Make  clear  to  the  American  people  the  importance  of  Southeast  Asia  to
the  security  of  the  United  States  so  that  they  may  be  prepared  for  any  of  the
courses  of  action  proposed  herein.

B.  INDOCHINA

In  the  Absence  of  Chinese  Communist  Aggression

21.  Without  relieving  France  of  its  basic  responsibility  for  the  defense  of  the
Associated  States,  expedite  the  provision  of,  and  if  necessary  increase,  aid  to  the
French  Union  forces,  under  the  terms  of  existing  commitments,  to  assist  them  in:

a.  An  aggressive  military,  political  and  psychological  program,  including
covert  operations,  to  eliminate  organized  Viet  Minh  forces  by  mid-1955.

b.  Developing  indigenous  armed  forces,  including  independent  logistical  and
administrative  services,  which  will  eventually  be  capable  of  maintaining  in-
ternal security  without  assistance  from  French  units.

Toward  this  end,  exert  all  feasible  influence  to  improve  the  military  capabilities
of  the  French  Union-Associated  States  forces,  including  improved  training  of
local  forces,  effective  command  and  intelligence  arrangements,  and  the  reposing
of  increased  responsibility  on  local  military  leaders.

22.  Continue  to  assure  France  that:  (1)  the  United  States  is  aware  that  the
French  effort  in  Indochina  is  vital  to  the  preservation  of  the  French  Union  and
of  great  strategic  importance  to  the  security  of  the  free  world;  (2)  the  United
States  is  fully  aware  of  the  sacrifices  France  is  making;  and  (3)  U.S.  support  will
continue  so  long  as  France  continues  to  carry  out  its  primary  responsibility  in
Indochina.

23.  Encourage  further  steps  by  both  France  and  the  Associated  States  to  pro-
duce a  working  relationship  based  on  equal  sovereignty  within  the  general  frame-
work of  the  French  Union.  These  steps  should  take  into  account  France's  primary
responsibility  for  the  defense  of  Indochina.

a.  Support  the  development  of  more  effective  and  stable  governments  in  the
Associated  States,  thus  making  possible  the  reduction  of  French  participation
in  the  affairs  of  the  States.

b.  Urge  the  French  to  organize  their  administration  and  representation  in
Indochina  with  a  view  to  increasing  the  feeling  of  responsibility  on  the  part  of
the  Associated  States.

c.  Seek  to  persuade  the  Associated  States  that  it  is  not  in  their  best  interest
to  undermine  the  French  position  by  making  untimely  demands.

d.  Cooperate  with  the  French  and  the  Associated  States  in  publicizing  prog-
ress toward  achieving  the  foregoing  policies.

24.  Continue  to  promote  international  recognition  and  support  for  the  Asso-
ciated States.

25.  Employ  every  feasible  means  to  influence  the  French  government  and
i]  people  against  any  conclusion  of  the  struggle  on  terms  inconsistent  with  basic
|l  U.S.  objectives.  In  doing  so,  the  United  States  should  make  clear:

a.  The  effect  on  the  position  of  France  itself  in  North  Africa,  in  Europe,
and  as  a  world  power.

b.  The  free  world  stake  in  Indochina.


440


"a


lO  IT)  lO


m  o  o


III


^  in  m  m
^  (N  r4  (N


o  o  o

o  o  o

»o  00  »o

I  I  I

m  o  o  o

o  »o  o

en


«  00  m

O  00

IT)  m  m  (N


»o  p  p
00  <N  ^  lO*
00  'si-  ^


m  in
(Js  a\  0\  r<^
in  ^
On  oo  ^


in  in  »n
o6  ^ '  '


>n  p  o
ri  ON  rn  ri
O  'nJ-  >n  in


in

I

O  vn

>n  in  in  in

OS  o\  o\

>H  >H  >H

b  b  PLh


>n

I

O  ^  in  \o

«n  in  »n  in

0>  Cs  On  On

^  ^  ^  ^

b  b  PU


in

O  in  N£)

in  in  in  >n

0\  Os  0\  0\

>H  >H  >H

Ph  Ph  I-Ih  Ph


441


»o  >o  in


r-^  p  »o
(N  rn


I  I


>0 (N  (N
f<~>  m  m


O  O  O

o  o  o

«o  oo

I  I  I

>o  o  o  o

o  >o  o

^


On  ^  00  ^
m  r--  m
vo  m  m  m


»o  >o  >o


I

O  lo

>o  lo  >o  wo

0\  0\  0\

>.  >H >H  >H

PU  tin


r-;  p  »ri

r-i  ^  m*

a\  On  ^  ^

o  00  (N


m

I

O  ^  »o  ^

vr^  lo
On  0>  On


>.  ;jH

Ph


o


O

a

a

XI

a
o


Oh

X


>  -2-

1/3  <U
■t-<  c/3

-  g

a.  S


c/3

O

2


|1

cJ  P
CQ

S  ^

O  in


«  .2


a
p

ri


C/5


O  ^

cz)  on

O  O

o  c  o


S  .2

S  I-'

P  c/5

O  73

II

1  s

15  .2  o


IS  I

a  »

03


I'll


W  w


<  S


a  ^

03  H- '

O  o

o  o

-  G

C  03

2  3


(U  lO

03  o  '-^  On


52  O
(U  o3

.3  §  -  5

O  (U  C
^  Qh

«  S  ^

^  X!
(N  O

•-I  t;  ^
o  aH"^  -3

03  ^3

o  s  o

p

(U  -5
CL(  ^


s

c/3

o
'o

CI.

00


O


03

^  ^ U5  03  03


^ <N  03

w  o


03

c/3  (U


3  P  b  <U


03  ^

C  .ti  ^  03
■-^  ^  ir^

^  C  ■  O
o  (u  wo

^ :^  <N

5  S  o  o

'd  S
5^  ?^  —  o


•2^

0  CJ


a  O

•2  <^

_ „  -C  (U

ttj  2  ^  O

m  10
o


442 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  1

c.  The  impact  of  the  loss  of  Indochina  upon  the  over-all  strategy  of  France's
free  world  partners.

26.  Reiterate  to  the  French:

a.  That  in  the  absence  of  a  marked  improvement  in  the  military  situation  '
there  is  no  basis  for  negotiation  with  any  prospect  for  acceptable  terms.

b.  That  a  nominally  non-Communist  coalition  regime  would  eventually  turn
the  country  over  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  with  no  opportunity  for  the  replacement  of  !
the  French  by  the  United  States  or  the  United  Kingdom.

27.  Flatly  oppose  any  idea  of  a  cease-fire  as  a  preliminary  to  negotiations,
because  such  a  cease-fire  would  result  in  an  irretrievable  deterioration  of  the
Franco-Vietnamese  military  position  in  Indochina.

28.  If  it  appears  necessary,  insist  that  the  French  consult  the  Vietnamese  and
obtain  their  approval  of  all  actions  related  to  any  response  to  Viet  Minh  offers  to  ■
negotiate.

29.  If  the  French  actually  enter  into  negotiations  with  the  communists,  insist
that  the  United  States  be  consulted  and  seek  to  influence  the  course  of  the  ;
negotiations.

30.  In  view  of  the  possibility  of  large-scale  Chinese  Communist  intervention,  \
and  in  order  that  the  United  States  may  be  prepared  to  take  whatever  action
may  be  appropriate  in  such  circumstances,  continue  to  keep  current  the  plans
necessary  to  carry  out  the  courses  of  action  indicated  in  paragraphs  3 1  and  32
below.  In  addition,  seek  UK  and  French  advance  agreement  in  principle  that  a
naval  blockade  of  Communist  China  should  be  included  in  the  courses  of  miUtary
action  set  forth  in  paragraph  3 1  below.

In  the  Event  of  Chinese  Communist  Intervention

31.  If  the  United  States,  France  and  the  Associated  States  determine  that
Chinese  Communist  forces  (including  volunteers)  have  overtly  intervened  in
Indochina,  or  are  covertly  participating  so  as  to  jeopardize  holding  the  Tonkin
delta  area,  the  United  States  (following  consultation  with  France,  the  Associated
States,  the  UK,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand)  should  take  the  following  measures
to  assist  French  Union  forces  to  repel  the  aggression,  to  hold  Indochina  and  to
restore  its  security  and  peace:

a.  Support  a  request  by  France  or  the  Associated  States  that  the  United
Nations  take  immediate  actions,  including  a  resolution  that  Communist  China
had  committed  an  aggression  and  a  recommendation  that  member  states  take
whatever  action  may  be  necessary,  without  geographic  limitation,  to  assist
France  and  the  Associated  States  to  meet  such  aggression.

b.  Whether  or  not  the  United  Nations  so  acts,  seek  the  maximum  inter-
national support  for  participation  in  military  courses  of  action  required  by  the
situation.

c.  Carry  out  the  following  minimum  courses  of  military  action,  either  under
UN  auspices  or  as  part  of  a  joint  effort  with  France,  the  UK,  and  any  other
friendly  governments :

( 1 )  Provide,  as  may  be  practicable,  air  and  naval  assistance  for  a  resolute
defense  of  Indochina  itself;  calling  upon  France  and  the  Associated  States
to  provide  ground  forces.

(2)  Provide  the  major  forces  to  interdict  Chinese  Communist  commu-
nication lines,  including  those  in  China;  calling  upon  the  UK  and  France


Documents  443


to  provide  token  forces  and  such  other  assistance  as  is  normal  among  allies.

(3)  Provide  logistical  support  to  other  participating  nations  as  may  be
necessary.

d.  Take  the  following  additional  actions,  if  appropriate  to  the  situation:

(1)  If  agreed  pursuant  to  paragraph  30  above,  establish  jointly  with  the
UK  and  France  a  naval  blockade  of  Communist  China.

(2)  Intensify  covert  operations  to  aid  guerrilla  forces  against  Communist
China  and  to  interfere  with  and  disrupt  Chinese  Communist  lines  of  com-
munication.

(3)  Utilize,  as  desirable  and  feasible,  Chinese  National  forces  in  military
operations  in  Southeast  Asia,  Korea,  or  China  proper.

(4)  Assist  the  British  in  Hong  Kong,  as  desirable  and  feasible.

(5)  Evacuate  French  Union  civil  and  military  personnel  from  the  Tonkin
delta,  if  required.

32.  a.  If,  after  taking  the  actions  outlined  in  paragraph  31-c  above,  the  United
States,  the  UK  and  France  determine  jointly  that  expanded  military  action
against  Communist  China  is  necessary,  the  United  States,  in  conjunction  with
at  least  France  and  the  UK,  should  take  air  and  naval  action  against  all  suitable
military  targets  in  China  which  directly  contribute  to  the  war  in  Indochina,
avoiding  insofar  as  practicable  targets  near  the  USSR  boundaries.

b.  If  the  UK  and  France  do  not  agree  to  such  expanded  military  action,
the  United  States  should  consider  taking  such  action  unilaterally.

33.  If  action  is  taken  under  paragraph  32,  the  United  States  should  recognize
that  it  may  become  involved  in  an  all-out  war  with  Communist  China,  and
possibly  with  the  USSR  and  the  rest  of  the  Soviet  bloc,  and  should  therefore
proceed  to  take  large-scale  mobilization  measures.

[material  missing]


[Document  21]

OFFICE  OF  THE  ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
WASHINGTON  25,  D.C.

30  January  1954

i INTERNATIONAL  SECURITY  AFFAIRS

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  RECORD

.Subject:  Meeting  of  President's  Special  Committee  on  Indochina,
29  January  1954

1.  The  Special  Committee  met  in  Mr.  Kyes'  office  at  3:30  p.m.  29  January
1954.

2.  The  first  matter  discussed  was  the  disposition  of  urgent  French  requests
for  additional  U.S.  assistance.  The  Under  Secretary  of  State,  General  W.  B.
Smith,  mentioned  that  there  has  as  yet  been  no  reply  to  Prime  Minister  Laniel's
letter  to  President  Eisenhower  on  this  subject.  It  was  necessary  to  answer  this
I  substantively  as  soon  as  possible.

j  3.  Admiral  Radford  said  he  had  been  in  touch  with  General  Ely,  French  Chief
I M  Staff,  through  General  Valluy.  Ten  B-26  aircraft  are  on  the  way  to  Indochina
I  his  week.  These  would  contribute  to  filling  the  French  request  for  aircraft  to
oring  two  B-26  squadrons  up  to  a  strength  of  25  operational  aircraft  each.  How-
^ver,  an  additional  12  are  needed  to  fill  the  full  requirement  because  a  total  of


444 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

22  are  needed  (12  to  fill  the  annual  attrition  plus  10  to  fill  the  additional  French
request).  There  was  some  discussion  on  the  seeming  differences  in  requests  reach-
ing Washington  via  Paris  and  those  coming  through  the  MAAG.  Subsequently
in  the  meeting  it  was  agreed  that  the  French  should  be  informed  that  the  U.S.
would  act  only  on  requests  which  had  been  approved  by  General  O'Daniel  after  I
General  O'Daniel  was  set  up  in  Indochina.

4.  Admiral  Radford  indicated  that  to  fill  the  entire  requirement  for  22  B-26's
on  an  urgent  basis  would  mean  taking  some  of  them  from  U.S.  operational  ?
squadrons  in  the  Far  East,  but  this  could  be  done.  The  aircraft  would  not  all
have  "zero"  maintenance  time  on  them.

5.  As  to  the  additional  French  request  for  25  B-26's  to  equip  a  third  squadron,  •
it  was  decided  that  final  decision  to  furnish  them  should  await  the  return  of  ■
General  O'Daniel.  However,  the  Air  Force  has  been  alerted  that  they  may  have  1
to  be  furnished  on  short  notice.  '

6.  As  to  the  provision  of  a  small  "dirigible,"  it  was  decided  to  inform  the  !
French  that  this  could  not  be  furnished.  ;

7.  Regarding  the  French  request  for  400  mechanics  trained  in  the  mainte-
nance  of  B-26  and  C-47  aircraft,  there  was  considerable  discussion.  Admiral
Radford  said  he  had  informed  General  Ely,  through  General  Valluy,  that  the
U.S.  does  not  believe  the  French  have  exhausted  all  efforts  to  get  French  civilian
maintenance  crews.  He  suggested  the  French  try  to  find  them  through  "Air  \
France."  Mr.  Kyes  mentioned  the  possibility  of  obtaining  French  personnel
from  their  eight  aircraft  factories  or  from  the  big  Chateauroux  maintenance
base  where  the  U.S.  employed  French  mechanics.  General  Smith  inquired  about  :
the  possibility  of  lowering  French  NATO  commitments  to  enable  transfer  of  '
French  military  mechanics.  Admiral  Radford  said  General  Valluy  had  informed
him  the  French  Staff  have  carefully  considered  the  idea  but  the  French  Air
Force  does  not  have  enough  military  mechanics  trained  in  B-26  or  C-47  main-
tenance to  fill  the  requirement.  Therefore,  there  would  be  such  a  delay  while
their  military  mechanics  were  being  trained  on  these  aircraft  that  the  urgent
requirement  could  not  be  met.  He  had  also  said  that  the  employment  of  French
civilian  mechanics  presented  a  difficult  problem  in  security  clearance.

8.  General  Smith  recommended  that  the  U.S.  send  200  U.S.  Air  Force
mechanics  to  MAAG,  Indochina,  and  tell  the  French  to  provide  the  rest.  Ad-
miral Radford  said  this  could  be  done  and  that  the  Air  Force  is,  somewhat  ,
reluctantly,  making  plans  to  this  end.  He  had  let  the  French  know  that  if  Ameri-  ;
can  mechanics  were  sent  they  must  be  used  only  on  air  bases  which  were  entirely
secure  from  capture.  General  Smith  wondered,  in  light  of  additional  French
requests,  if  the  Committee  should  not  consider  sending  the  full  400  mechanics.

9.  Mr.  Kyes  questioned  if  sending  200  military  mechanics  would  not  so
commit  the  U.S.  to  support  the  French  that  we  must  be  prepared  eventually  for
complete  intervention,  including  use  of  U.S.  combat  forces.  General  Smith  said
he  did  not  think  this  would  result — we  were  sending  maintenance  forces  not  '
ground  forces.  He  felt,  however,  that  the  importance  of  winning  in  Indochina
was  so  great  that  if  worst  came  to  the  worst  he  personally  would  favor  inter-
vention with  U.S.  air  and  naval  forces — not  ground  forces.  Admiral  Radford  \
agreed.  Mr.  Kyes  felt  this  consideration  was  so  important  that  it  should  be  put
to  the  highest  level.  The  President  himself  should  decide.  General  Smith  agreed.
Mr.  Allan  Dulles  wondered  if  our  preoccupation  with  helping  to  win  the  battle
at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  so  great  that  we  were  not  going  to  bargain  with  the
French  as  we  supplied  their  most  urgent  needs.  Mr.  Kyes  said  this  was  an  aspect
of  the  question  he  was  raising.  Admiral  Radford  read  from  a  cable  just  received


Documents  445


from  General  O'Daniel  which  indicated  General  Navarre  had  been  most  cordial
to  General  O'Daniel  at  their  meeting  and  had  indicated  he  was  pleased  with  the
concept  of  U.S.  liaison  officers  being  assigned  to  his  general  headquarters  and
to  the  training  command.  General  Navarre  and  General  O'Daniel  agreed  to  try
to  work  out  a  maximum  of  collaboration  at  the  military  level.

10.  Later  in  the  meeting,  Mr.  Allan  Dulles  raised  the  question  as  to  sending
the  CAP  pilots  the  French  had  once  requested.  It  was  agreed  that  the  French
apparently  wanted  them  now,  that  they  should  be  sent,  and  CIA  should  arrange
for  the  necessary  negotiations  with  the  French  in  Indochina  to  take  care  of  it.

11.  Mr.  Kyes  said  that  if  we  meet  the  French  urgent  demands  they  should
be  tied  to  two  things:  first,  the  achievement  of  maximum  collaboration  with  the
French  in  training  and  strategy,  and  secondly,  the  strengthening  of  General
O'Daniel's  hand  in  every  way  possible.  General  Smith  agreed  and  felt  we  should
reinforce  General  O'Daniel's  position  not  only  with  the  French  in  Indochina
but  also  at  the  highest  level  in  Paris.

12.  Summary  of  Action  Agreed  Regarding  Urgent  French  Requests
It  was  agreed :

a.  To  provide  a  total  of  22  B-26  aircraft  as  rapidly  as  practicable.

b.  To  provide  200  uniformed  U.S.  Air  Force  mechanics  who  would  be
assigned  as  an  augmentation  to  MAAG,  Indochina.  These  mechanics  to  be
provided  only  on  the  understanding  that  they  would  be  used  as  bases  where
they  would  be  secure  from  capture  and  would  not  be  exposed  to  combat.

c.  To  send  the  CAP  pilots,  with  CIA  arranging  necessary  negotiations.

d.  Not  to  provide  a  "dirigible."

e.  To  await  General  O'Daniel's  return  to  Washington  before  making  a
decision  on  the  other  French  requests.  Efforts  should  continue  to  get  the
French  to  contribute  a  maximum  number  of  mechanics.

It  was  further  agreed  that  General  Smith  would  clear  these  recommended  ac-
tions with  the  President.

13.  The  next  item  discussed  was  the  status  of  General  O'Daniel.  Mr.  Kyes
said  General  Trapnell,  the  present  Chief  of  MAAG,  is  being  replaced  at  the
normal  expiration  of  his  tour.  General  Dabney  had  been  chosen  to  replace
General  Trapnell  and  is  about  to  leave  for  Indochina.  Admiral  Radford  pointed
out  that  General  O'Daniel  could  be  made  Chief  of  MAAG  without  any  further
clearance  with  the  French  Government.  General  Smith  said  this  would  be  all
right  but  should  not  preclude  further  action  to  increase  the  position  of  General
^O'Daniel.  General  Erskine  pointed  out  that  the  MAAG  in  Indochina  is  not  a

'military  mission"  but  only  an  administrative  group  concerned  with  the  provi-
sion of  MDAP  equipment.  He  thought  the  MAAG  status  should  be  raised  to
that  of  a  mission  which  could  help  in  training.  It  was  agreed  that  General
O'Daniel  should  probably  be  first  assigned  as  Chief  of  MAAG  and  that,  for
j[his  reason.  General  Dabney's  departure  for  Indochina  should  be  temporarily
held  up.  General  Dabney  should,  however,  go  to  Indochina  to  assist  General
3'Daniel  by  heading  up  the  present  MAAG  functions.  Admiral  Davis  was  re-
quested to  assure  that  General  Dabney  did  not  depart  until  further  instructions
ivvere  given.

.  14.  There  was  some  discussion,  initiated  by  Mr.  Kyes,  about  ways  by  which
,.he  French  Foreign  Legion  in  Indochina  might  be  augmented.  He  felt  that  if
:he  German  and  French  Governments  would  facilitate  it,  considerable  numbers
|>f  Germans  might  be  enlisted  to  increase  the  Legion.  Mr.  Kyes  mentioned  sev-
eral other  general  courses  of  action  he  thought  should  be  further  considered  by


446 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

the  Special  Committee  and  then  suggested  that  General  Erskine  read  his  paper
on  the  subject  of  Indochina.  Mr.  Kyes  made  it  plain  he  considered  this  paper
only  a  point  of  departure  for  further  work  by  the  Special  Committee.  General
Erskine  then  read  the  paper,  copies  of  which  were  given  to  the  members  of  the
Special  Committee.

15.  Admiral  Radford  said  he  thought,  in  general,  that  the  paper  covered
many  important  fields  but  he  had  one  or  two  reservations.  He  felt,  with  regard
to  the  recommendation  on  regional  coordination,  that  CINCPAC  was,  and
should  be,  the  man  to  head  up  regional  coordination  of  the  MAAGs.  Mr.  Kyes
reiterated  that  the  paper  was  only  a  point  of  departure  and  said  he  felt  the  basic
trouble  in  trying  to  help  in  Indochina  was  the  attitude  of  the  French  Govern-
ment. Mr.  Allan  Dulles  said  the  French  do  not  want  us  to  become  too  involved
in  the  conduct  of  operations  in  Indochina  because  they  want  to  keep  one  foot
on  the  negotiations  stool.

16.  Admiral  Radford  said  he  felt  the  paper  was  too  restrictive  in  that  it  was  ,
premised  on  U.S.  action  short  of  the  contribution  of  U.S.  combat  forces.  He
said  that  the  U.S.  could  not  afford  to  let  the  Viet  Minh  take  the  Tonkin  Delta,  i
If  this  were  lost,  Indochina  would  be  lost  and  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  would ,
fall.  The  psychological  impact  of  such  a  loss  would  be  unacceptable  to  the  U.S.
Indochina  must  have  the  highest  possible  priority  in  U.S.  attention.  He  sug-
gested the  paper,  when  redrafted,  should  have  two  parts,  one  based  on  no  inter- 1
vention  with  combat  forces  and  a  second  part  indicating  what  should  be  done;
to  prepare  against  the  contingency  where  U.S.  combat  forces  would  be  needed.!
General  Smith  was  generally  agreeable  to  this  approach.

17.  It  was  agreed  not  to  use  the  OCB  facilities  to  support  the  Special  Com-
mittee, but  instead  to  set  up  a  working  group  of  representatives  of  the  principals ;
of  the  Special  Committee  to  revise  General  Erskine's  paper  by  the  middle  of
the  week,  3 1  January-6  February.

18.  The  working  group  would  comprise:  i

Admiral  Davis  (OSD)

Mr.  Godel  (OSD)  |
Captain  Anderson  (JCS)  '
Mr.  Bonsai  (State)
Mr.  Aurell  (CIA)
General  Bonesteel  (OSD)

General  Smith  recommended  that  a  representative  of  the  Air  Force  be  included  j
in  the  working  group.

19.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting,  General  Smith  inquired  as  to  what  was  being  i
done  to  speed  up  the  delivery  of  spare  parts  for  B-26's  and  C-119's.  He  waS:
informed  that  necessary  action  had  been  taken.

20.  Mr.  Allan  Dulles  inquired  if  an  unconventional  warfare  officer,  specifi-
cally Colonel  Lansdale,  could  not  be  added  to  the  group  of  five  liaison  officers
to  which  General  Navarre  had  agreed.  Admiral  Radford  thought  this  might  be
done  and  at  any  rate  Colonel  Lansdale  could  immediately  be  attached  to  the
MAAG,  but  he  wondered  if  it  would  not  be  best  for  Colonel  Lansdale  to  await  ^
General  O'Daniel's  return  before  going  to  Indochina.  In  this  way.  Colonel  Lans-
dale could  help  the  working  group  in  its  revision  of  General  Erskine's  paper.
This  was  agreeable  to  Mr.  Allan  Dulles.

21.  Present  at  the  meeting  were:

Department  of  Defense — Mr.  Kyes,  Admiral  Radford,  Admiral  Davis,
General  Erskine,  Mr.  Godel,  B/G  Bonesteel,  Colonel  Alden.


I


Documents  447

Department  of  State — General  Smith,  Mr.  Robertson.

CIA — Mr.  Allan  Dulles,  General  Cabell,  Mr.  Aurell,  Colonel  Lansdale.

C.  H.  Bonesteel,  III
Brigadier  General,  USA


|l  [Document  22]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
WASHINGTON  25,  D.C.

5  March  1954

MEMORANDUM  EOF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Reappraisal  of  General  O'Daniel's  Status  with  Respect  to  Indochina

1.  Subsequent  to  decisions  made  at  levels  above  the  Department  of  Defense
concerning  enlargement  of  Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group  (MAAG),  Indo-
china, and  appointment  of  a  new  chief  thereof,  information  has  been  received
which  points  to  the  need  for  a  reappraisal  of  the  matters  involved.

2.  A  recent  message  from  the  United  States  Ambassador  to  Indochina,  states
that  General  Navarre  informed  the  Ambassador  that  Navarre's  "very  willing  ac-
ceptance of  General  O'Daniel  [USA]  was  predicated  on  the  understanding  that
the  latter's  functions  were  limited  to  military  assistance,"  that  "any  good  ideas
the  General  or  any  [U.S.]  officers  might  produce  would  be  put  into  effect  wher-
ever practicable  [but  that]  it  should  be  clearly  understood  that  neither  O'Daniel
nor  MAAG  was  to  have  any  powers,  advisory  or  otherwise,  in  the  conduct
and  planning  of  operations,  or  in  the  training  of  national  armies  and  cadres."

3.  Information  available  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  relative  to  plans  of  the
United  States  Government  indicates  that  a  very  considerable  increase  in  MAAG,
Indochina,  personnel  and  in  the  scope  of  its  training  responsibilities  is  contem-
plated. Recent  messages  from  the  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Indochina  and  the  U.S.
Embassy,  Paris,  make  it  apparent  that  General  Navarre  would  be  strongly  op-
posed to  granting  increased  training  responsibility  and  authority.  From  this  it
appears  that  the  Chief,  MAAG,  Indochina,  will  not  have  authority,  primarily  the
authority  of  command  supervision,  to  accompany  the  proposed  greatly  increased
responsibility  of  the  MAAG.  Without  this  capability  to  exercise  command  super-
vision, no  training  program  can  be  assured  of  success.  In  the  opinion  of  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  this  places  a  completely  different  complexion  on  the  entire
matter  of  General  O'Daniel's  appointment  as  Chief,  MAAG,  Indochina.

4.  Therefore,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  feel  that  it  is  more  essential  than  ever,
in  the  interests  of  the  United  States,  that  this  basic  issue  of  authority  commensu-
rate with  responsibility  be  satisfactorily  resolved  in  advance  on  a  governmental
level  and  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  the  United  States.

5.  Inasmuch  as  this  basic  matter  requires  reconsideration,  we  believe  that  the
question  of  the  rank  proposed  for  Lieutenant  General  O'Daniel,  USA,  as  Chief,
MAAG,  Indochina,  should  be  reconsidered.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  hold  it  to
Je  distinctly  detrimental  to  the  prestige  of  the  United  States  Military  Services  in
general,  and  to  the  United  States  Army  in  particular  to  demote  a  distinguished


448 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  1

senior  United  States  Army  officer  already  well  and  widely  known  in  that  region.
The  repercussions  of  such  action  in  the  Orient  are  well  known.
6.  In  light  of  the  above,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  recommend  that:

a.  The  basic  issue  of  increased  responsibility  of  MAAG,  Indochina,  with  ■
respect  to  training  be  satisfactorily  resolved  on  a  governmental  level,  and  in  ^
a  manner  acceptable  to  the  United  States.

b.  The  despatch  of  General  O'Daniel  to  Indochina,  and  his  demotion  both
be  held  in  abeyance  until  the  training  issue  is  satisfactorily  settled.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:
ARTHUR  RADFORD,
Chairman,
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff. ;


[Document  23]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
WASHINGTON  25,  D.C.

12  March  1954 !

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Preparation  of  Department  of  Defense  Views  Regarding  Negotiations
on  Indochina  for  the  Forthcoming  Geneva  Conference

1.  This  memorandum  is  in  response  to  your  memorandum  dated  5  March
1954,  subject  as  above.

2.  In  their  consideration  of  this  problem,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  re-
viewed UNITED  STATES  OBJECTIVES  AND  COURSES  OF  ACTION  WITH
RESPECT  TO  SOUTHEAST  ASIA  (NSC  5405),  in  the  light  of  developments
since  that  policy  was  approved  on  16  January  1954,  and  they  are  of  the  opinion
that,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  the  statement  of  policy  set  forth  therein
remains  entirely  valid.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  reaffirm  their  views  concerning
the  strategic  importance  of  Indochina  to  the  security  interests  of  the  United
States  and  the  Free  World  in  general,  as  reflected  in  NSC  5405.  They  are  firmly
of  the  belief  that  the  loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists  would  constitute  a
political  and  military  setback  of  the  most  serious  consequences.

3.  With  respect  to  the  possible  course  of  action  enumerated  in  paragraph  2
of  your  memorandum,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  submit  the  following  views:

a.  Maintenance  of  the  status  quo.  In  the  absence  of  a  very  substantial  im-
provement in  the  French  Union  military  situation,  which  could  best  be  ac- !
complished  by  the  aggressive  prosecution  of  military  operations,  it  is  highly
improbable  that  Communist  agreement  could  be  obtained  to  a  negotiated
settlement  which  would  be  consistent  with  basic  United  States  objectives  in
Southeast  Asia.  Therefore,  continuation  of  the  fighting  with  the  objective  of
seeking  a  military  victory  appears  as  the  only  alternative  to  acceptance  of  a
compromise  settlement  based  upon  one  or  more  of  the  possible  other  courses
of  action  upon  which  the  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  been  specifi-
cally requested  in  your  memorandum.

b.  Imposition  of  a  cease-fire.  The  acceptance  of  a  cease-fire  in  advance  of


Documents  449

a  satisfactory  settlement  would,  in  all  probability,  lead  to  a  political  stalemate
attended  by  a  concurrent  and  irretrievable  deterioration  of  the  Franco-
Vietnamese  military  position.  (See  paragraph  27  of  NSC  5405.)

c.  Establishment  of  a  coalition  government.  The  acceptance  of  a  settle-
ment based  upon  the  establishment  of  a  coalition  government  in  one  or
more  of  the  Associated  States  would  open  the  way  for  the  ultimate  seizure
of  control  by  the  Communists  under  conditions  which  might  preclude  timely
and  effective  external  assistance  in  the  prevention  of  such  seizure.  (See  sub-
paragraph 26b  of  NSC  5405.)

d.  Partition  of  the  country.  The  acceptance  of  a  partitioning  of  one  or
more  of  the  Associated  States  would  represent  at  least  a  partial  victory  for
the  Viet  Minh,  and  would  constitute  recognition  of  a  Communist  territorial
expansion  achieved  through  force  of  arms.  Any  partition  acceptable  to  the
Communists  would  in  all  likelihood  include  the  Tonkin  Delta  area  which  is
acknowledged  to  be  the  keystone  of  the  defense  of  mainland  Southeast  Asia,
since  in  friendly  hands  it  cuts  off  the  most  favorable  routes  for  any  massive
southward  advance  towards  central  and  southern  Indochina  and  Thailand.
(See  paragraph  4  of  NSC  5405.)  A  partitioning  involving  Vietnam  and  Laos
in  the  vicinity  of  the  16th  Parallel,  as  has  been  suggested  (See  State  cable
from  London,  No.  3802,  dated  4  March  1954),  would  cede  to  Communist
control  approximately  half  of  Indochina,  its  people  and  its  resources,  for
exploitation  in  the  interests  of  further  Communist  aggression;  specifically,
it  would  extend  the  Communist  dominated  area  to  the  borders  of  Thailand,
thereby  enhancing  the  opportunities  for  Communist  infiltration  and  eventual
subversion  of  that  country.  Any  cession  of  Indochinese  territory  to  the  Com-
munists would  constitute  a  retrogressive  step  in  the  Containment  Policy,  and
would  invite  similar  Communist  tactics  against  other  countries  of  Southeast
Asia.

e.  Self-determination  through  free  elections.  Such  factors  as  the  preva-
lence of  illiteracy,  the  lack  of  suitable  educational  media,  and  the  absence
of  adequate  communications  in  the  outlying  areas  would  render  the  holding
of  a  truly  representative  plebiscite  of  doubtful  feasibility.  The  Communists,
by  virtue  of  their  superior  capability  in  the  field  of  propaganda,  could
readily  pervert  the  issue  as  being  a  choice  between  national  independence
and  French  Colonial  rule.  Furthermore,  it  would  be  militarily  infeasible  to
prevent  widespread  intimidation  of  voters  by  Communist  partisans.  While
it  is  obviously  impossible  to  make  a  dependable  forecast  as  to  the  outcome
of  a  free  election,  current  intelligence  leads  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  to  the
belief  that  a  settlement  based  upon  free  elections  would  be  attended  by
almost  cerain  loss  of  the  Associated  States  to  Communist  control.


4.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  of  the  opinion  that  any  negotiated  settlement
»vhich  would  involve  substantial  concessions  to  the  Communists  on  the  part  of
:he  Governments  of  France  and  the  Associated  States,  such  as  in  c  and  d  above,
^ould  be  generally  regarded  by  Asian  peoples  as  a  Communist  victory,  and  would
:ast  widespread  doubt  on  the  ability  of  anti-Communist  forces  ultimately  to  stem
:he  tide  of  Communist  control  in  the  Far  East.  Any  such  settlement  would,  in  all
Probability,  lead  to  the  loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists  and  deal  a  damag-
ng  blow  to  the  national  will  of  other  countries  of  the  Far  East  to  oppose  Com-
nunism.

,  5.  Should  Indochina  be  lost  to  the  Communists,  and  in  the  absence  of  im-
nediate  and  effective  counteraction  on  the  part  of  the  Western  Powers  which


450 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

would  of  necessity  be  on  a  much  greater  scale  than  that  which  could  be  decisive
in  Indochina,  the  conquest  of  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia  would  inevitably
follow.  Thereafter,  longer  term  results  involving  the  gravest  threats  to  funda-
mental United  States  security  interests  in  the  Far  East  and  even  to  the  stability
and  security  of  Europe  could  be  expected  to  ensue.  (See  paragraph  1  of  NSC  j
5405.)

6.  Orientation  of  Japan  toward  the  West  is  the  keystone  of  United  States
policy  in  the  Far  East.  In  the  judgment  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  the  loss  of  i
Southeast  Asia  to  Communism  would,  through  economic  and  political  pressures,  ;
drive  Japan  into  an  accommodation  with  the  Communist  Bloc.  The  communiza-
tion  of  Japan  would  be  the  probable  ultimate  result.

7.  The  rice,  tin,  rubber,  and  oil  of  Southeast  Asia  and  the  industrial  capacity
of  Japan  are  the  essential  elements  which  Red  China  needs  to  build  a  monolithic  j
military  structure  far  more  formidable  than  that  of  Japan  prior  to  World  War  II.
If  this  complex  of  military  power  is  permitted  to  develop  to  its  full  potential,  it  i
would  ultimately  control  the  entire  Western  and  Southwestern  Pacific  region  and
would  threaten  South  Asia  and  the  Middle  East.  !

8.  Both  the  United  States  and  France  have  invested  heavily  of  their  resources  ;
toward  the  winning  of  the  struggle  in  Indochina.  Since  1950  the  United  States  ;
has  contributed  in  excess  of  1.6  billion  dollars  in  providing  logistic  support.
France  is  reported  to  have  expanded,  during  the  period  1946-1953,  the  equiva-  ;
lent  of  some  4.2  billion  dollars.  This  investment,  in  addition  to  the  heavy  casual-  i
ties  sustained  by  the  French  and  Vietnamese,  will  have  been  fruitless  for  the  anti-  \
Communist  cause,  and  indeed  may  redound  in  part  to  the  immediate  benefit  of  ,
the  enemy,  if  control  of  a  portion  of  Indochina  should  now  be  ceded  to  the  '
Communists.  While  the  additional  commitment  of  resources  required  to  achieve  i
decisive  results  in  Indochina  might  be  considerable,  nevertheless  this  additional
effort  would  be  far  less  than  that  which  would  be  required  to  stem  the  tide  of
Communist  advance  once  it  had  gained  momentum  in  its  progress  into  South-
east Asia.

9.  If,  despite  all  United  States  efforts  to  the  contrary,  the  French  Government
elects  to  accept  a  negotiated  settlement  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  United  States,  ;
would  fail  to  provide  reasonably  adequate  assurance  of  the  future  political  and
territorial  integrity  of  Indochina,  it  is  considered  that  the  United  States  should
decline  to  associate  itself  with  such  a  settlement,  thereby  preserving  freedom  of
action  to  pursue  directly  with  the  governments  of  the  Associated  States  and  with
other  allies  (notably  the  United  Kingdom)  ways  and  means  of  continuing  the
struggle  against  the  Viet  Minh  in  Indochina  without  participation  of  the  French.
The  advantages  of  so  doing  would,  from  the  military  point  of  view,  outweigh  the  ;
advantage  of  maintaining  political  unity  of  action  with  the  French  in  regard  to
Indochina.

10.  It  is  recommended  that  the  foregoing  views  be  conveyed  to  the  Depart-
ment of  State  for  consideration  in  connection  with  the  formulation  of  a  United  :
States  position  on  the  Indochina  problem  for  the  forthcoming  Conference  and
for  any  conversation  with  the  governments  of  the  United  Kingdom,  France,  and,
if  deemed  advisable,  with  the  governments  of  the  Associated  States  preliminary
to  the  conference.  In  this  connection,  attention  is  particularly  requested  to  para-
graphs 25  and  26  of  NSC  5405;  it  is  considered  to  be  of  the  utmost  importance
that  the  French  Government  be  urged  not  to  abandon  the  aggressive  prosecution
of  military  operations  until  a  satisfactory  settlement  has  been  achieved.

11.  It  is  further  recommended  that,  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  possible  con-
tingencies which  might  arise  incident  to  the  Geneva  Conference,  the  National


Documents  451


Security  Council  considers  now  the  extent  to  which  the  United  States  would  be
willing  to  commit  its  resources  in  support  of  the  Associated  States  in  the  effort
to  prevent  the  loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists  either:

a.  In  concert  with  the  French;  or

b.  In  the  event  the  French  elect  to  withdraw,  in  concert  with  other  allies
or,  if  necessary,  unilaterally.

12.  In  order  to  assure  ample  opportunity  for  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  to  present
their  views  on  these  matters,  it  is  requested  that  the  Military  Services  be  repre-
sented on  the  Department  of  Defense  working  team  which,  in  coordination  with
the  Department  of  State,  will  consider  all  U.S.  position  papers  pertaining  to  the
Geneva  discussions  on  Indochina.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:
ARTHUR  RADFORD,
Chairman,
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.


[Document  24]

March  17,  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SPECIAL  COMMITTEE,  NSC

Subject:  Military  Implications  of  the  U.S.  Position  on  Indochina  in  Geneva

1.  The  attached  analysis  and  recommendations  concerning  the  U.S.  position
in  Geneva  have  been  developed  by  a  Subcommittee  consisting  of  representatives
of  the  Department  of  Defense,  JCS,  State,  and  CIA.

2.  This  paper  reflects  the  conclusions  of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the
JCS  and  has  been  collaborated  with  the  State  Department  representatives  who
have  reserved  their  position  thereon.

3.  In  brief,  this  paper  concludes  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  U.S.
strategic  position  in  Asia,  and  indeed  throughout  the  world,  no  solution  to  the
Indochina  problem  short  of  victory  is  acceptable.  It  recommends  that  this  be
the  basis  for  the  U.S.  negotiating  position  prior  to  and  at  the  Geneva  Conference.

4.  It  also  notes  that,  aside  from  the  improvement  of  the  present  military  situa-
tion in  Indochina,  none  of  the  courses  of  action  considered  provide  a  satisfactory
solution  to  the  Indochina  war.

5.  The  paper  notes  that  the  implications  of  this  position  are  such  as  to  merit
consideration  by  the  NSC  and  the  President.

6.  I  recommend  that  the  Special  Committee  note  and  approve  this  report  and
forward  it  with  the  official  Department  of  State  views  to  the  NSC.

G.  B.  Erskine
General,  USMC  (Ret)
Chairman,  Sub-committee
President's  Special  Committee

Military  Implication  of  U.S.  Negotiations  on  Indochina  at  Geneva
L  PROBLEM

To  develop  a  U.S.  position  with  reference  to  the  Geneva  Conference  as  it  re-


452 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

lates  to  Indochina,  encompassing  the  military  impHcations  of  certain  alternatives
which  might  arise  in  connection  with  that  conference.

II.  MAJOR  CONSIDERATIONS

A.  The  Department  of  Defense  and  the  JCS  have  reviewed  NSC  5405  in  the
light  of  developments  since  that  policy  was  approved  from  a  military  point  of
view  and  in  the  light  of  certain  possible  courses  of  action  as  they  affect  the
Geneva  Conference.  These  are:

1.  Maintenance  of  the  status  quo  in  Indochina.

2.  Imposition  of  a  cease-fire  in  Indochina.

3.  Establishment  of  a  coalition  government.

4.  Partition  of  the  country.

5.  Self-determination  through  free  elections.

B.  The  Department  of  Defense  and  the  JCS  have  also  considered  the  impact
of  the  possible  future  status  of  Indochina  on  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia
and  Japan  and  have  considered  the  effect  which  any  substantial  concessions  to
the  Communists  on  the  part  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  would  have
with  respect  to  Asian  peoples  as  a  whole  and  U.S.  objectives  in  Europe.

C.  Indochina  is  the  area  in  which  the  Communist  and  non-Communist  worlds
confront  one  another  actively  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  loss  of  this  battle  by
whatever  means  would  have  the  most  serious  repercussions  on  U.S.  and  free
world  interests,  not  only  in  Asia  but  in  Europe  and  elsewhere.

D.  French  withdrawal  or  defeat  in  Indochina  would  have  most  serious  con-
sequences on  the  French  position  in  the  world;  the  free  world  position  in  Asia;
and  in  the  U.S.  on  the  domestic  attitude  vis-a-vis  the  French.  It  would,  further-
more, constitute  a  de  facto  failure  on  the  part  of  France  to  abide  by  its  commit-
ment in  U.N.  to  repel  aggression.

E.  Unless  the  free  world  maintains  its  position  in  Indochina,  the  Communists
will  be  in  a  position  to  exploit  what  will  be  widely  regarded  in  Asia  as  a  Com-
munist victory.  Should  Indochina  be  lost  to  the  Communists,  and  in  the  absence
of  immediate  and  effective  counteraction  by  the  free  world  (which  would  of
necessity  be  on  a  much  greater  scale  than  that  required  to  be  decisive  in  Indo-
china), the  conquest  of  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia  would  inevitably  fol-
low. Thereafter,  longer  term  results,  probably  forcing  Japan  into  an  accommo-
dation with  the  Communist  bloc,  and  threatening  the  stability  and  security  of
Europe,  could  be  expected  to  ensue.

F.  As  a  measure  of  U.S.  participation  in  the  Indochinese  war  it  is  noted  that
the  U.S.  has  since  1950  programmed  in  excess  of  $2.4  billion  dollars  in  support
of  the  French-Associated  States  operations  in  Indochina.  France  is  estimated  to
have  expended  during  the  period  1946-1953  the  equivalent  of  some  $5.4  billion.
This  investment,  in  addition  to  the  heavy  casualties  sustained  by  the  French  and
Vietnamese,  to  say  nothing  of  the  great  moral  and  political  involvement  of  the
U.S.  and  French,  will  have  been  fruitless  for  the  anti-Communist  cause  if  control
of  all  or  a  portion  of  Indochina  should  now  be  ceded  to  the  Communists.

III.  FACTS  BEARING  ON  THE  PROBLEM

A.  NSC  5405,  approved  January  16,  1954,  states  U.S.  policy  with  respect  to
Indochina.

B.  The  French  desire  for  peace  in  Indochina  almost  at  any  cost  represents  our
greatest  vulnerability  in  the  Geneva  talks.


Documents  453


IV.  DISCUSSION

For  the  views  of  the  ICS  see  Tab  A.

V.  CONCLUSIONS

A.  Loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists  would  constitute  a  pohtical  and  mih-
tary  setback  of  the  most  serious  consequences  and  would  almost  certainly  lead
to  the  ultimate  Communist  domination  of  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

B.  The  U.S.  policy  and  objectives  with  respect  to  Southeast  Asia  as  reflected  in
NSC  5405  remain  entirely  valid  in  the  light  of  developments  since  that  policy
was  approved.

C.  With  respect  to  possible  alternative  courses  of  action  enumerated  in  para-
graph IIA  above,  the  Department  of  Defense  has  reached  the  following  con-
clusions:

1.  Maintenance  of  status  quo  in  Indochina.  It  is  highly  improbable  that  a
Communist  agreement  could  be  obtained  to  any  negotiated  settlement  which
would  be  consistent  with  basic  U.S.  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia  in  the  absence  of
a  very  substantial  improvement  in  the  French  Union  military  situation.  This
could  best  be  accomplished  by  the  aggressive  prosecution  of  military  operations.

2.  Imposition  of  a  cease-fire.  The  acceptance  of  a  cease-fire  in  advance  of  a
satisfactory  settlement  would  in  all  probability  lead  to  a  political  stalemate  at-
tended by  a  concurrent  and  irretrievable  deterioration  of  the  Franco-Vietnamese
military  position.

3.  Establishment  of  a  coalition  government.  The  acceptance  of  a  settlement
based  upon  this  course  of  action  would  open  the  way  for  the  ultimate  seizure
of  control  by  the  Communists  under  conditions  which  would  almost  certainly
preclude  timely  and  effective  external  assistance  designed  to  prevent  such  seizure,

4.  Partition  of  the  country.  The  acceptance  of  this  course  of  action  would
represent  at  the  least  a  partial  victory  for  the  Viet  Minh  and  would  constitute  a
retrogressive  step  in  the  attainment  of  U.S.  policy  and  would  compromise  the
achievement  of  that  policy  in  Southeast  Asia.

5.  Self-determination  through  free  elections.  Many  factors  render  the  holding
of  a  truly  representative  plebiscite  infeasible  and  such  a  course  of  action  would,
in  any  case,  lead  to  the  loss  of  the  Associated  States  to  Communist  control.

VI.  RECOMMENDATIONS

A.  That  the  U.S.  and  U.K.  and  France  reach  an  agreement  with  respect  to
Indochina  which  rejects  all  of  the  courses  enumerated  above  (except  No.  1  on
the  assumption  that  the  status  quo  can  be  altered  to  result  in  a  military  victory)
prior  to  the  initiation  of  discussions  on  Indochina  at  Geneva.  Failing  this,  the
U.S.  should  actively  oppose  each  of  these  solutions,  should  not  entertain  discus-
sion of  Indochina  at  Geneva,  or  having  entertained  it,  should  ensure  that  no
agreements  are  reached.

B.  If,  despite  all  U.S.  efforts  to  the  contrary,  the  French  Government  elects
to  accept  a  negotiated  settlement  which  fails  to  provide  reasonably  adequate  as-
surance of  the  future  political  and  territorial  integrity  of  Indochina,  the  U.S.
should  decline  to  associate  itself  with  such  a  settlement  and  should  pursue,
directly  with  the  governments  of  the  Associated  States  and  with  other  Allies
(notably  the  U.K.),  ways  and  means  of  continuing  the  struggle  against  the  Viet
Minh  in  Indochina  without  participation  of  the  French.

C.  The  Special  Committee  has  reviewed  the  findings  and  recommendations  of
'  the  Department  of  Defense  and  considers  that  the  implications  of  this  position


454 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

are  such  as  to  warrant  their  review  at  the  highest  levels  and  by  the  National
Security  Council,  after  which  they  become  the  basis  of  the  U.S.  position
with  respect  to  Indochina  at  Geneva.  The  Special  Committee  recognizes  more-
over that  certain  supplementary  and  alternative  courses  of  action  designed  to
ensure  a  favorable  resolution  of  the  situation  in  Indochina  merit  consideration
by  the  NSC.  These,  and  the  Special  Committee  recommendations  with  respect
thereto,  are:

1 .  The  political  steps  to  be  taken  to  ensure  an  agreed  U.S.-U.K— French  posi-
tion concerning  Indochina  at  Geheva.  That  the  NSC  review  the  proposed  politi-
cal action  designed  to  achieve  this  objective  with  particular  attention  to  possible
pressure  against  the  French  position  in  North  Africa,  and  in  NATO,  and  to  the
fact  that  discussions  concerning  implementation  of  course  2  and  3  hereunder  will
be  contingent  upon  the  success  or  failure  of  this  course  of  action.

2.  Overt  U.S.  involvement  in  Indochina.  That  the  NSC  determine  the  extent
of  U.S.  willingness,  over  and  above  the  contingencies  listed  in  NSC  5405,  to
commit  U.S.  air,  naval  and  ultimately  ground  forces  to  the  direct  resolution  of
the  war  in  Indochina  with  or  without  French  support  and  in  the  event  of  failure
in  course  1  above.  That  in  this  connection  the  NSC  take  cognizance  of  present
domestic  and  international  climate  of  opinion  with  respect  to  U.S.  involvement
and  consider  the  initiation  of  such  steps  as  may  be  necessary  to  ensure  world-
wide recognition  of  the  significance  of  such  steps  in  Indochina  as  a  part  of  the
struggle  against  communist  aggression.

3.  The  development  of  a  substitute  base  of  operations.  That  the  NSC  consider
whether  this  course  of  action  is  acceptable  as  a  substitute  for  1  and  2  above  and
recognizing  that  the  hope  of  implementation  thereof  would  be  one  of  major  ex-
penditure and  long-term  potential  only.


[Document  25]

THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
Washington

March  23,  1954

Dear  Mr.  Secretary:

Pursuant  to  a  recommendation  of  the  Under  Secretary  of  State,  the  Depart-
ment of  Defense  has  considered  the  military  implications  of  a  negotiated  settle-
ment to  terminate  the  hostilities  in  Indochina.  The  views  and  recommendations
of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  on  this  matter  were  submitted  to  me  in  a  memoran-
dum dated  March  12,  1954.  These  views,  together  with  the  views  of  General
G.  B.  Erskine,  USMC  (Ret),  Chairman  of  the  Subcommittee  of  the  President's
Special  Committee,  were  submitted  to  the  Special  Committee  in  a  memorandum
dated  March  17,  1954.  It  is  understood  that  the  Department  of  State  is  presently
considering  General  Erskine's  report.

I  am  fully  in  accord  with  General  Erskine's  recommendations  and  the  views
and  recommendations  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  in  this  matter.  Accordingly,
there  is  forwarded  herewith  for  your  information  a  copy  of  the  aforementioned
documents  which  represent  the  views  of  the  Department  of  Defense.  It  is  recom-
mended that  these  views  be  carefully  considered  in  preparation  of  the  United
States  position  on  Indochina  for  the  forthcoming  conference  at  Geneva.

Sincerely  yours,
C.  E.  Wilson


Documents  455


[Document  26]

THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Washington,  D.C.

CM-74-54

29  March  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT'S  SPECIAL
COMMITTEE  ON  INDO-CHINA:

SUBJECT:  Discussions  with  General  Paul  Ely.

1.  During  the  period  20-24  March  I  conducted  a  series  of  discussions  with
General  Ely,  Chairman  of  the  French  Chiefs  of  Staff,  on  the  situation  in  Indo-
China.  I  am  setting  forth  herein  a  summary  report  of  these  discussions  with
particular  relation  to  those  items  which  were  included  in  Phase  A  report  sub-
mitted by  the  Special  Committee.

2.  General  Ely  requested  urgent  action  for  the  United  States  to  effect  early
delivery  of  various  items  of  material  that  had  previously  been  requested  through
the  MAAG-Indo-China.  These  requests  were  all  met  to  the  satisfaction  of  Gen-
eral Ely  with  exception  of :

a.  14  C-47  aircraft  which  are  in  critical  supply  and  were  not  in  the  urgent
category.

b.  20  helicopters  and  80  additional  U.S.  maintenance  personnel.  An  al-
ternative solution  is  now  being  worked  out  through  routine  channels.

3.  In  connection  with  the  foregoing  is  the  solution  that  was  evolved  to  meet
the  French  request  for  25  additional  B-26  aircraft  for  a  third  squadron.  There  is
no  doubt  that  French  capabilities  for  maintenance  and  aircraft  utilization  fall
far  short  of  acceptable  standards  and  that  the  supply  of  additional  aircraft  alone
is  not  the  remedy  to  inadequate  air  power  in  Indo-China,  However,  in  view  of
the  importance  of  the  morale  factor  at  the  present  time  in  relation  to  the  struggle
for  Dien  Bien  Phu,  it  was  agreed,  and  the  President  has  approved,  to  lend  the
French  these  aircraft.  Certain  conditions  were  imposed  which  General  Ely  ac-
cepted :

a.  A  special  inspection  team  headed  by  an  Air  Force  General  Officer
would  proceed  to  Indo-China  immediately  to  examine  French  maintenance,
supply  problems,  and  utilization  of  U.S.  aircraft  furnished  the  French.  A
report  will  be  made  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  with  a  copy  being  given  to
General  Navarre.

b.  The  aircraft  will  be  returned  to  the  U.S.  Air  Force  at  the  end  of  the
current  fighting  season  about  the  end  of  May,  or  earlier  if  required  for  ser-
vice in  Korea.  Decision  as  to  permanent  acceptance  and  support  of  the
third  B-26  squadron  will  be  made  after  the  report  of  the  special  examination
(para  3a  above)  has  been  analyzed.

4.  General  Ely  informed  me  that  steps  had  been  taken  by  the  French  Air
Force  to  supply  additional  aviation  mechanics  to  Indo-China  and  to  replace  our
200  U.S.  Air  Force  mechanics  along  the  following  fines:

a.  The  tour  of  duty  of  200  French  mechanics  due  for  early  return  to
France  is  being  extended  two  months.  This  will  permit  the  operation  of  the
25  additional  B-26s  without  need  for  more  U.S.  personnel.  15  Air  crews


456 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

now  in  training  in  France  and  North  Africa  are  being  sent  by  air  to  Indo-
China.

b.  Fifty  mechanics  are  being  sent  from  France  within  the  next  month
and  beginning  1  June,  one  hundred  additional  per  month  will  be  sent  to  a
total  of  450.

c.  The  200  U.S.  Air  Force  mechanics  can  be  released  "within  8  days  of
15  June."

5.  General  Ely  raised  the  question  of  obtaining  authorization  to  use  the  C-119
transports  to  drop  napalm  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Although  the  U.S.  does  not  expect
spectacular  results,  this  was  approved  on  condition:

a.  No  U.S.  crews  were  involved.

b.  The  French  high  command  requested  the  diversion  of  this  air  hft
capability  to  meet  the  emergency  situation  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.

6.  I  presented  to  General  Ely  our  views  in  regard  to  expanding  the  MAAG
to  assist  the  French  in  training  the  Vietnamese,  indicating  to  him  the  importance
which  we  attach  to  this  action,  first,  to  obtain  better  results,  secondly  to  release
French  officers  for  combat  service.  General  Ely  was  most  unsympathetic  to  any
encroachment  on  French  responsibilities  or  significant  expansion  of  the  MAAG.
The  reasons  given  related  to  French  "prestige,"  possible  lack  of  confidence  in
French  leadership  by  the  Vietnamese,  "the  political  situation  in  France"  etc.  The
only  commitments  I  was  able  to  get  from  General  Ely  were:

a.  He  would  urge  General  Navarre  to  be  most  sympathetic  to  the  advice
given  by  the  officers  recently  assigned  to  MAAG  (such  as  Colonel  Rosson).

b.  He  would  request  General  Navarre  to  discuss  the  utilization  of  U.S.
staff  officers  with  General  O'Daniel  on  the  spot  in  a  broad,  understanding
and  comprehensive  manner."  I  would  make  a  similar  request  of  General
O'Daniel.

c.  He  would  make  some  informal  soundings  in  Paris  on  the  subject  of
increased  U.S.  participation  in  training  and  would  communicate  further  with
me — informally — through  General  Valluy.

I  conclude  that  the  French  are  disposed  firmly  to  resist  any  delegation  of  training
responsibilities  to  the  U.S.  MAAG.

7.  Much  the  same  attitude  was  manifested  by  General  Ely  in  regard  to  U.S.
operations  in  the  fields  of  psychological,  clandestine  and  guerrilla  warfare.  No
commitment  was  obtained  except  that  General  Ely  would  discuss  the  matter
with  Mr.  Allen  Dulles  (which  he  did).

8.  General  Ely  submitted  a  request  in  writing,  copy  attached  as  Enclosure
"A,"  as  to  what  action  the  U.S.  would  take  if  aircraft  based  in  China  intervened
in  Indo-China.  I  exchanged  the  following  agreed  minute  with  him  on  this  matter:

"In  respect  to  General  Ely's  memorandum  of  23  March  1954,  it  was
decided  that  it  was  advisable  that  military  authorities  push  their  planning
work  as  far  as  possible  so  that  there  would  be  no  time  wasted  when  and  if
our  governments  decided  to  oppose  enemy  air  intervention  over  Indo-China
if  it  took  place;  and  to  check  all  planning  arrangements  already  made  under
previous  agreements  between  CINCPAC  and  the  CINC  Indo-China  and-
send  instructions  to  those  authorities  to  this  effect."

9.  The  particular  situation  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  discussed  in  detail.  General
Ely  indicated  that  the  chance  for  success  was,  in  his  estimate,  "50-50."  He  dis-,


Documents  457


counted  any  possibility  of  sending  forces  overland  to  relieve  the  French  Garrison.
He  recognized  the  great  political  and  psychological  importance  of  the  outcome
both  in  Indo-China  and  in  France  but  considered  that  Dien  Bien  Phu,  even  if
lost,  would  be  a  military  victory  for  the  French  because  of  the  cost  to  the  Viet
Minh  and  the  relatively  greater  loss  to  the  Viet  Minh  combat  forces.  Politically
and  psychologically  the  loss  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  be  a  very  serious  setback
to  the  French  Union  cause,  and  might  cause  unpredictable  repercussions  both
in  France  and  Indo-China.

10.  In  regard  to  the  general  situation  in  Indo-China  General  Ely's  views  were
essentially  as  follows.  The  loss  of  Indo-China  would  open  up  all  of  South  East
Asia  to  ultimate  Communist  domination.  Victory  in  Indo-China  is  as  much  a
political  as  a  military  matter.  The  French  hope  to  get  agreement  with  the  Viet
Nam  in  current  discussions  in  Paris  which  will  implement  the  July  3rd  declara-
tion and  lead  to  more  enthusiastic  cooperation  and  participation  in  the  war  by
the  Vietnamese.  They  hope  also  to  get  more  positive  leadership  from  Bao  Dai
who,  at  this  time,  is  the  only  potential  native  leader.  From  the  more  optimistic
point  of  view,  assuming  that  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  held  and  native  support  assured,
he  expected  that  military  successes  but  not  total  military  victory  would  be  achieved
in  1954-1955,  following  the  broad  concept  of  the  Navarre  Plan  and  within
presently  programmed  resources.  Ultimate  victory  will  require  the  creation
of  a  strong  indigenous  army,  extending  operations  to  the  north  and  west,  manning
and  defending  the  Chinese  frontier  and  the  commitment  of  resources  greatly  in
excess  of  those  which  France  alone  can  supply.  He  envisages  some  sort  of  a
coalition  or  regional  security  arrangement  by  the  nations  of  South  East  Asia.

11.  I  raised  with  General  Ely  the  question  of  promoting  General  Navarre  in
order  that  General  O'Daniel  might  retain  his  rank  of  Lt.  General  without  em-
barrassment to  Navarre.  General  Ely  made  no  commitment,  pointing  out  that
rank  in  the  French  Army  resulted  from  a  Cabinet  action  depending  upon  senior-
ity. He  indicated  that  the  Cabinet  might  possibly  consider  a  promotion  for
General  Navarre  if  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  held.

12.  General  Ely  made  quite  a  point  of  explaining  in  "great  frankness"  actions
on  the  part  of  the  United  States  which  were  causes  of  friction.  Those  mentioned

,  specifically  were :

a.  Americans  acted  as  if  the  United  States  sought  to  control  and  operate
everything  of  importance;  that  this  was  particularly  true  at  lower  levels  and
in  connection  with  FCA  operations.

b.  The  United  States  appears  to  have  an  invading  nature  as  they  under-
take everything  in  such  great  numbers  of  people.

c.  French  think  that  McCarthyism  is  prevalent  in  the  U.S.  and  actually  is
akin  to  Hitlerism.

d.  Americans  do  not  appreciate  the  difficulties  under  which  the  French
must  operate  as  a  result  of  two  devastating  wars.

e.  Many  Americans  appear  to  favor  Germany  over  France.

/.  U.S.  administrative  procedures  are  enormously  wasteful,  irritating  and
paper  heavy.

g.  In  Germany  the  U.S.  forces  have  the  benefit  of  better  weapons  and
most  modern  techniques,  whereas  the  French  forces  do  not.

h.  In  connection  with  offshore  procurement,  the  U.S.  appeared  to  lack
confidence  in  the  French  in  the  manufacture  of  most  modern  weapons  and

^  equipment.

I  endeavored  to  set  the  record  straight  on  each  of  these  particulars  and  stressed


458 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

the  fact  that  Americans  were  growing  very  impatient  with  France  over  its  lack
of  action  on  the  EDC  and  German  rearmament  and  French  tendencies  to  over-
emphasize their  prestige  and  sensitivities.

13.  General  Ely  indicated  that  the  leaders  of  the  present  French  Government
were  fully  aware  of  the  importance  of  denying  Indo-China  to  the  Communists
and  the  prevention  of  Communist  domination  of  South  East  Asia.  He  stated  that
they  would  take  a  strong  position  at  the  Geneva  Conference  but,  inasmuch  as
France  could  make  no  concessions  to  Communist  China,  they  looked  to  the
United  States  for  assistance  as  the  United  States  could  contribute  action  that  the
Communist  Chinese  sought,  i.e.,  recognition  and  relaxation  of  trade  controls.

14.  During  the  course  of  the  discussions  General  Ely  stressed  that,  from  the
military  standpoint,  one  of  the  major  deficiencies  in  Indo-China  was  offensive  air
power.  I  took  this  opportunity  to  pose  the  proposition  of  incorporating  an  air
component  within  the  framework  of  the  Foreign  Legion  or  alternatively  forming
an  International  Volunteer  Air  Group  for  operations  in  Indo-China.  General
Ely  manifested  casual  interest  but  made  no  commitment  to  do  more  than  con-
sider the  matter  further  on  his  return  to  Paris.

15.  As  I  stated  in  a  brief  memorandum  to  the  President,  copy  attached  as
Enclosure  "B,"  I  am  gravely  fearful  that  the  measures  being  undertaken  by  the
French  will  prove  to  be  inadequate  and  initiated  too  late  to  prevent  a  progressive
deterioration  of  the  situation  in  Indo-China.  If  Dien  Bien  Phu  is  lost,  this  deteri-
oration may  occur  very  rapidly  due  to  the  loss  of  morale  among  the  mass  of  the
native  population.  In  such  a  situation  only  prompt  and  forceful  intervention  by
the  United  States  could  avert  the  loss  of  all  of  South  East  Asia  to  Communist
domination.  I  am  convinced  that  the  United  States  must  be  prepared  to  take  such
action.

ARTHUR  RADFORD
Admiral,  U.S.  Navy
Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

ENCLOSURE  "A"

Washington,  23  March  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  ADMIRAL  ARTHUR  W.  RADFORD

Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

FROM:  GENERAL  PAUL  ELY  '

The  absence  of  enemy  air  has  been  a  characteristic  of  the  military  situation  in
Indochina  since  the  beginning  of  operations.  Therefore,  an  enemy  air  intervention  .
would  carry  grave  consequences.

On  the  other  hand,  the  lack  of  jettable  airfields  in  Vietminh  controlled  areas
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  any  intervention  by  modem  aircrafts  would  start
from  Chinese  territory.

Without  prejudging  decisions  of  a  general  nature  which  our  governments  could
take  in  the  event  of  an  air  aggression  starting  from  China,  it  seems  to  me  it  will
be  of  some  use  to  study  the  best  way  of  limiting  the  effects  that  such  an  attack  ,
might  have  on  the  French  Air  Force  units  and  on  the  Corps  Expeditionnaire
even  if  it  were  carried  out  by  aircraft  of  a  doubtful  nationality;  this  last  assump-
tion has  not  been  made  so  far.

Can  direct  intervention  by  U.S.  aircraft  be  envisaged  and,  if  such  is  the  case,
how  would  it  take  place?


Documents  459


Contacts  have  already  been  made  in  the  past  by  CINCPAC  and  the  French
CinC  Indochina  on  this  problem.  I  feel  they  ought  to  be  renewed  and  pave  the
way  for  more  precise  studies  and  more  detailed  staff  agreements  with  a  view  to
limiting  the  air  risk  which  characterizes  the  present  situation.

/s/  P.  ELY

Enclosure  "A"

ENCLOSURE  "B"
THE  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF
Washington,  D.  C.

24  March  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  PRESIDENT

SUBJECT:  Discussions  with  General  Ely  relative  to  the  situation  in  Indo-China.

1.  During  the  period  20-24  March  I  conducted  a  series  of  discussions  with
General  Ely,  Chairman  of  the  French  Chiefs  of  Staff,  on  the  situation  in  Indo-
China.  In  addition,  General  Ely  conferred  with  the  Secretary  of  State,  Secretary
of  Defense,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  the  Director  of  CIA  and  the  U.S.  Military
Representative  to  NATO.

2.  General  Ely  requested  urgent  action  to  make  early  delivery  of  various  items
of  material  that  had  previously  been  requested  through  the  MAAG  Indo-China.
These  were  all  arranged  to  the  satisfaction  of  General  Ely  except  for  14  C-47
transport  aircraft  which  are  in  critical  supply  and  did  not  come  in  the  urgent
category.  Noteworthy  is  the  supply  of  25  additional  B-26s  for  a  third  squadron
which  will  be  furnished  immediately  on  a  temporary  loan  basis.  A  recent  request
for  20  helicopters  and  80  additional  U.S.  maintenance  personnel  was  discussed
and  he  was  informed  that  it  was  not  possible  to  grant  the  request  at  this  time.

3.  General  Ely  made  no  significant  concessions  in  response  to  suggestions
which  would  improve  the  situation  in  Indo-China.  He  explained  French  difficul-

,  ties  involving  domestic  problems  and  maintenance  of  prestige  as  basic  reasons  for
I  his  non-concurrence.  He  agreed  to  explore  informally  the  possibiUty  of  accepting
i  limited  U.S.  assistance  in  training  the  Vietnamese,  but  is  generally  in  opposition.

4.  General  Ely  submitted  a  request  in  writing  as  to  what  action  the  U.S.  would
take  if  aircraft  based  in  China  intervened  in  Indo-China.  No  commitment  was

I  made.  The  matter  is  being  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State.

*  5.  General  Ely  affirmed  the  gravity  of  the  situation  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  stating
the  outcome  as  50-50,  and  emphasized  the  great  importance  of  that  battle  from
the  political  and  psychological  standpoint.  In  this  I  am  in  full  accord  but  share
the  doubts  of  other  members  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  as  to  the  adequacy  of
the  measures  being  taken  by  General  Navarre.  He  was  given  approval  to  use
C-119  transport  aircraft  to  drop  Napalm  provided  no  U.S.  crews  were  involved.

.  6.  General  Ely  expressed  the  view  that  military  successes  but  not  total  military
victory  were  to  be  expected  in  1954-1955,  with  the  presently  programmed  re-
sources in  pursuance  of  the  Navarre  Plan.  He  considers  the  problem  in  Indo-

;  China  to  be  political  as  well  as  military.  Ultimate  victory  will  require  the  inde-
pendence  of  the  Associated  States,  development  of  a  strong  indigenous  army,
manning  and  defending  the  Chinese  frontier  and  commitment  of  resources  greatly
;  in  excess  of  those  which  France  can  supply.  He  envisages  some  sort  of  coalition

j  by  the  nations  of  S.  E.  Asia.


460 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

7.  As  a  result  of  the  foregoing  conferences  I  am  gravely  fearful  that  the
measures  being  taken  by  the  French  will  prove  to  be  inadequate  and  initiated
too  late  to  prevent  a  progressive  deterioration  of  the  situation.  The  consequences
can  well  lead  to  the  loss  of  all  of  S.  E.  Asia  to  Communist  domination.  If  this
is  to  be  avoided,  I  consider  that  the  U.S.  must  be  prepared  to  act  promptly  and
in  force  possibly  to  a  frantic  and  belated  request  by  the  French  for  U.S.  inter-
vention.

/s/  ARTHUR  RADFORD

Enclosure  "B"


[Document  27]

Apr.  3,  1954

SENT  TO:  AMEMBASSY  PARIS  3476

AMEMBASSY  LONDON  5175

EYES  ONLY  DILLON  AND  ALDRICH

FYI  Following  are  main  points  made  by  Secretary  in  long  conversation  with
Bonnet  this  morning.

1)  We  see  no  prospect  of  negotiated  settlement  at  Geneva  which  does  not
boil  down  to  one  of  following  alternatives:  (a)  Face-saving  formula  to  cover
surrender  of  French  Union  forces,  or  (b)  Face-saving  formula  to  cover  surrender
of  Viet  Minh.

2)  Division  of  Indochina  impractical.  QUOTE  Mixed  UNQUOTE  govern-
ment would  be  beginning  of  disaster.  Both  would  lead  to  (a) .

3)  In  addition  to  consequences  in  Southeast  Asia  solution  (a)  would  create
gravest  difficulties  for  France  in  Europe  and  North  Africa.  Future  of  France  as
great  power  is  at  stake.

4)  If  we  are  strong  and  resolute  enough  to  make  Chinese  Communists  see
clearly  that  their  conquest  of  Southeast  Asia  will  not  be  permitted  without  danger
of  extending  war  they  may  desist  and  accept  (b) .

5)  This  requires  strong  coalition  of  nations  (U.S.,  France,  Associated  States,
UK.,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Thailand,  Philippines)  who  will  recognize  threat
to  their  vital  interests  in  area  and  will  be  prepared  to  fight  if  necessary.  This
presupposes  continuation  of  French  military  effort  in  Indochina.

6)  If  coalition  established  U.S.  would  play  its  full  part.

7)  Establishment  and  announcement  of  coalition  should  precede  Geneva  in
order  permit  us  to  go  there  with  position  of  strength.

8)  Although  UN  action  not  excluded  and  UN  would  in  any  event  need  to  be
notified  in  some  formal  way,  we  probably  could  not  count  on  it.  (Soviet  veto  in  i
SC  and  long  drawn  debate  in  Assembly.)

9)  Formal  approach  to  other  governments  will  depend  on  French  desires.

10)  Bonnet  said  he  would  report  immediately  to  his  Government  and  seek
their  views.


DULLES


Documents  461


[Document  28]

Apr.  4,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  LONDON NIACT  5177
RPTD  INFO  Amembassy  PARIS  3478

EYES  ONLY  ALDRICH  AND  DILLON

Secretary  saw  Makins  late  April  2  and  discussed  Indochina  problem  along
same  general  lines  his  talk  April  3  with  Bonnet  (see  Department's  5090  to
London  rptd  Paris  3418  and  DEPTEL  3476  to  Paris,  5175  to  London).  Makins
indicated  our  thinking  considerably  more  advanced  than  British  which  had  ap-
parently not  yet  gone  beyond  examination  of  possible  political  solutions  Indo-
china under  existing  conditions.

Partition  seemed  to  London  least  undesirable  settlement  according  Makins
but  it  was  clear  UK  had  not  yet  developed  thoughts  for  dealing  positively  and
constructively  with  situation  which  well  may  confront  us  if  French  determined
to  sell  out.

Secretary  emphasized  to  Makins  essentiality  of  UK  and  US  [Word  missing]
and  at  Geneva  maintaining  solid  front  to  stiffen  French  attitude.  Makins  agreed
latter  point  and  promised  report  entire  talk  fully  and  urgently.  He  suggested
desirability  British  military  representative  here  talking  promptly  to  our  Chiefs
which  Secretary  said  had  best  wait  till  later  next  week.

DULLES


[Document  29]

FROM:  Paris
TO:  Secretary  of  State
NO:  3710,  April  5,  1  a.m.
LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION

URGENT. I  was  called  at  1 1  o'clock  Sunday  night  and  asked  to  come  immedi-
ately to  Matignon  where  a  restricted  Cabinet  meeting  was  in  progress.
On  arrival  Bidault  received  me  in  Laniel's  office  and  was  joined  in  a  few  minutes
by  Laniel.  They  said  that  immediate  armed  intervention  of  US  carrier  aircraft
at  Dien  Bien  Phu  is  now  necessary  to  save  the  situation.

Navarre  reports  situation  there  now  in  state  of  precarious  equilibrium  and  that
both  sides  are  doing  best  to  reinforce — Viet  Minh  are  bringing  up  last  available
reinforcements  which  will  way  outnumber  any  reinforcing  French  can  do  by
parachute  drops.  Renewal  of  assault  by  reinforced  Viet  Minh  probable  by  middle
or  end  of  week.  Without  help  by  then  fate  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  will  probably  be
sealed.

Ely  brought  back  report  from  Washington  that  Radford  gave  him  his  personal
(repeat  personal)  assurance  that  if  situation  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  required  US
naval  air  support  he  would  do  his  best  to  obtain  such  help  from  US  Government.
Because  of  this  information  from  Radford  as  reported  by  Ely,  French  Govern-
ment now  asking  for  US  carrier  aircraft  support  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Navarre  feels


462 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I


that  a  relatively  minor  US  effort  could  turn  the  tide  but  naturally  hopes  for  as
much  help  as  possible.

French  report  Chinese  intervention  in  Indochina  already  fully  established  as
follows:

First.  Fourteen  technical  advisers  at  Giap  headquarters  plus  numerous  others
at  division  level.  All  under  command  of  Chinese  Communist  General  Ly  Chen-
hou  who  is  stationed  at  Giap  headquarters.

Second.  Special  telephone  lines  installed  maintained  and  operated  by  Chinese
personnel.

Third. Forty  37  mm.  anti-aircraft  guns  radar-controlled  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.
These  guns  operated  by  Chinese  and  evidently  are  from  Korea.  These  AA  guns
are  now  shooting  through  clouds  to  bring  down  French  aircraft.
Fourth. One  thousand  supply  trucks  of  which  500  have  arrived  since  1  March,
all  driven  by  Chinese  army  personnel.

Fifth. Substantial  material  help  in  guns,  shells,  etc.,  as  is  well  known.

Bidault  said  that  French  Chief  of  Air  Staff  wished  US  be  informed  that  US  air

intervention  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  could  lead  to  Chinese  Communist  air  attack  on

delta  airfields.  Nevertheless,  government  was  making  request  for  aid.

Bidault  closed  by  saying  that  for  good  or  evil  the  fate  of  Southeast  Asia  now

rested  on  Dien  Bien  Phu.  He  said  that  Geneva  would  be  won  or  lost  depending

on  outcome  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  this  was  reason  for  French  request  for  this  very

serious  action  on  our  part.

He  then  emphasized  necessity  for  speed  in  view  of  renewed  attack  which  is  ex-
pected before  end  of  week.  He  thanked  US  for  prompt  action  on  airlift  for  French
paratroops.  He  then  said  that  he  had  received  Dulles'  proposal  for  Southeast
Asian  coalition,  and  that  he  would  answer  as  soon  as  possible  later  in  week  as
restricted  Cabinet  session  not  competent  to  make  this  decision.
New  Subject.  I  passed  on  Norstad's  concern  that  news  of  airlift  (DEPTEL
3470,  April  3)  might  leak  as  planes  assembled,  Pleven  was  called  into  room.  He
expressed  extreme  concern  as  any  leak  would  lead  to  earlier  Viet  Minh  attack.
He  said  at  all  costs  operation  must  be  camouflaged  as  training  exercise  until
troops  have  arrived.  He  is  preparing  them  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  they  will  be
ready  to  leave  in  a  week.  Bidault  and  Laniel  pressed  him  to  hurry  up  departure
date  of  troops  and  he  said  he  would  do  his  utmost.

DILLON


[Document  30]

SPECIAL  SECURITY  PRECAUTIONS  t

April  5,  1954

NSC  ACTION  NO.  1074-a
(Revision  of  Report  distributed  April  3)

Problem

1 .  To  analyze  the  extent  to  which,  and  the  circumstances  and  conditions  under
which,  the  United  States  would  be  willing  to  commit  its  resources  in  support  of
the  effort  to  prevent  the  loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists,  in  concert  with
the  French  or  in  concert  with  others  or,  if  necessary,  unilaterally.

X


Documents  463


Issues  Involved

2.  The  answer  to  this  problem  involves  four  issues:

a.  Will  Indochina  be  lost  to  the  Communists  unless  the  United  States
commits  combat  resources  in  some  form?

b.  What  are  the  risks,  requirements  and  consequences  of  alternative
forms  of  U.S.  military  intervention?

c.  Should  the  United  States  adopt  one  of  these  forms  of  intervention
rather  than  allow  Indochina  to  be  lost  to  the  Communists  and  if  so  which
alternative  should  it  choose?

d.  When  and  under  what  circumstances  should  this  decision  be  taken  and
carried  into  effect?

Prospect  of  Loss  of  Indochina

3.  The  first  issue  turns  on  whether  the  French  Union  can  and  will  prevent  the
loss  of  Indochina  and  what  further  actions,  if  any,  the  United  States  can  take
to  bolster  or  assist  the  French  effort.  Some  of  these  questions  were  covered  by
the  Report  of  the  Special  Committee  of  March  17,  1954.  Others  are  matters  of
continuous  intelligence  estimates.  At  the  present  time  there  is  clearly  a  pos-
sibility that  a  trend  in  the  direction  of  the  loss  of  Indochina  to  Communist  con-
trol may  become  irreversible  over  the  next  year  in  the  absence  of  greater  U.S.
participation.  There  is  not,  however,  any  certainty  that  the  French  have  as  yet
reached  the  point  of  being  willing  to  accept  a  settlement  which  is  unacceptable
to  U.S.  interests  or  to  cease  their  military  efforts.  Moreover,  regardless  of  the
outcome  of  the  fight  at  Dienbienphu,  there  is  no  indication  that  a  military  de-
cision in  Indochina  is  imminent.  It  is  clear  that  the  United  States  should  under-
take a  maximum  diplomatic  effort  to  cause  the  French  and  Associated  States  to
continue  the  fight  to  a  successful  conclusion.

Risks,  Requirements,  and  Consequences  of  U.S.  Intervention

4.  The  attached  Annex  addresses  itself  to  the  second  issue:  The  risks,  re-
quirements and  consequences  of  certain  alternative  forms  of  U.S.  military  inter-
vention. In  order  to  permit  analysis  of  military  requirements  and  allied  and  hos-
tile reactions,  this  annex  assumes  that  there  will  be  either:  (1)  a  French  and
Associated  States  invitation  to  the  United  States  to  participate  militarily;  or  (2)
an  Associated  States  invitation  to  the  United  States  after  a  French  decision  to
withdraw,  and  French  willingness  to  cooperate  in  phasing  out  French  forces  as
U.S.  forces  are  phased  in.  If  neither  of  these  assumptions  proved  valid  the  feasi-
bility of  U.S.  intervention  would  be  vitiated.  If  the  French,  having  decided  on
withdrawal  and  a  negotiated  settlement,  should  oppose  U.S.  intervention  and
should  carry  the  Associated  States  with  them  in  such  opposition,  U.S.  interven-
tion in  Indochina  would  in  effect  be  precluded.  If,  after  a  French  decision  to
withdraw,  the  Associated  States  should  appeal  for  U.S.  military  assistance  but
the  French  decided  not  to  cooperate  in  the  phasing  in  of  U.S.  forces,  a  success-
I  ful  U.S.  intervention  would  be  very  difficult.

Desirability  and  Form  of  U.S.  Intervention

5.  The  third  issue  is  whether  the  United  States  should  intervene  with  combat
forces  rather  than  allow  Indochina  to  be  lost  to  the  Communists,  and  which  al-
ternative it  should  select?


464 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

a.  U.S.  commitment  of  combat  forces  would  involve  strain  on  the  basic
western  coalition,  increased  risk  of  war  with  China  and  of  general  war,  high
costs  in  U.S.  manpower  and  money,  and  possible  adverse  domestic  political
repercLisions.  Moreover,  the  United  States  would  be  undertaking  a  commit-
ment which  it  would  have  to  carry  through  to  victory.  In  whatever  form  it
might  intervene,  the  U.S.  would  have  to  take  steps  at  the  outset  to  guard
against  the  risks  inherent  in  intervention.  On  the  other  hand,  under  the  prin-
ciples laid  down  in  NSC  5405,  it  is  essential  to  U.S.  security  that  Indochina
should  not  fall  under  Communist  control.

b.  Of  the  alternative  courses  of  action  described  in  the  Annex,  Course
A  or  B  has  these  advantages  over  Course  C.  Neither  Course  A  or  B  de-
pends on  the  initial  use  of  U.S.  ground  forces.  For  this  reason  alone,  they
obviously  would  be  much  more  acceptable  to  the  American  public.  For  the
same  reason,  they  would  initially  create  a  less  serious  drain  on  existing
U.S.  military  forces.  But  either  Course  A  or  B  may  turn  out  to  be  ineffec-
tive without  the  eventual  commitment  of  U.S.  ground  forces.

c.  A  political  obstacle  to  Course  A  or  Course  B  lies  in  the  fact  that  the
present  French  effort  is  considered  by  many  in  Southeast  Asia  and  other
parts  of  the  world  as  essentially  colonial  or  imperialist  in  character.  If  the
United  States  joined  its  combat  forces  in  the  Indochina  conflict,  it  would
be  most  important  to  attempt  to  counteract  or  modify  the  present  view  of
this  struggle.  This  would  also  be  essential  in  order  to  mobilize  maximum
support  for  the  war  within  Indochina.

d.  An  advantage  of  Course  B  over  Course  A  lies  in  the  association  of
the  Asian  States  in  the  enterprise  which  would  help  to  counteract  the  tend-
ency to  view  Indochina  as  a  colonial  action.  There  would  be  advantages  in
Course  B  also  in  that  U.S.  opinion  would  be  more  favorable  if  the  other
free  nations  and  the  Asian  nations  were  also  taking  part  and  bearing  their
fair  share  of  the  burden.

e.  As  between  UN  and  regional  support  it  appears  that  regional  group-
ing would  be  preferable  to  UN  action,  on  the  ground  that  UN  support
would  be  far  more  difficult  to  get  and  less  Hkely  to  remain  solid  until  the
desired  objective  was  reached.

6.  In  order  to  make  feasible  any  regional  grouping,  it  will  be  essential  for  the
United  States  to  define  more  clearly  its  own  objectives  with  respect  to  any  such
action.  In  particular,  it  would  be  important  to  make  perfectly  clear  that  this
action  is  not  intended  as  a  first  step  of  action  to  destroy  or  overthrow  Communist
China.  If  the  other  members  of  a  potential  regional  grouping  thought  that  we
had  such  a  broad  objective,  they  would  doubtless  be  hesitant  to  join  in  it.  The
Western  powers  would  not  want  to  increase  the  risks  of  general  war  which
would,  in  their  opinion,  flow  from  any  such  broad  purpose.  The  Asian  countries
would  be  equally  reluctant  to  engage  in  any  such  broad  activity.  Both  groups
would  doubtless  want  to  make  very  clear  that  we  object  essentially  to  the  ex-
pansionist tendencies  of  Communist  China  and  that,  if  those  ceased,  we  would
not  go  further  in  attempting  to  carry  on  military  activities  in  the  Far  East.  Fur-
thermore, to  attract  the  participation  of  Asian  States  in  a  regional  grouping,  the  1
United  States  would  undoubtedly  have  to  undertake  lasting  commitments  for
their  defense.

Timing  and  Circumstances  of  Decision  to  Intervene  with  U.S.  Combat  Forces

7.  The  timing  of  the  disclosure  or  implementation  of  any  U.S.  decision  to  in-
tervene in  Indochina  would  be  of  particular  importance.


Documents  465


a.  In  the  absence  of  serious  military  deterioration  in  Indochina,  it  is
unlikely  that  France  will  agree  to  the  arrangements  envisaged  in  Alterna-
tives A,  B,  or  C  in  light  of  the  hopes  widely  held  in  France  and  elsewhere
that  an  acceptable  settlement  can  be  achieved.

b.  On  the  other  hand,  inaction  until  after  exhaustive  discussions  at
Geneva,  without  any  indication  of  U.S.  intentions,  would  tend  to  increase
the  chance  of  the  French  government  and  people  settling,  or  accepting  the
inevitability  of  settling,  on  unacceptable  terms.  Hints  of  possible  U.S.  par-
ticipation would  tend  to  fortify  French  firmness,  but  might  also  tend  to  in-
duce the  Communists  to  put  forward  more  acceptable  terms.

c.  On  balance,  it  appears  that  the  United  States  should  now  reach  a
decision  whether  or  not  to  intervene  with  combat  forces,  if  that  is  necessary
to  save  Indochina  from  Communist  control,  and,  tentatively,  the  form  and
conditions  of  any  such  intervention.  The  timing  for  communication  to  the
French  of  such  decision,  or  for  its  implementation,  should  be  decided  in  the
light  of  future  developments.

8.  If  the  United  States  should  now  decide  to  intervene  at  some  stage,  the  United
States  should  now  take  these  steps:

a.  Obtain  Congressional  approval  of  intervention.

b.  Initiate  planning  of  the  military  and  mobilization  measures  to  enable
intervention.

c.  Make  publicized  U.S.  military  moves  designed  to  make  the  necessary
U.S.  air  and  naval  forces  readily  available  for  use  on  short  notice.

d.  Make  maximum  diplomatic  efforts  to  make  it  clear,  as  rapidly  as  pos-
sible, that  no  acceptable  settlement  can  be  reached  in  the  absence  of  far
greater  Communist  concessions  than  are  now  envisaged.

e.  Explore  with  major  U.S.  allies — notably  the  UK,  Australia,  and  New
Zealand,  and  with  as  many  Asian  nations  as  possible,  such  as  Thailand  and
the  Philippines,  and  possibly  Nationalist  China,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  and
Burma — the  formation  of  a  regional  grouping.

i.  Exert  maximum  diplomatic  efforts  with  France  and  the  Associated
States  designed  to  (1)  bring  about  full  agreement  between  them,  if  possible
prior  to  Geneva,  on  the  future  status  of  the  Associated  States;  (2)  prepare
them  to  invite  U.S.  and  if  possible  group  participation  in  Indochina,  if  neces-
sary.

NSC  Action  #  1074a
Aprils,  1954

ANNEX

I.  GENERAL

Scope  of  This  Annex

1.  This  Annex  seeks  to  assess  the  risks,  requirements,  and  consequences  of
alternative  forms  of  U.S.  military  intervention  in  Indochina.

Objective  of  U.S.  Intervention  in  Indochina

2.  The  immediate  objective  of  U.S.  military  intervention  in  any  form  would
be  the  destruction  of  organized  Vietminh  forces  by  military  action  limited  to
the  area  of  Indochina,  in  the  absence  of  overt  Chinese  Communist  intervention.


466 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

However,  whether  or  not  the  action  can  be  limited  to  Indochina  once  U.S.  forces
and  prestige  have  been  committed,  disengagement  will  not  be  possible  short  of
victory.

Risk  of  Expanding  the  War

3.  The  increased  risk  of  such  Chinese  Communist  intervention  is  assessed  un-
der each  alternative  form  of  U.S.  military  intervention.  U.S.  action  in  the  event
that  the  Chinese  Communists  overtly  intervene  in  Indochina  is  covered  by  exist-
ing policy  (NSC  5405).

4.  The  implications  of  U.S.  intervention  go  far  beyond  the  commitment  and
support  of  the  military  requirements  identified  below  under  the  several  alterna-
tive courses.  To  meet  the  increased  risk  of  Chinese  Communist  intervention  and
possibly  of  general  war,  measures  must  be  taken  inside  the  United  States  and
in  areas  other  than  Indochina  to  improve  the  defense  posture  of  the  United
States.  Military  measures  would  include  the  increased  readiness  of  the  existing
forces  and  the  re-positioning  of  U.S.  forces  outside  the  United  States.  Domestic
measures  would  include  those  outlined  below  under  "Mobilization  Implications."
A  reexamination  and  possibly  complete  revision  of  U.S.  budgetary  and  fiscal
policies  would  be  required.

Availability  of  Military  Forces

5.  The  military  forces  required  to  implement  the  various  courses  of  action
described  in  this  paper  are  presently  assigned  missions  in  support  of  other  U.S.
objectives.  A  decision  to  implement  any  of  these  courses  would  necessitate  a  di-
version of  forces  from  present  missions.  It  would  also  require  the  mobiHzation
of  additional  forces  to  assume  the  functions  of  the  diverted  forces  and  to  meet
the  increased  risk  of  general  war.  The  foregoing  is  particularly  true  with  respect
to  U.S.  ground  forces.

Mobilization  Implications

6.  All  the  domestic  consequences  of  U.S.  intervention  cannot  be  forecast,
being  dependent  on  such  factors  as  the  degree  of  opposition  encountered,  the
duration  of  the  conflict  and  the  extent  to  which  other  countries  may  participate,
but  in  varying  degree  some  or  all  of  the  following  steps  may  become  necessary:

a.  Increase  in  force  levels  and  draft  quotas.

b.  Increase  and  acceleration  of  military  production.

c.  Acceleration  of  stockpile  programs.

d.  Reimposition  of  materials  and  stabilization  controls.

e.  Speed-up  of  readiness  measures  for  all  continental  defense  programs.

Whether  or  not  general  mobilization  should  be  initiated,  either  at  the  outset  or
in  the  course  of  U.S.  intervention,  is  a  major  question  for  determination.

Use  of  Nuclear  Weapons

7.  Nuclear  weapons  will  be  available  for  use  as  required  by  the  tactical  situa-
tion and  as  approved  by  the  President.  The  estimated  forces  initially  to  be  sup-
plied by  the  United  States  under  the  alternatives  in  this  paper  are  based  on  the
assumption  of  availability.  If  such  weapons  are  not  available,  the  force  require-


Documents  467


ments  may  have  to  be  modified.  The  political  factors  involved  in  the  use  of
nuclear  weapons  are  assessed  under  the  various  alternatives.*

Political  Conditions

8.  U.S.  military  intervention  in  concert  with  the  French  should  be  conditioned
upon  satisfactory  political  cooperation  from  the  French  and  French  agreement
to  grant  independence  to  the  Associated  States  in  a  form  that  will  contribute  to
their  maximum  participation  in  the  war.  The  Associated  States  undoubtedly
would  not  invite  U.S.  or  allied  intervention  without  lasting  guarantees  of  terri-
torial integrity.  U.S.  contribution  to  a  full-scale  reconstruction  and  development
program  in  Indochina  must  also  be  anticipated.

(No  paragraphs  9  and  10)

II. ALTERNATIVE  FORMS  OF  COMMITMENT  OF  U.S.  COMBAT
FORCES  FOR  OPERATION  IN  INDOCHINA

A. IN  CONCERT  WITH  THE  FRENCH
Assumptions

11.  The  Associated  States  and  France  invite  the  military  participation  of  the
United  States.

12.  It  is  impracticable  to  organize  a  UN  or  regional  military  effort.

13.  The  military  situation  in  Indochina  is  approximately  as  at  present,  i.e.,
stalemate  with  elements  of  deterioration.

14.  France  and  the  Associated  States  will  carry  forward  the  scale  of  military
effort  envisaged  in  the  Laniel-Navarre  Plan.

Military  Requirements

15.  Estimated  forces  to  be  supplied  by  U.S.  initially.

a.  Ground  forces — (None,  provided  French  Union  forces  afford  adequate
security  for  local  defense  of  U.S.  forces  in  Indochina.)

b.  Naval  forces — (Total  personnel  strength  of  35,000).

(1) 1  carrier  task  group  plus  additional  units  consisting  of:
Amphibious  lift  for  1  RCT
Minecraft

Underway  replenishment  group
VPRON's

c.  Air  Force  forces — (Total  personnel  strength  of  8,600)

( 1 )  1  fighter  wing  (3  sqdns.  with  integral  air  defense  capability)

(2)  1  light  bomber  wing

(3)  1  troop  carrier  wing

(4)  1  tactical  control  sqdn.

(5)  1  tactical  recon.  sqdn.

16.  Command  Arrangements:  Theater  Command

a.  This  should  be  U.S.,  since  this  command  must  be  a  combined  as  well
as  a  joint  command  and  U.S.  commanders  have  had  considerably  more  ex-

*  State  considers  the  military  effect  of  use  or  non-use  of  nuclear  weapons  should  be
made  clear  in  the  estimates  of  military  requirements  to  assist  in  making  a  decision.


468 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


perience  in  commanding  combined  and  joint  commands.  Further,  should
it  become  necessary  to  introduce  U.S.  ground  forces,  it  would  be  much  bet-
ter to  have  a  U.S.  commander  already  operating  as  theater  commander
rather  than  effect  a  change  at  the  time  U.S.  ground  forces  become  involved.
All  services  of  the  United  States,  France,  and  the  Associated  States  will
have  representatives  at  the  combined  headquarters.  Similar  representation
will  be  necessary  at  the  Joint  Operations  Center  (JOC)  to  be  established.

b.  Political  considerations  and  the  preponderance  of  French  Union
forces  may  dictate  the  assignment  of  theater  command  to  the  French,  at
least  during  the  early  phase  of  U.S.  participation.

17.  Logistic  Requirements:  This  course  of  action  can  be  logistically  supported
with  the  following  effects :

a.  No  delay  to  NATO  deliveries.

b.  No  drain  on  Army  logistic  reserves,  negligible  drain  on  Air  Force
logistic  reserves,  a  partial  drain  on  certain  logistic  reserves  of  the  Navy,
particularly  aircraft  and  ammunition.

c.  Some  Navy  production  schedule  increases  in  aircraft  and  ammunition
(depending  on  extent  of  operations),  some  increases  in  Air  Force  production
schedule  with  emphasis  on  ammunition,  no  effect  on  Army  production
schedules.

d.  No  additional  facilities  at  bases  in  Indochina  required.

18.  The  training  of  indigenous  forces  is  crucial  to  the  success  of  the  operation.
The  United  States  should  therefore  insist  on  an  understanding  with  the  French
which  will  insure  the  effective  training  of  the  necessary  indigenous  forces  re-
quired including  commanders  and  staff  personnel  at  all  levels.  The  United  States
must  be  prepared  to  make  contributions  of  funds,  materials,  instructors  and  train-
ing devices  as  agreed  with  the  French.  A  United  States  program  for  the  develop-
ment of  indigenous  forces  would  stress  the  organization  of  divisional  size  units.
The  battalion  organization  does  not  particularly  well  fit  the  approved  concept
for  operations  formulated  by  General  Navarre,  nor  does  it  represent  the  best  re-
turn in  striking  power  for  the  manpower  investment  made.  A  reasonable,  attain-
able goal  in  Associated  States  forces  which  the  United  States  might  develop  and
train  is  on  the  order  of  330,000  (an  increase  of  100,000  over  the  present  forces.)
This  would  be  accomplished  by  a  re-organization  of  the  presently  formed  bat-
talions into  divisions  followed  by  further  training  stressing  regimental  and  divi-
sional exercises.  New  units  would  be  developed  as  necessary  to  complete  the
program.

i
■)

Political  Aspects  ^

19.  French  Reaction:  The  French  would  expect  U.S.  military  participation
in  Indochina:

a.  To  relieve  them  from  the  prospect  of  defeat  or  failure  in  Indochina
and  to  this  extent  they  would  welcome  U.S.  intervention.

b.  To  highlight  the  inability  of  the  French  to  handle  the  situation  alone,
with  resultant  weakening  of  the  general  international  position  of  France.

c.  To  lead  to  a  strengthening  of  the  position  of  the  Associated  States  as
against  the  French,  and  a  weakening  of  the  French  Union  concept.

d.  To  tend  to  result  in  channeling  U.S.  support  for  the  Indochina  war  di-


Documents  469


rectly  to  the  theater  of  operations,  thus  reducing  the  financial  benefits  to
metropohtan  France.

e.  To  increase  the  risk  of  Chinese  Communist  intervention  and,  through
a  series  of  actions  and  counteractions,  to  increase  the  risk  of  general  war
with  the  USSR.

On  balance,  the  French  would  prefer  to  find  a  solution  of  the  Indochina  problem
which  did  not  involve  U.S.  military  participation,  although  such  solution  might
in  our  opinion  risk  the  ultimate  loss  of  Indochina.  In  the  event  of  U.S.  military
participation  the  French  could  be  expected  to  attempt  progressively  to  shift  the
military  burden  of  the  war  to  the  United  States,  either  by  withdrawing  their
forces  or  failing  to  make  good  attrition.

20.  Associated  States  Reaction:  The  Associated  States  would  not  be  interested
in  U.S.  intervention  unless  they  were  satisfied  ( 1 )  such  intervention  would  be
on  a  scale  which  seemed  adequate  to  assure  defeat  of  the  Vietminh  organized
military  forces  and  to  deter  Chinese  Communist  aggression,  and  (2)  the  United
States  would  assume  lasting  responsibility  for  their  political  independence  and
territorial  integrity.  On  these  terms  non-Communist  Indochinese  leaders  would
welcome  U.S.  intervention,  and  would  be  unlikely  to  succumb  to  Communist
peace  proposals.  The  war-weary  Indochinese  people,  however,  might  be  less
favorable,  particularly  if  U.S.  intervention  came  at  a  time  when  an  end  to  the
fighting  seemed  otherwise  in  sight.  The  Associated  States  would  expect  to  profit
from  U.S.  intervention  in  terms  of  increased  independence  from  the  French,  and
would  constantly  seek  to  enlist  U.S.  influence  in  bolstering  their  position  vis-a-vis
France.  The  Indochinese,  however,  would  be  worried  over  the  possibility  that
U.S.  intervention  might  invite  Chinese  Communist  reaction  and  make  Indochina
a  battleground  of  destruction  on  the  Korean  scale.  Accordingly,  they  would  be
expected  to  oppose  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  in  Indochina,
j  21.  Free  World  Reaction:  The  U.K.,  apprehensive  of  the  possibility  of  war
f  with  Communist  China,  would  approve  a  U.S.  intervention  in  Indochina  only  if
convinced  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  prevention  of  further  expansion  of  Com-
munist power  in  Asia.  Australia  and  New  Zealand  would  fully  support  such  a
;  U.S.  action,  and  Canada  to  a  lesser  extent.  Nationalist  China  and  the  Republic
•  of  Korea  would  welcome  U.S.  intervention  in  Indochina,  since  both  would  hope
'  that  this  would  lead  to  general  war  between  the  United  States  and  Communist
China.  President  Rhee,  in  particular,  might  be  tempted  to  believe  that  his  chances
of  involving  the  United  States  in  a  renewal  of  Korean  hostilities  were  greatly
enhanced.  Thailand,  if  assured  of  U.S.  guarantees  of  adequate  permanence
would  probably  permit  the  use  of  Thai  territory  and  facilities.  The  Philippines
would  support  U.S.  intervention.  Japan  would  lend  unenthusiastic  diplomatic
support.  India  and  Indonesia  strongly,  and  Ceylon  and  Burma  to  a  lesser  extent,
would  disapprove  U.S.  intervention.  Other  members  of  the  Arab-Asian  bloc
would  be  unsympathetic  especially  because  of  seeming  U.S.  support  for  French
colonialism.  The  NATO  countries,  other  than  those  mentioned  above,  would
generally  support  U.S.  military  action,  but  their  support  would  be  tempered  by
fear  of  expansion  of  the  hostilities  and  the  effect  on  the  NATO  build-up.  The
attitude  of  most  of  the  Latin  American  countries  would  tend  to  be  non-
i  committal.

22.  Free  World  Reaction  in  the  Event  of  U.S.  Tactical  Use  of  Nuclear  Weap-
ons: U.S.  allies  would  almost  certainly  consider  that  use  by  the  U.S.  of  nuclear
■weapons  in  Indochina  (a)  would  remove  the  last  hope  that  these  weapons  would


470 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

not  be  used  again  in  war,  and  (b)  would  substantially  increase  the  risk  of  gen-
eral war.  Our  allies  would,  therefore,  doubt  the  wisdom  of  the  use  of  nuclear
weapons  in  Indochina  and  this  doubt  would  develop  into  strong  disapproval  if
nuclear  weapons  were  used  without  their  being  consulted  or  against  their  wishes.
On  the  other  hand,  France  and,  if  consulted,  the  UK,  Australia,  New  Zealand,
and  possibly  the  Netherlands,  might  support  such  action  but  only  if  convinced
by  the  U.S.  that  such  action  was  essential  to  keep  Southeast  Asia  from  falling
under  Communist  control  and  to  preserve  the  principle  of  collective  security.
Other  NATO  governments,  if  similarly  consulted  would  probably  not  publicly
disapprove  of  such  U.S.  action,  if  they  were  persuaded  during  consultation  that
such  action  was  essential  to  prevent  collapse  of  the  collective  security  system.
Nationalist  China  and  the  Republic  of  Korea  would  probably  approve  such
action  in  the  hope  that  this  would  result  in  general  war  between  the  U.S.  and
Communist  China.  Japan  would  almost  certainly  publicly  disapprove.  Most
Asian  states  and  those  of  the  Arab  Bloc  would  probably  object  strongly  to  such
U.S.  action.  Certain  of  these  nations  led  by  India,  would  almost  certainly  seek
to  have  the  UN  censure  the  U.S.
23.  Soviet  Bloc  Reaction:

a.  The  Communist  Bloc  would  almost  certainly  seek  to  create  differences
between  the  United  States  and  the  French,  and  for  this  purpose  would  prob-
ably put  forward  "plausible"  peace  offers  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  in
the  light  of  the  Geneva  Conference.  It  is  unlikely,  in  the  first  instance,  that
the  USSR  would  take  any  direct  military  action  in  response  to  U.S.  partici-
pation in  the  Indochina  war.  The  Soviet  Union  would,  however,  continue
to  furnish  to  the  Chinese  Communists  military  assistance  for  Vietminh
utilization  in  Indochina.

b.  The  Chinese  Communists  probably  would  not  immediately  intervene
openly,  either  with  regular  or  "volunteer"  forces,  but  would  substantially
increase  all  other  kinds  of  support.  However,  if  confronted  by  impending
Vietminh  defeat,  Communist  China  would  tend  toward  intervention  be-
cause of  the  prospect  that  Communist  prestige  throughout  the  world  would
suffer  a  severe  blow,  and  that  the  area  of  U.S.  military  influence  would  be
brought  to  the  southern  border  of  China.  On  the  other  hand,  Communist
China's  desire  to  concentrate  on  domestic  problems,  plus  fear  of  what
must  appear  to  Peiping  as  the  virtual  certainty  of  U.S.  counteraction  against
Communist  China  itself,  would  tend  to  deter  overt  intervention.  The  chances
are  about  even  that  in  this  situation  Communist  China  would  decide  upon
overt  intervention  rather  than  accept  the  defeat  of  the  Vietminh.*

c.  Soviet  Bloc  Reaction  in  the  Event  of  U.S.  Tactical  Use  of  Nuclear
Weapons.  Initial  Communist  military  reactions  would  probably  be  substan-
tially the  same  as  in  the  case  of  no  nuclear  weapons.  Politically,  the  Com-
munists would  intensify  their  world-wide  campaign  to  brand  the  U.S.  as  an
aggressor,  with  the  expectation  that  considerable  political  capital  could
be  realized  out  of  the  adverse  world  reactions  to  U.S.  use  of  nuclear  weap-
ons. If  U.S.  use  of  nuclear  weapons  should  lead  to  impending  Vietminh
defeat,  there  is  a  split  of  opinion  within  the  Intelligence  Advisory  Commit-
tee as  to  whether  the  Chinese  Communists  would  accept  the  risk  involved

*  For  fuller  discussion  of  the  split  of  opinion  within  the  lAC  on  this  question,  see
SE-53,  "Probable  Communist  Reactions  to  Certain  Possible  U.S.  Courses  of  Action
in  Indochina  through  1954"  (published  December  18,  1953).


Documents  471


and  intervene  overtly  to  save  the  Communist  position  in  Indo  China:  three
members  believe  the  chances  they  would  not  openly  intervene  are  greater
than  assessed  in  par.  23-b  above;  three  members  believe  the  chances  are
better  than  even  they  would  openly  intervene.

24.  Foreign  Aid  Consideration:  Military  assistance  to  finance  the  French
and  Associated  States  military  effort  and  to  supply  military  hardware  would
continue  at  approximately  current  rates  (FY  1954  =  $800  million;  FY  1955  =
$1130  million).  Expenditures  for  economic  assistance  in  Indochina  would  be
substantially  increased  over  the  present  rate  of  expenditure  ($25  million).  These
figures  do  not  take  into  account  the  cost  of  U.S.  military  participation  or  the
possible  cost  of  post-war  rehabilitation  in  Indochina.

[material  missing]

C. IN  THE  EVENT  OF  A  PROPOSED  FRENCH  WITHDRAWAL,  THE
UNITED  STATES  ACTING  IN  CONCERT  WITH  OTHERS  OR  ALONE

Assumptions

37.  France  refuses  to  continue  participation  in  the  war  in  Indochina.

38.  The  Associated  States  invite  the  military  participation  of  the  United  States
with  others  or  alone.

39.  There  has  been  no  serious  deterioration  in  the  French  Union  military  situ-
ation prior  to  U.S.  take-over.

40.  The  French  will  so  phase  their  withdrawal  as  to  permit  orderly  replace-
ment of  their  forces.

41.  The  Associated  States  will  cooperate  fully  with  the  United  States  in  de-
veloping indigenous  forces.

42.  It  may  be  practicable  to  organize  a  UN  or  regional  military  effort.

Military  Requirements

43.  a.  Ground  forces.  (Total  personnel  strength  of  605,000)

(1)  Indigenous  forces  of  330,000.

(2)  U.S.  or  allied  forces  of  six  infantry  and  one  airborne  division
(each  the  equivalent  of  a  U.S.  division  in  strength  and  composition)  plus
necessary  support  personnel  totaling  275,000.

b.  Air  Force  forces.  (Total  personnel  strength  of  12,000)
1  air  defense  fighter  wing
1  light  bomb  wing


[Document  31]

ARMY  POSITION  ON  NSC  ACTION  NO.  1074-A

1.  There  are  important  military  disadvantages  to  intervention  in  Indochina
under  the  assumptions  set  forth  in  NSC  Action  No.  1074-a.

2.  A  military  victory  in  Indochina  cannot  be  assured  by  U.S.  intervention  with
air  and  naval  forces  alone.

3.  The  use  of  atomic  weapons  in  Indochina  would  not  reduce  the  number  of
ground  forces  required  to  achieve  a  military  victory  in  Indochina.

4.  It  is  estimated  that  seven  U.S.  divisions  or  their  equivalent,  with  appropriate
naval  and  air  support,  would  be  required  to  win  a  victory  in  Indochina  if  the


472 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

French  withdraw  and  the  Chinese  Communists  do  not  intervene.  However,  U.S.
military  intervention  must  take  into  consideration  the  capability  of  the  Chinese
Communists  to  intervene.

5.  It  is  estimated  that  the  equivalent  of  12  U.S.  divisions  would  be  required
to  win  a  victory  in  Indochina,  if  the  French  withdraw  and  the  Chinese  Commu-
nists intervene.

6.  The  equivalent  of  7  U.S.  divisions  would  be  required  to  win  a  victory  in
Indochina  if  the  French  remain  and  the  Chinese  Communists  intervene.

7.  Requirements  for  air  and  naval  support  for  ground  force  operations  are:

a.  Five  hundred  fighter-bomber  sorties  per  day  exclusive  of  interdiction
and  counter-air  operations.

b.  An  airlift  capability  of  a  one  division  drop.

c.  A  division  amphibious  lift.

8.  One  U.S.  airborne  regimental  combat  team  can  be  placed  in  Indochina  in
5  days,  one  additional  division  in  24  days,  and  the  remaining  divisions  in  the
following  120  days.  This  could  be  accomplished  partially  by  reducing  U.S.
ground  strength  in  the  Far  East  with  the  remaining  units  coming  from  the  gen-
eral reserve  in  the  United  States.  Consequently,  the  U.S.  ability  to  meet  its
NATO  commitment  would  be  seriously  affected  for  a  considerable  period.  The
time  required  to  place  a  total  of  12  divisions  in  Indochina  would  depend  upon
the  industrial  and  personnel  mobilization  measures  taken  by  the  government.


[Document  32]

5  April  1954

Special  Committee  Report  On
SOUTHEAST  ASIA— PART  II

I.  THE  PROBLEM

To  set  forth  recommendations  concerning  longer  range  policy  and  courses  of
action  for  possible  future  contingencies  in  Southeast  Asia  not  covered  by  NSC
5405.

II.  MAJOR  CONSIDERATIONS  i

A.  The  Special  Committee  has  reviewed  NSC  5405,  "U.S.  Objectives  and
Courses  of  Action  with  Respect  to  Southeast  Asia,"  dated  16  January  1954,  and
considers  that  this  statement  of  policy  remains  valid  and  should  be  continued
in  effect  insofar  as  it  concerns  the  specific  contingencies  enumerated  therein.

B.  NSC  5405  covers  the  contingency  of  possible  Chinese  Communist  inter-
vention in  Indo-China  and  along  with  Part  I  of  the  Special  Committee  Report
establishes  U.S.  courses  of  action  designed  to  secure  the  military  defeat  of  Com-
munist forces  in  Indo-China  in  the  absence  of  Chinese  Communist  intervention.

C.  There  are,  however,  at  least  two  additional  factors  not  covered  by  NSC
5405  which  merit  additional  policy  consideration  of  the  U.S.  Government.  These  !
are:

( 1 )  The  fact  that  the  Communist  threat  to  Southeas  Asia  will  continue  to
be  a  major  obstacle  to  U.S.  policy  and  objectives  in  Southeast  Asia  even
though  a  solution  to  the  Indo-Chinese  war  which  is  satisfactory  to  the  U.S.
may  be  obtained.


Documents  473


(2)  The  fact  that  the  threat  of  Communist  domination  in  Southeast  Asia
will  be  infinitely  increased  in  the  event  that  Indo-China  should  fall  under
Communist  domination  despite  the  present  efforts  of  the  U.S.  to  the  contrary.

III.  FACTS  BEARING  ON  THE  PROBLEM

A.  Southeast  Asia  comprises  some  170  million  people  in  an  area  just  emerging
from  the  colonial  era.  Standards  of  living  and  of  literacy  are  very  low.  With
the  exception  of  Viet  Nam,  military  forces  are  inconsiderable.  The  number  and
quality  of  leaders,  administrators,  and  technicians  is  far  below  minimum  re-
quirements. The  prospects  of  political  or  economic  stability  during  this  generation
are  dim,  except  in  the  Philippines  and  perhaps  in  Thailand.

B.  The  peoples  of  Southeast  Asia  are  accustomed  to  the  rule  of  the  many  by
the  very  few  at  the  level  of  their  central  government.  Their  principal  national
political  vitality  expresses  itself  as  "anti-colonialism"  and  the  termination  of  all
foreign  domination  rather  than  in  a  desire  for  political  democracy  or  for  the
political  liberties  upon  which  the  Western  concept  of  the  world  ideological  struggle
is  based.

C.  Southeast  Asia  is  a  part  of  and  ethnically  associated  with  the  Asian  con-
tinent, principally  China.  China  today  is  the  base  of  international  Communism
in  the  Far  East.  With  the  exception  of  Australia,  to  which  Southeast  Asian  states
are  not  ideologically  oriented,  anti-Communist  bases  are  very  distant.  Certain
of  them  are  associated  with  colonialism  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of  Southeast
Asia.  Western  influence,  both  in  Southeast  Asia  and  in  Korea,  has  not  been
effective  in  preventing  the  spread  of  Communism.  This  results  in  increased  vul-
nerability of  some  Southeast  Asian  countries  to  Communist  influences.

D.  Nationalism  that  expresses  itself  in  Asia  as  anti -colonialism,  if  properly
guided,  is  also  a  potential  weapon  against  Communist  imperialism.  At  the  present
time,  however,  some  Asians  tend  to  regard  "Western  colonialism"  as  more  evil
and  pressing  than  the  possible  future  threat  of  Communist  imperialism.

E.  Economically,  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  vary  in  their  products  and
markets.  Many  major  export  products  of  the  area  (rubber,  tin,  copra,  etc.)  are
absorbed  by  the  West.  However,  rice  production  is  a  matter  of  pan-Asian  concern
as  is  oil  production.

F.  Southeast  Asia  as  a  region  is  less  homogeneous  than  the  Atlantic  Com-
munity or  the  American  Republics  in  the  factors  making  for  real  regional  con-
sistency and  strength.  There  are  major  ethnic  and  religious  differences  as  well  as
traditional  enmities.  There  is  no  sense  of  a  common  danger  as  regards  Com-
munist imperialism.

G.  Current  developments,  including  military  operations  in  the  Associated  States
and  the  forthcoming  Geneva  Conference,  will  have  a  major  influence  on  future
U.S.  policy  throughout  Southeast  Asia.

H.  U.S.  position  and  policy  in  the  area  are  most  effectively  represented  in
the  Philippines  and  in  Thailand,  from  which  countries — outside  of  Indo-China
— any  expanded  program  of  Western  influence  may  best  be  launched.

IV.  CONCLUSIONS

A.  The  Special  Committee  considers  that  these  factors  reinforce  the  necessity
of  assuring  that  Indo-China  remain  in  the  non-Communist  bloc,  and  believes
that  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  in  Indo-China  is  essential  if  the  spread  of  Communist
influence  in  Southeas  Asia  is  to  be  halted.

I


474 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

B.  Regardless  of  the  outcome  of  military  operations  in  Indo-China  and  without
compromising  in  any  way  the  overwhelming  strategic  importance  of  the  Asso-
ciated States  to  the  Western  position  in  the  area,  the  U.S.  should  take  all  affirma-
tive and  practical  steps,  with  or  without  its  European  allies,  to  provide  tangible
evidence  of  Western  strength  and  determination  to  defeat  Communism;  to  demon-
strate that  ultimate  victory  will  be  won  by  the  free  world;  and  to  secure  the
affirmative  association  of  Southeast  Asian  states  with  these  purposes.

C.  That  for  these  purposes  the  Western  position  in  Indo-China  must  be  main-
tained and  improved  by  a  military  victory.

D.  That  without  compromise  to  C.  above,  the  U.S.  should  in  all  prudence
reinforce  the  remainder  of  Southeast  Asia,  including  the  land  areas  of  Malaya,
Burma,  Thailand,  Indonesia,  and  the  Philippines.

V. RECOMMENDED  COURSES  OF  ACTION  *

A.  The  Special  Committee  wishes  to  reaffirm  the  following  reconmmendations
which  are  made  in  NSC  5405,  the  Special  Committee  Report  concerning  military
operations  in  Indo-China,  and  the  position  paper  of  the  Special  Committee,  con-
curred in  by  the  Department  of  Defense,  concerning  U.S.  courses  of  action  and
policies  with  respect  to  the  Geneva  Conference:

(1)  It  be  U.S.  policy  to  accept  nothing  short  of  a  military  victory  in  Indo-
China.

(2)  It  be  the  U.S.  position  to  obtain  French  support  of  this  position;  and
that  failing  this,  the  U.S.  actively  oppose  any  negotiated  settlement  in  Indo-
China  at  Geneva.

(3)  It  be  the  U.S.  position  in  event  of  failure  of  (2)  above  to  initiate
immediate  steps  with  the  governments  of  the  Associated  States  aimed  toward
the  continuation  of  the  war  in  Indo-China,  to  include  active  U.S.  participa-
tion and  without  French  support  should  that  be  necessary.

(4)  Regardless  of  whether  or  not  the  U.S.  is  successful  in  obtaining
French  support  for  the  active  U.S.  participation  called  for  in  (3)  above,
every  effort  should  be  made  to  undertake  this  active  participation  in  con-
cert with  other  interested  nations.

B.  The  Special  Committee  also  considers  that  all  possible  political  and  economic
pressure  on  France  must  be  exerted  as  the  obvious  initial  course  of  action  to
reinforce  the  French  will  to  continue  operating  in  Indo-China.  The  Special  Com-
mittee recognizes  that  this  course  of  action  will  jeopardize  the  existing  French
Cabinet,  may  be  unpopular  among  the  French  public,  and  may  be  considered  as
endangering  present  U.S.  policy  with  respect  to  EDC.  The  Committee  neverthe-
less considers  that  the  free  world  strategic  position,  not  only  in  Southeast  Asia
but  in  Europe  and  the  Middle  East  as  well,  is  such  as  to  require  the  most  ex-
traordinary efforts  to  prevent  Communist  domination  of  Southeast  Asia.  The  Com-
mittee considers  that  firm  and  resolute  action  now  in  this  regard  may  well  be
the  key  to  a  solution  of  the  entire  problem  posed  by  France  in  the  free  world
community  of  nations.

C.  In  order  to  make  the  maximum  contribution  to  free  world  strength  in
Southeast  Asia,  and  regardless  of  the  outcome  of  military  operations  currently

*  The  Department  of  State  representative  recommends  the  deletion  of  paragraphs  A
and  B  hereunder  as  being  redundant  and  included  in  other  documents.


i


Documents  475


in  progress  in  Indo-China,  the  U.S.  should,  in  all  prudence,  take  the  following
courses  of  action  in  addition  to  those  set  forth  in  NSC  5405  and  in  Part  I  of
the  Special  Committee  report:

Political  and  Military:

( 1 )  Ensure  that  there  be  initiated  no  cease-fire  in  Indo-China  prior  to  victory
whether  that  be  by  successful  military  action  or  clear  concession  of  defeat  by
the  Communists.

Action:  State,  CIA

(2)  Extraordinary  and  unilateral,  as  well  as  multi-national,  efforts  should  be
undertaken  to  give  vitality  in  Southeast  Asia  to  the  concept  that  Communist
imperialism  is  a  transcending  threat  to  each  of  the  Southeast  Asian  states.  These
efforts  should  be  so  undertaken  as  to  appear  through  local  initiative  rather  than
as  a  result  of  U.S.  or  UK,  or  French  instigation.

Action:  USIA,  State,  CIA

(3)  It  should  be  U.S.  policy  to  develop  within  the  UN  charter  a  Far  Eastern
regional  arrangement  subscribed  and  underwritten  by  the  major  European  pow-
ers with  interests  in  the  Pacific.

a.  Full  accomplishment  of  such  an  arrangement  can  only  be  developed  in
the  long  term  and  should  therefore  be  preceded  by  the  development,  through
indigenous  sources,  of  regional  economic  and  cultural  agreements  between
the  several  Southeast  Asian  countries  and  later  with  Japan,  Such  agreements
might  take  a  form  similar  to  that  of  the  OEEC  in  Europe.

Action:  State,  CIA,  FOA

b.  Upon  the  basis  of  such  agreements,  the  U.S.  should  actively  but
unobtrusively  seek  their  expansion  into  mutual  defense  agreements  and
should  for  this  purpose  be  prepared  to  underwrite  such  agreements  with
military  and  economic  aid  and  should  [material  missing]

D.  The  courses  of  action  outlined  above  are  considered  as  mandatory  regard-
less of  the  outcome  of  military  operations  in  Indo-China.

( 1 )  If  Indo-China  is  held  they  are  needed  to  build  up  strength  and  resistance
to  Communism  in  the  entire  area.

(2)  If  Indo-China  is  lost  they  are  essential  as  partial  steps:

a.  To  delay  as  long  as  possible  the  extension  of  Communist  domination
throughout  the  Far  East,  or

b.  In  conjunction  with  offensive  operations  to  retake  Indo-China  from  the
Communists.

(3)  Should  Indo-china  be  lost,  it  is  clear  to  the  Special  Committee  that  the
'involvement  of  U.S.  resources  either  in  an  attempt  to  stop  the  further  spread
ji  of  Communism  in  the  Far  East  (which  is  bound,  except  in  terms  of  the  most
1  extensive  military  and  political  effort,  to  be  futile)  or  to  initiate  offensive  opera-
:  tions  to  retake  and  reorient  Indo-China  (which  would  involve  a  major  military
j campaign),  will  greatly  exceed  those  needed  to  hold  Indo-China  before  it  falls.

' (4)  Furthermore,  either  of  these  undertakings  (in  the  light  of  the  major  set-


476 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


back  to  U.S.  national  policy  involved  in  the  loss  of  Indo-China)  would  entail  as
an  urgent  prerequisite  the  restoration  of  Asian  morale  and  confidence  in  U.S.
policy  which  will  have  reached  an  unprecedently  low  level  in  the  area.

(5)  Each  of  these  courses  of  action  would  involve  greater  risk  of  war  with
Communist  China,  and  possibly  the  Soviet  Union,  than  timely  preventive  action
taken  under  more  favorable  circumstances  before  Indo-China  is  lost;

[Remainder  missing]


[Document  33]

April  5,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  3482

EYES  ONLY  FOR  AMBASSADOR  FROM  SECRETARY

As  I  personally  explain  to  Ely  in  presence  of  Radford,  it  is  not  (rpt  not)
possible  for  US  to  commit  belligerent  acts  in  Indochina  without  full  political
understanding  with  France  and  the  other  countries.  In  addition,  Congressional
action  would  be  required.  After  conference  at  highest  level,  I  must  confirm  this
position.  US  is  doing  everything  possible  as  indicated  my  5175  to  prepare  public,
Congressional  and  Constitutional  basis  for  united  action  in  Indochina.  However,
such  action  is  impossible  except  on  coalition  basis  with  active  British  Common-
wealth participation.  Meanwhile  US  prepared,  as  has  been  demonstrated,  to  do
everything  short  of  belligerency.

FYI  US  cannot  and  will  not  be  put  in  position  of  alone  salvaging  British
Commonwealth  interests  in  Malaya,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  This  matter  now
under  discussion  with  UK  at  highest  level.

DULLES


[Document  34]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  3729,  April  5,  8  p.m.

LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION

I  delivered  message  DEPTEL  3482  to  Bidault  Monday  evening.  He  asked  me  to
tell  Secretary  that  he  personally  could  well  understand  position  US  Government
and  would  pass  on  your  answer  to  Laniel.

He  asked  me  to  say  once  more  that  unfortunately  the  time  for  formulating  coa-
litions has  passed  as  the  fate  of  Indochina  will  be  decided  in  the  next  ten  days  at
Dien-Bien-Phu.  As  I  left  he  said  that  even  though  French  must  fight  alone  they
would  continue  fighting  and  he  prayed  God  they  would  be  successful.

DILLON


Documents  417


[Document  35]

FROM:  London
TO:  Secretary  of  State
NO:  4382  April  6,  3  p.m.

PRIORITY

EYES  ONLY  FOR  SECRETARY

In  compliance  with  DEPTEL  5090,  I  saw  Eden  this  morning  and  made  points
referred  to  therein  and  embodied  those  in  an  informal  memorandum  which  I  left
with  him,  a  copy  of  which  is  going  forward  to  you  by  pouch.
Eden  had  already  seen  President's  letter  to  Prime  Minister  (DEPTEL  5179).
Eden  stated  questions  covered  would  be  considered  at  highest  level  as  soon  as
possible  and  that  in  meantime  he  wished  to  say  that  he  felt  seriousness  of  military
situation  in  Indochina  had  been  exaggerated  saying,  "French  cannot  lose  the
war  between  now  and  the  coming  of  the  rainy  season  however  badly  they  may
conduct  it."  He  will  consult  with  Prime  Minister,  Cabinet  and  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff  and  will  let  us  know  soonest  whether  it  is  thought  that  you  or  Bedell  Smith
might  profitably  come  here  prior  to  meeting  in  Paris.

ALDRICH


[Document  36]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  DULTE  5,  April  25,  midnight

EYES  ONLY  ACTING  SECRETARY  FROM  THE  SECRETARY

I  met  with  Eden  this  evening  at  10:15  p.m.,  following  his  arrival  from
London.  He  had  consulted  Churchill,  the  Cabinet  and  British  chiefs.  He  said
that  the  United  Kingdom  is  strongly  opposed  to  any  intervention  at  Dien  Bien
Phu  because  it  does  not  think  it  will  have  decisive  effect  and  will  not  be  under-
stood by  United  Kingdom  or  free  world  opinion.  He  indicated  that  the  views  of
I  the  British  chiefs  differ  with  ours  and  that  British  chiefs  look  forward  to  a
discussion  and  estimate  with  Radford  in  London.  In  summary  the  British
position  is  as  follows:  (1)  The  United  Kingdom  is  prepared  now  to  join  with  the
United  States  in  a  secret  study  of  measures  which  might  be  taken  to  defend
Thailand  and  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia  if  the  French  capitulate.
Eden  saw  Bidault  at  Orly  tonight  on  his  way  through  Paris  (where  he  stopped
I  to  pick  up  Mrs.  Eden)  and  outlined  to  him  the  British  position  as  follows:  (1)
;  The  United  Kingdom  will  give  the  French  all  possible  diplomatic  support  in
I  Geneva  to  reach  a  satisfactory  settlement  on  Indochina.  (2)  If  such  a  settle-
l  ment  is  reached  the  United  Kingdom  will  be  willing  to  join  with  United  States
and  others  in  guaranteeing  that  settlement.  (3)  If  Geneva  fails  the  United


478 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


Kingdom  will  be  prepared  to  join  the  others  to  examine  the  situation  urgently
to  see  what  should  be  done.

I  said  to  Eden  that  while  I  had  reservations  myself  about  air  intervention  at
Dien  Bien  Phu  at  this  moment  without  an  adequate  political  basis  for  such
action,  his  reply  was  most  discouraging  in  that  it  seemed  to  leave  the  French
nothing  to  fall  back  on.  If  French  are  to  stand  loss  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  they  must
be  strengthened  and  a  declaration  of  common  intent  would  do  this.  In  essence
the  United  Kingdom  was  asking  the  French  to  negotiate  and  at  the  same  time
telling  them  that  if  the  negotiation  failed  that  they  would  be  glad  to  examine
what  could  be  done.  Given  the  present  French  situation  with  which  Eden  is
fully  familiar,  I  said  to  Eden  that  I  doubted  that  there  would  be  French  will
to  stand  up  to  their  adversaries  at  Geneva.

Eden  made  quite  clear  that  the  United  Kingdom  is  opposed  to  air  intervention
at  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  also  opposed  to  becoming  direcdy  involved  in  any  way
with  the  Indochinese  war.

Referring  to  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia,  he  said  the  British  were  confident  that
they  had  the  situation  in  Malaya  in  hand  and  mentioned  that  they  had  22
battalions  there  and  100,000  native  police.  He  said  that  there  was  no  parallel
between  Indochina  and  Malaya.

Eden  also  showed  me  a  map  of  Indochina  prepared  by  Alexander  and  the
British  chiefs.  The  map  indicates  that  virtually  all  of  Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cam-
bodia is  under  or  subject  to  imminent  control  by  the  Viet  Minh.  The  British
believe  that  the  only  way  to  cope  with  the  situation  is  to  commit  a  strong  force
to  the  Hanoi  delta  and  generally  work  outward  concentrically  consolidating  their
position  as  they  go  with  loyal  natives.  This  they  believe  is  a  "tremendous  project
involving  lots  of  time  and  considerable  forces."

I  said  to  Eden  I  felt  the  position  which  his  Government  had  taken  would  have
so  little  in  it  in  way  of  comfort  to  the  French  that  the  prospect  of  the  latter
standing  firm  here  was  very  slight.  It  would  be  a  tragedy  not  to  take  steps  now
which  would  prevent  Indochina  from  being  written  off.

Eden  said  that  there  was  obviously  a  difference  in  the  United  States  and  the
United  Kingdom  estimates  and  thinking  but  the  United  Kingdom  proposals
which  he  had  outlined  above  were  as  far  as  the  British  Government  could  go.

DULLES


[Document  37]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  DULTE  9,  April  26,  9  p.m.

SENT  DEPARTMENT  DULTE  9;  REPEATED  INFORMATION  LONDON
73,  PARIS  122.

DEPARTMENT  EYES  ONLY  ACTING  SECRETARY  FROM  SECRETARY
PARIS  AND  LONDON  EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADOR


I  met  for  about  an  hour  this  afternoon  with  Eden  and  Bidault  at  latter's  villa.
Meeting  was  called  at  latter's  request  with  no  (repeat  no)  indication  its  purpose.


Documents  479


After  some  discussion  procedural  problems  Indochina  conference  (reported
separately)  discussion  turned  to  Bao  Dai's  declaration  in  Paris  and  current
attitude.  Bidault  told  us  that  he  understands  Bao  Dai  named  as  his  personal
representative  and  observer  a  former  member  Ho  Chi  Minh's  cabinet  but  that
Bidault  has  not  (repeat  not)  been  able  to  confirm  observer's  arrival  at  his
station  in  Evian.

Bidault  then  launched  into  rather  confused  discussion  of  problem  his  govern-
ment faces  with  regard  to  establishing  position  for  Indochina  negotiation  which
he  said  was  extremely  difficult  during  progress  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  battle.  He
touched  lightly  on  whole  range  of  possibilities  including  collective  defense,
cease-fire  and  partition.  He  mentioned  further  deterioration  in  political  situa-
tion in  Associated  States.

Eden  picked  up  the  question  of  cease-fire  and  encouraged  further  discussion  by
Bidault  this  subject  with  cryptic  remark  that  a  month  ago  British  had  felt
cease-fire  due  to  general  infiltration  was  dangerous  but  that  now  without  having
any  clear  view  they  were  not  (repeat  not)  so  sure.  I  pointed  out  that  cease-fire
at  Dien  Bien  Phu  locally  would  be  in  fact  surrender  and  that  cease-fire  generally
would  involve  serious  risk  of  native  peoples'  rising  with  resultant  massacre  of
French.  Side  conversations  later  made  it  clear  French  believe  with  support  of
their  military  authorities  in  Indochina  that  general  cease-fire  lacking  any  con-
trol or  safeguards  would  make  it  impossible  for  French  Union  forces  to  resume
fighting  once  cease-fire  established.  Bidault  said  that  the  French  Government
had  queried  French  High  Command  in  Indochina  and  had  received  a  reply
that  there  would  either  have  to  be  a  final  cease-fire  or  further  reeinforcements
would  have  to  be  sent  to  Indochina  during  the  conference.

As  indicative  of  Bidault's  continuing  courage,  he  said  that  when  he  saw  Molotov
tomorrow  he  intended  to  stand  on  Laniel's  statement  of  March  5  and  attempt  to
draw  Molotov  out  without  ceding  ground  himself  and  without  getting  involved
in  detailed  discussions  of  substance  on  an  Indochina  settlement.
In  my  judgment,  Eden  has  arrived  with  instructions  actively  to  encourage
French  into  almost  any  settlement  which  will  result  in  cessation  hostilities  in
Indochina.  My  guess  is  that  behind  this  lies  British  fear  that  if  fighting  continues,
we  will  in  one  way  or  another  become  involved,  thereby  enhancing  risk  Chinese
intervention  and  possibility  further  expansion  of  war.  This  estimate  of  mine  is
confirmed  by  fact  that  Chauvel  told  MacArthur  the  French  believe  Eden's  in-
structions are  to  press  actively  for  a  cease-fire.

I  made  clear  to  Bidault  privately  that  we  would  have  no  (repeat  no)  part  in
settlement  at  Geneva  of  Indochina  war  which  constituted  surrender  of  Indo-
china to  Communists,  and  that  France  has  better  chance  by  fighting  on  rather
than  by  attempted  withdrawal  which  would  be  under  most  difficult  conditions.
I  intend  to  see  Eden  alone  tomorrow  morning  to  talk  with  extreme  bluntness  to
him  expressing  my  dismay  that  British  are  apparently  encouraging  French  in
direction  surrender  which  is  in  conflict  not  (repeat  not)  only  with  our  interest
but  what  I  conceive  theirs  to  be.


DULLES


480 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  38]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  DULTE  13,  April  27,  midnight

SENT  DEPARTMENT  DULTE  13  REPEATED  INFORMATION  LONDON
77  PARIS  127.

EYES  ONLY  ACTING  SECRETARY.
EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADORS.

I  saw  Eden  and  his  immediate  advisors  for  a  few  minutes  before  his  luncheon
April  27.  I  opened  by  saying  that  I  wanted  to  speak  frankly  concerning  our  own
immediate  affairs.  I  said  I  considered  it  great  mistake  to  push  French  in
direction  cease-fire  which  I  believed  would  be  a  disaster.  I  said  I  considered  it
of  utmost  importance  that  we  both  keep  French  in  mood  to  fight  on  in  Indo-
china. If  that  mood  is  lost  surely  disaster  would  follow  with  little  chance  of
limiting  its  scope  and  indeed  little  chance  of  French  extricating  themselves.
Eden  replied  with  some  heat  that  he  was  not  advocating  a  cease-fire  though  he
admitted  that  he  had  told  Bidault  that  he  was  less  sure  today  than  a  month  ago
that  a  cease-fire  was  out  of  the  question.  He  insisted  that  all  he  had  been
thinking  of  had  been  a  cease-fire  with  adequate  safeguards  and  controls.  His
purpose  he  said  had  been  to  concentrate  French  thinking  on  latter  points.
I  interjected  that  I  did  not  think  three  of  us  were  presenting  a  very  impressive
or  cohesive  position.  I  reminded  him  that  I  wanted  immediate  ad  hoc  plans
covering  Southeast  Asia  including  Indochina  if  Geneva  failed  but  that  British
were  against  this,  French  I  said  had  in  effect  no  government  and  were  at  a  loss
as  to  what  to  do.  They  were  drifting  toward  disaster.  I  was  concerned  that  we
were  not  doing  all  possible  between  us  to  shore  up  French  resolution.  I  said
there  was  a  basic  difference  between  us  in  that  British  seemed  to  think  that
plans  for  a  joint  defense  were  more  apt  to  spread  conflict  than  absence  of  any
plans.

Eden  said  that  what  worried  them  in  London  apart  from  political  aspects  was
that  they  felt  military  intervention  would  be  "terrific  business,"  a  bigger  affair
than  Korea,  which  could  get  us  nowhere.  They  just  did  not  believe  that  it  was  a
realizable  military  exercise  considering  the  military  means  available.  Moreover
Eden  said  it  would  be  most  unpopular  in  Asia  let  alone  with  British  home
opinion.

Eden  then  asked  if  our  tripartite  position  was  really  as  bad  as  I  had  pointed  it.
He  said  he  felt  that  other  side  was  properly  worried.

I  agreed  but  said  in  all  frankness  they  were  more  worried  about  United  States
than  British.

Eden  did  not  deny  this,  and  said  that  we  must  see  how  things  go  here  in  next
few  days  and  do  what  we  can  to  buck  French  up  particularly  if  Dien  Bien  Phu
falls.

I  said  I  was  deeply  worried  over  French  situation  not  alone  in  its  relation  with
Indochina.  NATO  was  directly  affected.  The  fall  of  Laniel  might  result  in  a
left-of-center  government  coming  to  power  which  would  exist  by  Communist


Documents  481


sufferance,  thereby  increasing  Communist  influence  domestically  in  France  and
by  contagion  in  Italy  which  country  was  also  a  source  of  serious  concern.  I  said
EDC  would  be  affected,  and  our  entire  defense  structure  in  Europe.  At  this
point  Bidault  arrived  and  we  broke  off  our  conversation.

DULLES


[Document  39]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  DULTE  21,  April  29,  10  a.m.

EYES  ONLY  ACTING  SECRETARY  FOR  PRESIDENT  FROM  SECRE-
TARY.

Developments  have  been  so  rapid  and  almost  every  hour  so  filled  with  high-level
talks  that  evaluation  has  been  difficult.  My  present  estimates  follow:
(1)  Indochina:  Delay  in  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  has  resulted  in  some  French
discounting  of  this  development.  Nevertheless,  it  must  be  assumed  the  French
will  not  continue  in  any  long-range  operation  unless  it  will  definitely  relieve
the  strain  on  French  manpower  in  Indochina.  Present  French  Government
holding  on  because  their  Parliament  in  recess  and  probably  no  one  eager  to
take  over  at  this  juncture.  Bidault  given  considerable  discretion  because  present

I  Cabinet  cannot  make  up  its  mind  on  any  course.  Therefore,  we  do  not  have

:  anyone  on  French  side  with  whom  we  can  make  any  dependable  agreements.

■  After  deputies  return  and  Dien  Bien  Phu  falls,  there  may  well  be  a  change  of
government,  probably  to  the  left,  committed  to  liquidate  Indochina.  However,
this  is  more  easily  said  than  done  and  it  is  possible  that  as  this  fact  develops  a
French  Government  might  be  prepared  to  sit  down  with  us  seriously  and  con-
sider some  joint  program  which  is  something  that  so  far  they  have  evaded.

f  I  do  not  know  whether  from  military  standpoint  it  would  be  deemed  feasible  to
end  the  scattering  and  exposure  of  military  forces  for  local  political  reasons  and
withdraw  present  forces  to  defensible  enclaves  in  deltas  where  they  would  have

;  U.S.  sea  and  air  protection  meanwhile  retain  enough  territory  and  enough
prestige  to  develop  really  effective  indigenous  army  along  lines  suggested  by
O'Daniel.  This  might,  I  suppose,  take  two  years  and  would  require  in  large  part
taking  over  training  responsibility  by  U.S.  Also  full  independence  and  increased

I  economic  aid  would  probably  be  required  to  help  maintain  friendly  governments
in  areas  chosen  for  recruitment.

I  do  not  have  any  idea  as  to  whether  this  is  militarily  feasible  and  Admiral
Davis  inclines  to  view  that  it  is  not.  However,  from  political  standpoint  this
type  of  program  appears  to  offer  best  hope  of  France  staying  in  war.  If  France
and  U.S.  agree  on  such  a  plan,  there  would  be  fair  chance  of  Australia  and
New  Zealand  coming  along.  However,  this  estimate  can  be  improved  in  next
day  or  two  after  I  have  conferred  further  with  Foreign  Minister  Casey  and
Prime  Minister  Webb.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  UK  would  initially  participate  and
would  probably  use  its  influence  to  prevent  participation  by  Australia  and  New
Zealand.  The  UK  situation  would  be  difficult  internally  and  externafly,  and


482 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I


there  would  probably  be  undesirable  repercussions  upon  other  NATO  partners.
Thailand  could  be  expected  to  cooperate  if  we  act  promptly.  Foreign  Minister
Wan  gave  further  assurance  today  and  urges  quick  military  conversations.
The  attitude  here  of  Molotov  and  Chou  En-lai's  statement  yesterday  lead  me
to  rate  more  highly  than  heretofore  the  probability  that  any  open  U.S.  inter-
vention would  be  answered  by  open  Chinese  intervention  with  consequence  of
general  war  in  Asia.

(2)  UK  attitude  is  one  of  increasing  weakness.  British  seem  to  feel  that  we
are  disposed  to  accept  present  risks  of  a  Chinese  war  and  this,  coupled  also  with
their  fear  that  we  would  start  using  atomic  weapons,  has  badly  frightened  them.
I  have  just  received  a  note  from  Eden  referring  to  my  paper  read  before  NATO
restricted  council  where  Eden  again  urges  necessity  of  consultation  before  any
use.  He  says,  "You  know  our  strongly-held  views  on  the  need  for  consultation
before  any  decision  is  taken."

(3)  General:  The  decline  of  France,  the  great  weakness  of  Italy,  and  the
considerable  weakness  in  England  create  a  situation  where  I  think  that  if  we
ourselves  are  clear  as  to  what  should  be  done,  we  must  be  prepared  to  take  the
leadership  in  what  we  think  is  the  right  course,  having  regard  to  long-range  U.S.
interest  which  includes  importance  of  Allies.  I  believe  that  our  Allies  will  be  in-
clined to  follow,  if  not  immediately,  then  ultimately,  strong  and  sound  leader-
ship. In  saying  this,  I  do  not  underestimate  the  immense  difficulty  of  our  finding
the  right  course  in  this  troubled  situation.  Nor  do  I  mean  to  imply  that  I  think
that  this  is  the  moment  for  a  bold  or  war-like  course.  I  lack  here  the  U.S.  political
and  NSC  judgments  needed  for  overall  evaluation.

DULLES


[Document  40]

NIE  63-54
Approved  28  April  1954
Published  30  April  1954

CONSEQUENCES  WITHIN  INDOCHINA  OF  THE  FALL
OF  DIEN  BIEN  PHU

THE  PROBLEM

To  estimate  the  probable  consequences  within  Indochina  during  the  next  two
or  three  months  of  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  within  the  near  future.


SCOPE

The  consequences  of  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  on  the  political  situation  in
France,  and  the  repercussions  of  major  decisions  in  France  or  Geneva  on  the
situation  in  Indochina,  are  excluded  from  the  scope  of  this  estimate.

CONCLUSIONS

1.  The  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  have  far-reaching  and  adverse  repercus-
sions, but  it  would  not  signal  the  immediate  collapse  of  the  French  Union


Documents  483


political  and  military  situation  in  Indochina.  As  a  consequence  of  the  fall  of
Dien  Bien  Phu,  the  morale  of  French  Union  forces  would  receive  a  severe
blow.  A  crucial  factor  in  the  military  situation  thereafter  would  be  the  reliability
of  native  units,  particularly  the  Vietnamese.  There  would  almost  certainly  be
increased  desertions,  and  the  possibility  cannot  be  excluded  that  the  native
components  of  French  Union  forces  might  disintegrate.  However,  we  believe
that  such  disintegration  would  be  unlikely  during  the  ensuing  two  or  three
months,  and  that  for  at  least  this  period  the  major  part  of  the  native  troops
would  probably  remain  loyal.

2.  Assuming  no  such  disintegration,  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  not  in
itself  substantially  alter  the  relative  military  capabilities  of  French  Union  and
Viet  Minh  forces  in  Indochina  during  the  next  two  or  three  months.  The  French
stand  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  has  produced  certain  compensatory  military  results.  It
has  prevented  an  overrunning  of  Laos  and  has  resulted  in  the  inflicting  of
casualties  upon  the  Viet  Minh  comparable  in  number  to  the  total  French  force
committed  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  The  bulk  of  Viet  Minh  forces  released  by  the
fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  probably  not  be  able  to  move,  regroup,  and
re-equip  in  time  to  be  employed  in  new  major  operations  during  the  next  two  or
three  months,  although  some  lightly  equipped  infantry  battalions  might  be
made  available  more  rapidly  for  operations  in  the  Delta  region.

3.  Although  the  Viet  Minh  have  a  substantial  capability  to  organize  demon-
strations and  carry  out  sabotage  and  terrorist  activities  in  the  major  cities  of
Indochina,  we  believe  that  French  Union  forces  could  maintain  control  in  those
cities.

4.  The  political  consequences  in  Indochina  of  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would
be  considerably  more  adverse  than  the  strictly  military  consequences  and  would
increase  the  tempo  of  deterioration  in  the  over-all  French  Union  position  in
Indochina,  particularly  in  Vietnam.  There  would  probably  be  a  serious  decline
in  the  Vietnamese  will  to  continue  the  war  and  to  support  the  Vietnamese  mili-
tary programs.  However,  we  believe  that  general  collapse  of  French  and  native
governmental  authority  during  the  next  two  or  three  months  would  be  prevented
by  the  continued  existence  of  organized  French  Union  forces  and  the  hope
among  Indochinese  that  the  U.S.  might  intervene  in  Indochina.

5.  We  believe  that  although  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  not  immediately
ilead  to  collapse  of  the  French  Union  position  in  Indochina,  it  would  accelerate

the  deterioration  already  evident  in  the  French  Union  military  and  political
position  there.  If  this  trend  were  not  checked,  it  could  bring  about  a  collapse  of
the  French  Union  position  during  the  latter  half  of  1954.  It  should  be  empha-
sized that  this  estimate  does  not  consider  the  repercussion  of  major  decisions
in  France  or  Geneva  and  elsewhere,  which  could  have  a  decisive  effect  on  the
situation  in  Indochina.

j,  DISCUSSION

6.  We  believe  that  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,  if  it  occurred  as  assumed  in  the
problem,  would  result  from:  (a)  French  capitulation;  or  (b)  an  overwhelming
of  the  French  either  by  assault  or  by  gradual  constriction  of  the  French  position.
1 7.  If  the  French  were  to  capitulate  without  further  heavy  fighting,  the  adverse
1  military  and  political  consequences  would  be  essentially  similar  in  kind,  though
possibly  of  greater  intensity,  to  those  accompanying  the  fall  of  the  fortress
r.hrough  heavy  fighting.  Viet  Minh  losses  in  the  event  of  capitulation  would  be
iless  than  those  which  would  be  incurred  during  further  heavy  fighting.


484 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

8.  In  any  event,  the  Viet  Minh  would  have  suffered  heavy  losses  in  the  pro-
longed fighting  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  Estimated  Viet  Minh  casualties  in  the  fighting
there  to  date  are  approximately  13,000;  roughly  50  percent  of  this  number
have  been  killed  or  rendered  permanently  ineffective.  Although  a  few  experi-
enced units  have  been  sent  as  reinforcements,  individual  replacements  for  the  ;
most  part  have  consisted  of  partially  trained  personnel.  As  a  result  of  the  Dien
Bien  Phu  operation,  the  effectiveness  of  the  Viet  Minh  offensive  striking  force
will  be  greatly  reduced  during  the  next  two  or  three  months.

9.  French  Union  casualties  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  to  date  have  been  approximately
5,500.  The  defeat  of  the  force  now  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  add  another  11,000,
thus  bringing  the  total  French  Union  losses  to  roughly  17,000.  At  least  two-  '■
thirds  of  these  troops  are  experienced,  professional  units  from  Algerian,  colonial
and  foreign  legion  forces.  Moreover,  [word  missing]  of  the  thirteen  parachute
battalions  in  the  French  Union  forces  in  Indochina  are  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  The
loss  of  these  elite  French  Union  troops  would  reduce  the  French  Union  offensive  \
striking  force  by  approximately  one  quarter,  thus  markedly  reducing  over-all
French  Union  capabilities  for  offensive  operations  in  Indochina.

10.  As  a  consequence  of  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,  the  morale  of  the  French  ;
Union  forces  would  receive  a  severe  blow.  Their  will  to  win  would  be  dimin-  .
ished,  largely  because  of  a  widespread  belief  that  military  victory  was  no  longer
possible.  The  loss  of  morale  would  probably  not  be  sufficient  to  reduce  the  i
effectiveness  of  the  professional  soldiers  of  the  French  Expeditionary  force.
However,  a  crucial  factor  in  the  military  situation  thereafter  would  be  the
reliability  of  native  units,  particularly  the  Vietnamese.  There  would  almost
certainly  be  an  increase  in  Vietnam  desertions,  and  the  possibility  cannot  be
excluded  that  the  native  components  of  French  Union  forces  might  disintegrate.
However,  we  believe  that  such  disintegration  would  be  unlikely  during  the
ensuing  two  or  three  months,  and  that  for  at  least  this  period  the  major  part  of
the  native  troops  would  probably  remain  loyal.  Therefore,  we  estimate  that  the
impact  upon  the  morale  of  the  French  Union  forces  would  be  severe,  but  not
of  such  severity  as  to  preclude  their  employment  as  an  effective  military  force
during  the  next  two  or  three  months.

11.  The  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  not  in  itself  substantially  alter  the  relative
military  capabilities  of  French  Union  and  Viet  Minh  forces  in  Indochina  during
the  next  two  or  three  months  unless  there  were  large-scale  desertions  from  the
French  Union  forces.  The  victorious  Viet  Minh  troops  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  ;
have  suffered  heavy  casualties  and  their  efficiency  would  be  reduced.  In  order
to  bring  these  forces  up  to  full  strength,  the  Viet  Minh  would  probably  move
them  from  Dien  Bien  Phu  to  their  main  supply  and  training  areas  adjacent  to
the  Red  River  delta.  Prior  to  the  rainy  season,  this  redeployment  would  require
at  least  three  to  four  weeks.  After  the  full  onset  of  the  rainy  season,  which  is
unlikely  before  mid-May,  the  movement  would  take  between  two  and  three  ;
months  to  complete.  We  therefore  estimate  that  the  bulk  of  the  Viet  Minh
troops  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  not  be  available  for  major  operations  elsewhere
in  Indochina  during  the  next  two  or  three  months,  although  some  lightly-
equipped  infantry  battalions  might  be  made  available  more  rapidly  for  opera-  ;
tions  in  the  Delta  region.

12.  Although  the  over-all  capabilities  of  the  Viet  Minh  would  be  reduced  as  a  ,
consequence  of  the  losses  inflicted  upon  their  main  striking  force,  Viet  Minh  ;
forces  elsewhere  in  Indochina  would  have  the  capability  during  the  rainy  season
to  maintain  and  in  some  instances  increase  military  pressure  against  French
Union  forces.  In  the  Red  River  delta,  they  could  intensify  efforts  to  sever  land


I


Documents  485

!  communications  between  Hanoi  and  Haiphong,  ambush  French  detachments,
attack  villages,  air  bases,  and  other  installations,  and  lay  siege  to  isolated  French
delta  strong  points.  The  scale  of  Viet  Minh  operations  in  the  Delta,  however,
would  be  restricted  by  the  adverse  effects  of  heavy  rains  on  maneuverability,
i  The  Viet  Minh  could  use  their  force  concentrated  in  the  Pleiku  region  in  south-
1  ern  Annam  to  launch  fairly  large-scale  attacks  against  French  forces  engaged  in
the  "Atlante"  operation.  They  could  also  use  units  from  this  force  for  raiding
:  operations  in  the  Mekong  River  area  or  to  reinforce  the  Viet  Minh  battalions
*  now  in  Cambodia.  Combat  operations  in  southern  Annam,  the  Mekong  valley,
l  and  in  Cambodia  would  be  restricted  by  the  tenuous  nature  of  resupply  of
!  ammunition  and  other  military  equipment  for  these  units.  The  Viet  Minh
could  at  the  same  time  organize  demonstrations  and  carry  out  sabotage  and
terrorist  activities  in  the  major  cities  of  Indochina.  The  Viet  Minh  capability  in
this  regard  is  probably  substantial.

■  13.  French  Union  forces,  assuming  no  major  Vietnamese  defections,  would
■have  the  capability  to  maintain  their  present  major  fortified  positions  in  the
iDelta,  and  elsewhere,  maintain  control  in  the  major  cities,  prevent  the  perma-
inent  severing  of  land  communications  between  Hanoi  and  Haiphong,  repulse
'  Viet  Minh  attacks  in  southern  Annam  and  the  Mekong  River  area,  and  retain
the  area  liberated  in  the  "Atlante"  operation.  If  the  Viet  Minh  were  to  under-
take a  major  military  operation  against  Cambodia,  the  defense  of  Cambodia
would  require  troops  from  other  areas.  French  Union  forces  would  retain  the
!  capability  to  launch  limited  offensive  operations  before  the  full  onset  of  the
jrainy  season,  either  in  the  Red  River  delta  region  or  on  the  coast  of  Annam.

1 14.  The  political  consequences  in  Indochina  of  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu
[would  be  considerably  more  adverse  than  the  strictly  military  consequences,  al-
I  though  the  two  are  interrelated.  The  defeat  would  increase  the  tempo  of  de-
terioration in  the  over-all  French  Union  position  in  Indochina,  particularly  in
; Vietnam.  The  principal  political  consequences  would  be:  (a)  a  major  blow  to
French  prestige  among  the  Indochinese,  and  an  increased  conviction  on  their
part  that  the  French  were  unable  to  protect  them  against  the  Viet  Minh;  (b)  a
serious  decline  in  French  and  Indochinese  will  to  continue  the  war,  and  in  par-
ticular a  further  decline  in  popular  support  in  Vietnam  for  Vietnamese  military
programs;  (c)  exacerbation  of  French-Indochinese  relations,  partly  as  a  result
iof  increased  Indochinese  suspicions  that  the  French  will  "sell  out"  to  the  Viet
Minh;  (d)  a  sharp  increase  of  "fence  sitting"  among  politically  conscious
.groups  previously  disposed  to  support  the  Vietnam  Government;  and  (e)  a
l^harp  increase,  particularly  among  Vietnamese,  of  covert  support  of  the  Viet
Minh.  However,  we  believe  that  a  general  collapse  of  French  and  native  gov-
[srnmental  authority  during  the  next  two  or  three  months  would  be  prevented
I  by  the  continued  existence  of  organized  French  Union  forces  and  the  hope  that
:he  U.S.  might  intervene  in  Indochina.

■  15.  The  political  effect  in  Laos  would  probably  be  similar  to  that  of  Vietnam.
iHowever,  the  Laotians  would  probably  display  a  greater  disposition  than  the
Vietnamese  to  stand  by  the  French  and  to  continue  the  war  effort.

|16.  The  political  effect  on  Cambodia  would  be  extremely  uncertain.  The  in-
ternal security  of  Cambodia  and  a  certain  minimum  stability  might  be  main-
tained, but  Cambodia's  vulnerability  to  future  Viet  Minh  pressure  would  in-
crease.

17.  The  Viet  Minh  would  make  every  effort  to  make  political  capital  of  their
/ictory  at  Dien  Bien  Phu.  They  would  concentrate  on  increasing  the  sense  of
lopelessness  in  the  Associated  States,  and  would  seek  to  convince  the  Indo-


486 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

TROOP  STRENGTHS  AND  DISPOSITIONS

French  Union  Viet  Minh

Regular  and  Light  Bns  274  402,000  Regular  and  Regional  Bns  155  185,000
Semi-Military  203,500 Semi-Military  106,000

Total  605,500  Total  291,000

MAJOR  CONCENTRATIONS*
Delta

65  Regular  Bns  (35  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  22  Regular  Bns

19  Light  Bns  10  Regional  Bns
83,000  semi-military 35,000  semi-military

Dien  Bien  Phu

16  Regular  Bns  (15  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  28  Regular  Bns

2  Regional  Bns

Northern  Tonkin  (Less  DB  Phu  Area)

13  Regional  Bns

Northern  Laos

14  Regular  Bns  (10  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  3  Regular  Bns

2  Light  Bns  2  Regional  Bns

Thakhek-Savannakhet

17  Regular  Bns  (13  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  8  Regular  Bns

3  Light  Bns  4  Regional  Bns

Central  Vietnam

35  Regular  Bns  (10  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  14  Regular  Bns

16  Light  Bns  7  Regional  Bns

Cochin  China

17  Regular  Bns  (3  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  10  Regular  Bns

20  Light  Bns  2  Regional  Bns

Southern  Laos  and  Northeastern  Cambodia

8  Regular  Bns  (3  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  4  Regular  Bns

Western  Cambodia

11  Regular  Bns  (0  Fr.  Ex.  Force)  Elements
3  Light  Bns

*  These  dispositions  cover  only  infantry  units.  The  regional  breakdown  does  not  in-
clude the  total  number  of  Viet  Minh  and  French  bns.

Chinese  that  the  triumph  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  signalled  their  imminent  "deliver-
ance" from  colonial  rule  by  fellow  countrymen.  They  w^ould  intensify  current
efforts  to  enhance  the  status  of  the  so-called  "People's  Governments"  of  Laos
and  Cambodia.

18.  We  believe  that  although  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  would  not  immediately
lead  to  collapse  of  the  French  Union  position  in  Indochina,  it  would  accelerate


Documents  487

r

!  the  deterioration  already  evident  in  the  French  Union  military  and  political
position  there.  If  this  trend  were  not  checked,  it  could  bring  about  a  collapse  of

;  the  French  Union  position  during  the  latter  half  of  1954.  It  should  be  empha-
sized that  this  estimate  does  not  consider  the  repercussion  of  major  decisions  in

;  France  or  Geneva  and  elsewhere  which  are  likely  to  have  a  decisive  effect  on

I  the  situation  in  Indochina.


!!  [Document  41]

I  INDOCHINA

I The  following  are  comments  made  by  Major  General  Thomas  J.  H.  Trapnall,
(Junior,  former  Chief  of  the  Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group  (MAAG)  In-
dochina, at  his  debriefing,  3  May  1954.

GENERAL

The  battle  of  Indochina  is  an  armed  revolution  which  is  now  in  its  eighth
!year.  It  is  a  savage  conflict  fought  in  a  fantastic  country  in  which  the  battle
may  be  waged  one  day  in  waist-deep  muddy  rice  paddies  or  later  in  an  im-
penetrable mountainous  jungle.  The  sun  saps  the  vitality  of  friend  and  foe  alike,
but  particularly  the  European  soldier.  Torrential  monsoon  rains  turn  the  delta
battleground  into  a  vast  swamp  which  no  conventional  vehicle  can  successfully
negotiate.  It  is  a  war  of  many  paradoxes —

Where  there  is  no  popular  will  to  win  on  the  part  of  the  Vietnamese.

Where  the  leader  of  the  Rebels  is  more  popular  than  the  Vietnamese  Chief
of  State.

Where  a  sizeable  French  army  is  composed  of  relatively  few  Frenchmen.
I Where  the  partners  of  the  Associated  States  regard  each  other  as  more
'dangerous  than  the  enemy.

I  Where  a  large  segment  of  the  population  seeks  to  expel  the  French  at  any
jprice,  possibly  at  the  cost  of  extinction  as  a  new  nation.

j  This  is  a  war  which  has  no  easy  and  immediate  solution,  a  pohtico-mihtary
i  chess  game  in  which  the  players  sit  thousands  of  miles  distant — in  Paris,  Wash-
jington,  Peiping,  and  Moscow.

STRATEGIC  POSITION  OF  INDOCHINA

The  autonomous  Associated  States  of  Indochina  consist  of  Viet  Nam,
Laos,  and  Cambodia.  They  occupy  a  blocking  position  against  the  expansion  of
Chinese  Communist  influence  along  the  principal  routes  of  communication  in
Southeast  Asia.  If  this  area,  approximately  the  size  of  the  state  of  Texas,  defects
!3r  is  neutralized  the  frontiers  of  Burma,  Thailand  and  Malaya  would  imme-
diately be  exposed  and  eventually  the  positions  of  Australia,  New  Zealand,
[ndia,  Ceylon,  Pakistan,  Indonesia  and  the  Philippines  would  be  weakened.  A
Jtate  of  Civil  War  presently  exists  in  Indochina,  which  pits  the  Communist  Viet
iMinh  against  French  Union  forces  essentially  devoted  to  the  ideals  of  freedom.
lOther  issues,  such  as  varieties  of  Nationalism,  are  involved  as  well.  More-
over, a  state  of  transition  is  concurrently  underway  in  which  a  formerly  strong
Colonial  power  is  crumbling.  France  is  giving  way  to  a  self-determination
jnovement  by  the  indigenous  peoples,  who,  while  numbering  more  than  30  mil-


488 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

lion,  lack  stability  and  security.  The  population  of  the  three  states  is  not  com-
pletely compatible  in  matters  of  economics,  culture,  religion,  ethnic  origins,
philosophy or [words illegible] compromise position has  been
reached  in  which  the  principal  state  of  Viet  Nam,  combining  the  former  pro-  .
tectorates  of  Annam  and  Tonkin  with  the  ex-colony  of  Cochin  China,  has
entered  into  a  loose  state  of  alliance  with  the  lesser  states  of  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia, and  with  France.  This  federation  is  called  the  French  Union.  The  exact
relationship  of  each  autonomous  state  to  France  has  as  yet  not  been  com-  )
pletely  determined.  This  indecision  is,  moreover,  complicated  by  natural  rivalries
existing  among  the  states,  even  extending  to  political  tribal  groups  within  the  '
states.  j

The  topography  of  Indochina  is  varied  and  consists  of  extensive  mountains,
jungles,  rivers,  canals  and  major  deltas.  A  remarkable  compartmentation  results.  ;
Military  operations  in  a  given  area  may  be  conducted  with  almost  complete
disregard  of  the  situation  in  the  adjacent  compartment.  While  essentially  the  i
ground  war  presently  is  the  dominant  military  activity,  great  potentials  in  ,
amphibious,  naval  and  air  warfare  by  French  Union  Forces  exist  which  should
be  exploited  increasingly.  Poor  internal  communications  and  1,599  miles  of  I
coastline  are  factors  dictating  the  advisability  of  utilizing  more  effectively  the  j:
combat  power  of  the  combined  arms.

The  political  situation  in  France  and  Indochina  requires  a  complicated  sys-
tem of  military  administration.  Four  national  armies  comprise  the  French  Union  ^
Ground  Forces.  The  French  Far  East  Territorial  Force,  numbering  roughly
V4  million  troops,  equals  the  combined  totals  of  the  three  indigenous  armies,  '
of  which  only  that  of  Viet  Nam  may  be  considered  as  significant.  Military
responsibility  is  being  delegated  to  the  Associated  States  to  the  degree  that  their
state  of  military  development  and  capabilities  so  warrant.  The  pentalateral
agreement  of  23  December  1950  is  the  authority  for  existing  relationships.  The
United  States  is  a  signatory  to  this  document  which  extends  MDAP  into  Indo-
china. Significantly,  the  conflict  in  Indochina  has  not  been  "internationalized"
such  as  in  Korea.  Of  the  French  Union  partners,  only  France  is  a  member  of
the  United  Nations.  France  has  specifically  opposed  UN  intervention  on  the  :
presumption  that  its  control  of  the  Union  would  eventually  be  weakened  by  UN
participation.  On  the  enemy-side,  the  rebel  army  of  300,000  troops  could  not
be  supported  without  the  substantial  aid  presently  provided  by  Red  China.

GOVERNMENT  OF  INDOCHINA

The  prosecution  of  the  war  against  the  Viet  Minh  in  Indochina  is  a  joint
responsibility  of  the  sovereign  governments  of  Viet  Nam,  Cambodia,  Laos  and
France,  under  the  leadership  and  direction  of  the  latter.  The  local  representa-
tive of  the  French  Government  is  the  Commissioner  General,  M.  De  Jean.  He
represents  M.  Marc  Jacquet,  French  Minister  of  State,  in  charge  of  relations
with  the  Associated  States.  The  Ministers  of  the  Associated  States,  the  French  ,
Commissioner  General  and  the  military  Commander  in  Chief,  Lt  General  Henri
Navarre,  prescribe  the  conduct  of  the  war.  Existing  protocols  define  the  degree  [
of  military  control  enjoyed  by  the  Commander  in  Chief  over  the  armed  forces
of  the  individual  Associated  States.  Essentially,  the  French  exercise  operational
control  over  all  forces  in  strategy  and  tactics.  Each  of  the  Associated  States
maintains  a  Chief  of  Staff  and  a  General  Staff  who  are  primarily  concerned  with
recruiting,  training,  personnel  actions  and  limited  logistical  activities.  The  long
range  program  envisages  a  progressive  turnover  of  responsibilities  to  the  Asso-


Documents  489

dated  States,  although  a  requirement  exists  that  adequate  coordinating  powers
be  vested  in  the  hands  of  the  French  for  many  years  to  come.
;  Political  decisions  affecting  military  operations  are  reached  in  sessions  of  the
'high  committee  by  representatives  of  the  States,  France,  and  the  Commander  in
Chief.  Essentially  military  problems  are  resolved  in  a  permanent  military  com-
mittee in  which  the  military  chiefs  of  the  Associated  States  together  with  the
Commanding  General  of  Headquarters,  Joint  and  Ground  Forces,  Far  East,
iparticipate.

)  Although  a  quadruplication  of  facilities  exist  in  the  form  of  several  national
general  staffs  and  territorial  organizations,  actually  a  reasonably  efficient  chan-
nel of  command  is  maintained  by  the  French.  Diplomatic  liaison  with  the
'States  counterpart  organizations  is  exercised  wherever  coordination  is  required,
irhis  highly  complex  arrangement  of  joint  and  combined  staffs  and  pooling  of
National  forces  may  be  likened  to  a  miniature  NATO  at  war,  except  that  by
necessity,  the  senior  and  more  professionally  qualified  partner,  France,  exercises
the  dominant  role.  The  governmental  structure  of  each  state  is  more  or  less
Driented  toward  support  of  the  war  against  Communism  and  the  principal
I  portion  of  each  State's  budget  is  devoted  to  defense  expenditures.  Viet  Nam  is
:he  most  vigorous  state  in  this  regard.  Laos  is  cooperative  to  the  French,  but
Without  sizeable  resources  of  men  or  money.  Cambodia  views  the  entire  strug-
Igle  as  secondary  to  what  it  considers  more  important,  the  determination  of
i'uture  relationships  among  the  States  themselves.  In  consideration  of  the  fact
j  hat  hostilities  are  more  or  less  normal  in  the  life  of  the  Indochinese,  the  States
nay  be  considered  as  mobilized  for  war,  although  with  less  dislocation  to
3rivate  enterprise  and  fewer  restrictions  and  austerity  measures  than  would  be
jxpected  by  Western  nations  in  a  counterpart  situation.

Both  Laos  and  Cambodia  are  constitutional  monarchies,  while  the  Viet-
jiamese  respond  with  less  solidarity  to  the  government  indirectly  controlled  by
|he  Chief  of  State,  Bao  Dai,  nominal  descendant  of  the  Emperors  of  Annam.
He  is  potentially  a  capable  leader  but  unfortunately  out  of  favor  with  many
|;xtreme  Nationalists  and  non-Communist  dissidents.

1  The  overall  attitude  of  the  population  borders  on  indifference.  The  failure  of
riendly  propaganda  toward  both  development  of  a  National  attitude  and  the
ostering  of  patriotism  is  an  important  deficiency.  The  uneducated  native  is

inclined  toward  himself,  his  family  and  his  tribe,  or  stock,  in  that  order.  The
apanese-inoculated  spirity  of  Asia  for  the  Asiatics  has  been  adopted  by  Na-
ionalistic  leaders  and  the  intelligentsia.  The  peasant,  whose  way  of  life  has  not

|)een  changed  for  centuries,  is  mostly  apathetic.

The  principal  targets  for  Communism  are  among  the  educated  classes,  whose

immediate  resentment  is  the  domination  of  the  French  through  force  of  arms
ind  political  and  economic  controls.  These  people,  when  jjonverted  to  Com-
nunism,  muster  more  effective  support  from  the  peasantry  and  city  workers
ban  do  the  French  and  the  educated  Loyalists.  Communist  influence  is  strong
md  its  organization  very  complete,  particularly  within  the  large  cities.  The
contending  leaders  compete  with  each  other  for  recruits — the  Communists  hold-
ng  forth  idealistic  rewards  reinforced  by  threats,  and  the  Loyalists  stressing
ear  of  the  enemy  as  well  as  other  inducements,  some  of  which  approach  im-

l^ressment.

I  The  effect  of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  bid  for  a  negotiated  peace  and  the  French
inclination  to  seek  a  settlement  has  had  strong  repercussions  among  the  people,
Particularly  those  who  pay  double  taxes,  and  whose  villages  are  invaded,  fought
,)ver  and  destroyed  periodically  by  the  opposing  forces.


490 Gravel  Edition /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

It  is  natural  that  the  Communists  will  support  the  line  of  negotiation  since
implementation  of  any  such  peace  will  set  the  stage  for  Communist  absorption
of  the  entire  area,  without  fail  and  immediately.  The  Ho  Demarche,  and  the
proven  ability  of  his  field  forces  to  threaten  seriously  the  French  Union  Forces,
has  had  a  profound  effect  on  metropolitan  France  as  well,  where  a  considerable
portion  of  the  population  is  in  favor  of  terminating  an  expensive  and  seemingly
futile  war.

PERFORMANCE  OF  MDAP-SUPPORTED  FORCES

French  and  Associated  States  Forces  have  received  MDAP  equipment  in  in-
creasing amounts  since  1950.  French  Union  Forces  conduct  modern  joint  mili-
tary operations  according  to  professionally  accepted  tactics  and  techniques,  and
in  accordance  with  doctrines  approved  by  the  U.S.  Armed  Services.  Applica-
tions vary  in  consonance  with  difficulties  imposed  by  terrain  and  the  climatic
environment.  It  has  been  noted  that  this  is  a  war  which  pits  a  modern  mecha-
nized army  against  a  large  and  well-led  guerrilla  force.  However,  the  character
of  the  Viet  Minh  forces  has  been  changing  during  the  past  year.  Therefore,  many
inefficiencies  must  be  charged  against  the  mechanized  army  since  it  lacks  com-
plete opportunity  to  utilize  its  capabilities  fully.  Since  it  is  neither  practicable
nor  completely  desirable  to  meet  the  enemy  on  the  basis  of  guerrilla  versus
guerrilla,  the  ultimate  solution  will  require  the  isolation  of  the  Viet  Minh  from
his  base  of  supply  in  Red  China  and  then  overwhelming  him  by  materiel
superiority.  In  any  instance,  a  requirement  for  provision  of  quantities  of  MDAP
equipment  exists  and  will  continue  to  exist  for  an  indeterminate  period.  Gen-
erally, maintenance  standards  of  MDAP  equipment  are  below  those  of  the  U.S.
Armed  Services,  although  within  well-trained  units  employing  equipment  in  the
intended  manner,  favorable  comparisons  may  be  reached.  Since  many  of  the
personnel  of  the  French  Union  Army  begin  their  careers  as  illiterate  peasants,
completely  unskilled,  the  training  and  indoctrination  task  toward  better  main-
tenance is  evident.  MAAG  visiting  teams  proffer  such  guidance  as  is  feasible.
Specific  notification  of  superior,  as  well  as  unsatisfactory  units,  are  made  offi-
cially to  the  French  military  authorities.  Under  the  existing  terms  of  reference,
MAAG  has  no  authorized  direct  contact  with  armed  forces  of  the  Associated
States.  A  significant  weakness  on  the  part  of  the  French  is  their  failure  to
project  their  system  of  field  operations  and  staff  planning  beyond  their  experi-
ence in  Indochina.  Imagination  is  frequently  lacking.  Also  evident  is  the  fact
that  their  limited  experience  in  World  War  II  has  stunted  their  overall  develop-
ment in  modern  warfare.  This  is  basically  the  reason  underlying  their  poor  staff
work,  logistics  and  operational  plans.  In  addition,  the  French  are  sensitive
and  touchy  and  loath  to  accept  advice.  We  frequently  encounter  outdated  tech-
niques dating  back  to  Colonial  campaigns  and  World  War  I.

Another  weakness  of  the  French  Union  Force  is  the  diversity  of  troops  em-
ployed. The  French  Expeditionary  Corps  is  composed  of  Foreign  Legion,
Moroccans,  Algerians,  Tunisians,  Songalese  and  a  small  percentage  of  metro-
politan French  volunteers.  These  units  are  diluted  nearly  59  percent  by  native
Indochinese.  The  Associated  States  Forces  are  composed  of  varieties  of  native
Vietnamese,  Laotians  and  Cambodians.  The  whole  effect  is  that  of  a  heteroge-
neous force  among  whom  even  basic  communication  is  difficult.  Troops  require
a  variety  of  clothes  sizes  and  diets.  They  have  different  religious  customs,  folk-
ways and  mores.  They  vary  in  their  capacity  for  different  tasks  and  terrain.
Logistically,  a  great  problem  exists  in  the  support  of  such  troops.


I

I  Documents  491

I  On  the  other  hand,  the  Rebels  are  mostly  Vietnamese  recruited  largely  from
the  hardy  stocks  of  Tonkin  and  Annam.  They  are  a  truly  homogeneous  army
whose  capabilities  and  requirements  remain  more  or  less  consistent.

The  MDAP  equipment  furnished  the  French  Air  Force  of  Indochina  has
converted  it  into  a  modern  air  arm  capable  of  performing  its  combat  mission
in  a  highly  satisfactory  manner.  It  is  an  effective,  offensive  or  defensive  combat
weapon,  the  full  potential  of  which  has  not  been  realized.

NATIONAL  MILITARY  SERVICE

a.  French  Forces:  All  French  Army  personnel  in  Indochina  are  serving  in
the  Regular  Army.  The  draftee  in  France  is  not  required  by  law  to  serve  in
Indochina.  However,  he  may  volunteer  for  such  duty.  The  period  of  service
in  Indochina  was  formerly  24  months,  but  due  to  a  shortage  of  replacements,

\  the  period  currently  is  extended  to  27  months.  French  personnel  receive  sub-
stantial increases  in  pay  for  service  in  Indochina.

b.  Vietnamese  Forces:  The  original  law  which  drafted  man  for  military  serv-
ice required  all  physically  fit  males  to  undergo  a  period  of  service  for  60  days.

! Until  April  1953,  this  law  was  not  strictly  enforced.  In  April,  it  became,  with
j minor  changes,  the  basis  for  the  ordinance  drafting  40,000  men  for  duty  with
|i Kinh  Quan  battalions.  Personnel  are  inducted  into  the  army  for  the  duration.
They  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  family  situation.  Single  men  are  taken
first.  A  man  enlisting  for  the  Regular  Army  is  taken  on  a  trial  basis  for  one
year.  At  the  end  of  one  year,  and  if  his  service  has  proven  satisfactory,  he  can  re-
' enlist  for  a  period  of  one,  two,  three  or  four  years.  Recently,  the  draft  laws  have
been  more  vigorously  enforced  to  eliminate  draft  dodging.

INTER-SERVICE  BALANCE  OF  FORCES  IN  INDOCHINA

While  the  majority  of  resources  are  devoted  to  ground  operations,  the  follow-
ing factors  must  be  considered:

a.  The  enemy  has  no  air  forces  or  naval  forces  other  than  junks  and  sampans.

b.  Friendly  ground  forces  maintain  a  large  proportion  of  river  squadrons  and
light  aviation  units.

i  c.  Opportunities  for  employment  of  large  tactical  air  forces  and  seagoing
I naval  and  amphibious  forces  are  limited.

i  d.  Strategic  targets  are  limited.  Terrain  and  enemy  skill  in  camouflage  reduce
I number  of  tactical  targets.

\  e.  A  shortage  of  trained  air  personnel  exists,  with  limited  prospects  for
I augmentation  from  metropolitan  France  resources.

j  f.  Commercial  resources  satisfy  a  considerable  portion  of  naval  and  air
j logistical  requirements.

g.  Airfield  construction  limits  composition  of  air  traffic  to  light  and  medium

transports  and  propeller-driven  fighters  and  bombers.  The  balance  of  forces  is
I  considered  adequate,  although  recently  the  French  Air  Force,  motivated  by  un-
I  anticipated  operational  requirements  in  Laos  and  Dien  Bien  Phu,  has  requested
j:  additional  B-26  light  bombers,  an  additional  C-47  transport  squadron,  and  the
I  loan  of  U.S.  C-119  heavy  transports  and  maintenance  personnel.  Civilian  CAT
1  pilots  are  presently  on  contract  to  the  French  Air  Force  for  logistical  missions.

The  Army  likewise  has  requested  increased  air  strength  in  the  form  of  helicopter

companies  and  liaison  aircraft.


492 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


OBJECTIVES  I

The  missions  of  the  opposing  forces  may  be  considered  as  follows:

VIET  MINH — To  achieve,  by  attritive  military  and  political  action,  a  \

negotiated  settlement  of  the  war  in  Indochina  upon  such  terms  as  will  permit  i

either.

a.  Absolute  control  of  a  portion  of  Viet  Nam  and  Laos — generally  considered  I
to  be  north  of  the  18th  Parallel,  or  [

b.  Eventual  control  of  the  majority  portion,  or  the  complete  entity,  of  Indo-  ,
china  as  a  result  of  a  favorable  political  position  achieved  at  the  peace  table.

FRENCH  UNION — To  achieve,  by  overwhelming  military  pressure  and  I
political  action,  a  cessation  of  hostilities  upon  terms  favorable  to  the  French  '
Union  which  will  \

a.  Restrict  the  influence  of  the  League  of  Independent  Viet  Nam  Party- Viet  '
Minh,  to  that  of  a  controllable  minority.

b.  Permit  the  establishment  of  sound,  stable,  solvent  and  harmonious  govern-  '
ments  within  the  Associated  States.  !

c.  Enable  France  to  maintain  its  position  as  the  dominant  member  of  the  {
French  Union — of  the  Far  East — with  extra  territorial  privileges  and  com-  1;
mercial  benefits.

Naturally,  the  results  of  the  Geneva  Conference  may  be  expected  to  have  a
strong  influence  on  future  political  and  military  objectives  in  Indochina  for  both
sides.  {

I

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  FRENCH  UNION  GROUND  FORCES  \

By  the  end  of  1954,  French  Union  ground  forces  will  consist  of  four  French
and  one  Vietnamese  infantry  division  and  one  French  airborne  division.  The  i
ground  divisions  will  be  formed  from  13  French  RCTs  and  9  Vietnamese
ARCTs.  The  airborne  division  will  be  formed  from  2  French  ARCTs  and  one
Vietnamese  ARCT.  This  force,  known  as  the  Battle  Corps,  will  be  supported  by  5
armored  battalions,  5  reconnaissance  battalions,  5  amphibious  battalions  and  3
medium  and  1  heavy  artillery  battalion.  This  represents  the  striking  force  of  the
French  Union  Forces,  not  much  larger  than  a  single  U.S.  type  Army  Corps.  To
free  this  force  for  independant  action  against  the  Rebel  strongholds,  the  French
consider  that  a  force  of  twice  that  size  is  necessary  for  static  defense  and  i
pacification  purposes.  By  the  end  of  1955,  this  surface  defense  force  will  reach
a  total  of  86  standard  infantry  battalions,  132  light  infantry  battalions,  1100
suppletive  companies,  the  equivalent  of  70  artillery  batteries  and  36  armored
car  companies.  All  units  of  the  French  Union  Army  are  equipped  with  a
percentage  of  MDAP  material.  Amounts  vary  according  to  date  of  activation,
depot  stocks,  mission  and  replacement  factors.  A  certain  percentage  of  hard
items,  estimated  at  30  percent  of  gross  requirements,  is  provided  by  French
procurement  agencies  and  may  consist  of  identical  items  to  those  of  MDAP,  i
having  been  acquired  during  World  War  II,  or  through  other  channels  by  which  ;
U.S.  surplus  stocks  were  distributed  after  1946.  Indigenous  production  is  prac-  ,
tically  negligible,  since  local  industry  is  not  developed  and  barely  sufficient  to
provide  maintenance  for  civilian  requirements.  A  certain  number  of  paramilitary
agencies  exist  in  this  theater  of  operations  which  are  not  MDAP  supported.
These  include  militia,  national  police,  plantation  guards  and  others.  Obviously,
MDAP  items,  mostly  smafl  arms  and  ammunition  will  find  their  way  by  devious
channels  into  unauthorized  hands.


1

Documents  493

Due  to  the  stress  of  constant  warfare,  circumstances  are  such  that  strict
control  is  impossible.  For  example,  an  MDAP  rifle,  abandoned  in  battle  may  be
acquired  by  a  Viet  Minh  soldier,  who  will  forfeit  the  same  weapon  upon  his
death  or  capture  by  paramilitary  forces.

j  LOGISTICS  OF  THE  GROUND  FORCES

j  In  general  terms  the  organization  and  operation  of  the  technical  services
I  which  furnish  logistical  support  to  the  combat  arms  is  similar  to  that  in  the
United  States  Army.  The  French  Forces  are  handicapped  by  an  insufficient  num-
ber of  units  and  trained  specialists  and  consequently  are  unable  to  furnish  the
i  amount  and  quality  of  support  given  by  comparable  U.S.  units.  For  all  technical
I  services  MDA  Programs  have  furnished  the  spare  parts  and  small  items
;  necessary  to  carry  out  adequate  maintenance  and  repair  programs.

French  Forces:  French  Forces  are,  for  the  most  part,  trained  prior  to  ship-
ment  to  Indochina.  Training  of  individual  replacements  is  done  in  the  units  to
I  which  they  are  assigned.  French  Far  East  ground  forces  operate  schools  for
;  artillery,  armor,  engineer  and  transportation  for  their  own  forces  and  addi-
;  tionally  provide  generous  quotas  for  Associated  States  personnel.  Recently,  four
tactical  training  centers  have  been  activated  for  use  as  maneuver  areas  for  large
tactical  formations  and  battalions  rotated  out  of  static  positions.

Vietnamese  Forces:  There  are  eight  training  centers  for  recruits  of  the  Viet-
\  namese  Army.  Four  are  for  recruits  for  the  Regular  Army  and  four  are  for
'  personnel  to  be  activated  into  Kinh  Quan  (light  infantry)  battalions  and  com-
panies. On-the-job  training  is  conducted  in  technical  fields  for  selected  indi-
viduals upon  assignment  to  a  unit.  In  addition  to  this  training,  a  limited  number
I  of  specialists,  technical,  non-commissioned  and  officer  schools  exist.  A  con-
!  siderable  number  of  indigenous  officers  and  men  attend  French  schools  both  in

France  and  Indochina.  Training  is  not  up  to  American  standards,
i The  Associated  States  training  plan  has  an  annual  capacity  of  about  65,000.
•  It  is  considered  adequate  to  meet  phased  build-up  requirements.  By  American
criteria,  certain  training  deficiencies  are  conspicuous,  particularly  in  such  areas
as  standardization  of  training  aids,  programs  of  instruction,  troop  training
'  programs  and  training  literature.  Utilization  of  plant  facilities  with  greater
.  efficiency  is  a  further  requirement.  It  is  apparent  that  the  Associated  States
forces  are  developing  with  more  stress  on  quantity  than  quality.  It  is  hoped  that
American  guidance  will  prove  acceptable  and  valuable  to  the  French.  The  use
of  MDAP  equipment  has  not  generated  any  critical  training  problems,  however
a  need  exists  for  management  training  to  encompass  stock  control;  organization
of  depots  and  other  procedural-type  activities.  ^

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  FRENCH  NAVAL  FORCES,  FAR  EAST

French  naval  strength  is  approximately  10,000.  The  only  Associated  States
navy  is  a  1,000  man  Vietnamese  force.  Naval  forces  are  light  units  composed
of  approximately  250  light  vessels  and  100  small  craft.  These  are  supported  by
'  an  aircraft  carrier  on  loan  from  NATO  and  a  squadron  of  privateer  aircraft,
j  Command  of  river  operations  as  well  as  overall  logistic  support  is  the  responsi-
I  bility  of  the  Commander,  French  Naval  Forces  ashore.  Direct  coordination  of
:  naval  river  forces  with  the  respective  Army  area  commands  is  executed  at  the
i  Naval  area  level.  Commander,  French  Naval  Forces,  afloat,  controls  coastal
operations  including  surveillance,  blockade,  and  amphibious  operations.  Naval


494 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I  \

Aviation,  Indochina,  supports  the  Naval  mission  as  directed.  The  aircraft  carrier
force  is  under  Naval  administrative  command  although  embarked  aircraft  oper-  \
ate  as  directed  by  the  French  Air  Force  area  tactical  commands.

I

SUMMARY  OF  THE  NAVAL  SITUATION  \

The  French  Union  naval  forces  in  Indochina  are  reasonably  effective  on  rivers  [
and  inshore  areas.  They  have  had  much  experience  in  river  landings,  combating,
river  ambushes  and  intercepting  junk  and  small  boat  traffic  on  both  the  ocean  '
and  inland  waterways.  Also,  logistic  support  by  water  to  all  services  is  a  con-
stant and  heavy  undertaking.  For  guerrilla  warfare  along  the  waterways  in  the ;
Red  River  and  Mekong  River  deltas,  they  are  uniquely  qualified  and  equipped.
In  other  more  orthodox  forms  of  naval  warfare  such  as  large  amphibious  oper-
ations,  anti-submarine  and  anti-aircraft  warfare,  they  are  neither  trained  nor  j
equipped.  With  the  establishment  of  the  Joint  Amphibious  Staff  and  the  forma-
tion of  an  Amphibious  Corps,  part  of  this  deficiency  should  be  eliminated.
Although  enemy  submarines  and  aircraft  have  not  been  a  factor  in  this  war,  the ;
possibility  does  exist.  There  is  little  in  Indochina  to  combat  the  potential  menace.  ^
Limitations  and  restrictions  for  the  conduct  of  the  war  at  present  are  basically
caused  by  a  shortage  of  personnel  rather  than  a  lack  of  equipment.  In  addition,
concrete  and  positive  steps  have  been  taken  in  the  establishing  of  a  Vietnamese !
National  Navy.  This  will  perform  a  two-fold  purpose — that  of  easing  the  seri-
ous shortage  of  personnel  and  engendering  a  spirit  of  pride  in  the  Vietnamese :
people  through  increased  responsibility  and  participation  in  the  conduct  of  the  ■
war  in  their  homeland.  |

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  FRENCH  AIR  FORCE

I

As  of  10  April  1954,  the  French  Air  Force  consisted  of  98  Bearcats,  organ-
ized into  4  squadrons,  16  Bearcat  Photo  Recon  Aircraft  organized  as  a  flight,
84  B-26  light  bombers,  expanding  to  3  squadrons,  a  light  tactical  reconnaissance
flight  of  modified  B-26  bombers,  4  transport  squadrons  of  114  C-47s — 65
MDAP — and  liaison  aircraft  squadrons  consisting  of  8  C-45s,  12  L-20  Beavers
and  8  H-19  helicopters.  Additionally,  85  Army  liaison  aircraft — L-19s — will  be
delivered  by  31  August.  22  C-119  packets  with  supporting  (200)  mechanics
are  on  loan  during  the  present  emergency.

SUMMARY  OF  THE  AIR  FORCE  SITUATION

The  general  MAAG  opinion  is  that  the  individual  flight  and  ground  crews
are  very  well  qualified  in  operating  and  maintaining  their  equipment.  However,
there  is  not  enough  of  them.  Shortages  of  MDAP  supplied  equipment  of  the
major  categories  has  not  restricted  or  hampered  the  operational  ability  of  the
FAF  combat  squadrons  and  support  agencies.  Some  of  the  changes  in  methods
and  procedures  which  MAAG  believed  should  be  placed  in  effect  are  actually
beyond  the  capability  of  the  FAF  due  primarily  to  the  shortage  of  personnel
and  overall  restrictions  imposed  on  the  FAF  by  the  political  and  economic  situ-
ation both  in  Indochina  and  in  Metropolitan  France.

The  French  are  highly  operationally  minded,  however,  they  do  not  put  proper
emphasis  on  their  logistics  support  requirements  to  support  their  operations.
In  spite  of  the  MDAP  equipment  and  machinery  received,  the  development  of
this  country's  self-sufficiency  has  been  abnormally  slow.


Documents  495

,  ORGANIZATION  AND  TACTICS  OF  THE  REBEL  ARMY

ill The  Viet  Minh  is  a  well-led,  veteran  guerrilla  army  of  approximately  300,000

■  t  troops  organized  into  6  infantry  divisions,  a  heavy  division  of  artillery  and  engi-
j.  neers  and  numerous  regiments,  battalions  and  companies.  It  has  a  regional  militia
'  component  as  well  as  its  regular  troops.  Its  equipment  and  tactics  are  those  of

light  infantry  with  a  tremendous  capability  of  cross  country  mobility  and  en-
'  durance.  A  high  command  is  reputed  to  contain  Red  Chinese  advisors.  Until
i  the  pitched  battle  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  the  rebels  followed  the  strategy  of  hit  and

run  with  much  of  its  maneuver  dictated  by  political  objectives.  The  manner  in
I  which  this  force  deployed  its  battle  corps  into  assault  infantry,  and,  with  effective
{  artillery  support,  captured  several  highly  organized  and  well-defended  strong
!  points,  indicates  a  versatility  not  fully  appreciated  prior  to  this  campaign  season.
I  Additionally,  the  Viet  Minh  are  skilled  in  psychological  and  political  indoctri-
'  nation  and  have  been  able  to  establish  bases  of  operations  behind  French  fortified

lines,  particularly  in  the  delta.  The  recent  capability  of  the  Viet  Minh  to  seize
'  territory  throughout  Indochina,  albeit  temporarily,  will  have  a  profound  effect
'  upon  the  conferences  at  Geneva,
i

I  CONDUCT  OF  THE  WAR— MILITARY  ASPECTS

\  In  June  1953,  General  Navarre  formulated  a  set  of  principles  for  the  conduct
1  of  the  war  in  Indochina.  This  was  described  in  the  O'Daniel  report  as  the
!  Navarre  concept  for  successful  conclusion  of  the  war  in  Indochina,  but  it  is  less  a
!  formula  for  successfully  concluding  the  war  than  a  statement  of  short  term  aims,
J  to  wit:

I a.  To  retake  the  initiative  immediately  through  the  carrying  out,  beginning  this
i  summer,  of  local  offensives  and  by  pushing  to  the  utmost  commando  and
guerrilla  actions.

I  b.  To  take  the  offensive  in  the  north  beginning  September  1 5,  in  order  to  fore-
I  stall  the  enemy  attack.  To  conduct  the  battle  which  will  take  place  during  the

■  fall  and  winter  of  1953-54  in  an  offensive  manner  by  attacking  the  flanks  and
rear  of  the  enemy.

c.  To  recover  from  areas  not  directly  involved  in  the  battle  a  maximum  number
,  of  units.  To  pacify  these  regions  progressively.

d.  To  build  up  progressively  a  battle  corps  by  grouping  battalions  into  regi-
ments and  regiments  into  divisions  and  by  giving  to  the  units  thus  created  the
necessary  support — artillery,  engineers,  armor,  communications — taking  into
account  the  very  special  character  of  the  war  in  Indochina,  the  terrain — the  en-
emy. To  bring  about  a  cooperation  with  the  Air  Force  and  the  Navy.

e.  To  maintain  a  reserve  of  special  type  units — armor,  commando,  light  bat-
talion, etc.,  for  attachment  to  groups  and  divisions  in  accordance  with  terrain

i  and  mission.

I  f.  To  continue  the  effort  of  instructing  and  organizing  the  army  of  the  Asso-
)  ciated  States  so  as  to  give  them  more  and  more  participation  as  well  as  more
|i  and  more  autonomy  in  the  conduct  of  operations.

I  Note:  The  above  was  given  to  General  O'Daniel  in  writing  by  General  Navarre
j  on  29  June  1953  and  was  thereafter  referred  to  as  the  Navarre  concept  for  the
I  successful  conclusion  of  war  in  Indochina.

j Few  of  these  aims  are  progressing  satisfactorily.  The  training  of  the  National
[  armies  is  woefully  inefficient  and  the  series  of  tactical  offensive  operations  en-
gaged in  during  1953-54  fighting  season,  instead  of  retaking  the  initiative  has


496 Gravel  Edit  ion /The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I  \

lost  it  to  the  Viet  Minh.  After  a  rather  encouraging  beginning  with  the  Lang
Son  operation,  Navarre's  later  operations  reveal  that  he  is  following  the  same  •
conservative  defensive  tactics  as  his  predecessor,  General  Salan.  Although
Mouette  was  highly  publicized  as  a  successful  offensive,  it  in  fact  was  nothing
but  a  reconnaissance  in  force  with  the  objective  of  occupying  a  strong  position  •
and  awaiting  attack  by  the  enemy  in  the  hope  of  dealing  him  a  crippling  blow.  ■
The  enemy  refused  to  be  taken  in.  The  current  campaign  season  has  been
dominated  by  the  Viet  Minh,  and  the  present  position  of  the  French  Union
Forces  is  no  improvement  over  that  of  last  year.  Dien  Bien  Phu  is  not  only  an-
other Na  San  but  a  grave  tactical  and  strategic  error.  The  only  hope  for  gain
from  the  battle  now  raging  is  that  the  French  can  survive.  The  French  have  !
consistently  postponed  seizure  of  the  initiative  through  failure  to  select  and
pursue  vital  military  objectives  such  as  the  obvious  enemy  troop  concentration
depot  and  communications  area  in  the  foothills  north  of  the  Tonkin  delta.  Viet  :
Minh  leadership,  on  the  other  hand,  has  capitalized  on  this  vacated  opportunity  |
by  seizing  and  holding  the  initiative.  The  French  battle  corps,  which  was  built ;
up  hopefully  by  energetic  withdrawal  of  implanted  units,  has  now  been  dissi- 1
pated  into  four  sizeable  components:  (1)  Dien  Bien  Phu — 12  battalions — an
expensive-supplied  airhead,  is  encircled  and  under  heavy  attack.  (2)  Seno-'
Savannakhet-Thakhek-Pakse  area — 15  battalions — partially  supported  by  air'
with  its  overland  communications  threatened.  (3)  Operation  Atlanta — 25  bat- j
talions — a  coastline  sweep  north  from  Nha  Trang,  which  has  uncovered  no
appreciable  enemy,  and  (4)  the  Tonkin  delta — 18  battalions — where  the  enemy
is  increasing  his  attacks  on  rear  installations  and  lines  of  communications.  The  ;
lack  of  initiative  which  the  French  have  is  emphasized  by  the  day-to-day  reac-  ■
tion  of  the  French  to  enemy  moves  and  activity  as  expressed  in  recent  requests
for  emergency  assistance  in  the  way  of  U.S.  equipment  and  maintenance  per-
sonnel.

French  tactics  are  based  primarily  on  defense,  even  though  French  Union
Forces  outnumber  Viet  Minh  forces  by  almost  2  to  1 ,  have  overwhelming  fire
power,  and  unopposed  air  force,  a  balanced  naval  force  and  strategic  transport
capability.  The  barbed  wire  concept  is  exemplified  by  the  fact  that  the  French  ;
have  established  a  requirement  of  4000  tons  of  this  item  per  month  over  and
above  that  furnished  by  France.  The  bulk  of  the  C-119  airlift  for  Dien  Bien  Phu
supply  was  utilized  in  dropping  barbed  wire.

French  Union  forces  do  not  as  a  general  rule  attempt  to  gain  and  maintain  ;
contact  with  the  enemy,  but  rather,  they  wait  for  the  Viet  Minh  to  attack.
Patrolling  is  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.  Viet  Minh  regular  battle  corps
troops  have  been  avoided  unless  the  French  troops  are  well  dug  in  behind
barbed  wire  or  have  astronomical  odds  in  their  favor.

Night  operations  are  never  employed  by  French  Union  forces  although  the
Viet  Minh  use  such  operations  most  successfully.  French  forces  retire  to  their
fortified  and  secured  areas  at  nightfall,  and  control  only  the  areas  of  their  ;
fields  of  fire.  Night  operations  training  should  be  instituted  and  emphasized  in  i
their  training  programs,  and  French  Union  forces  should  be  as  adept  and  |
successful  in  such  operations  as  the  enemy.  j

At  present  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  French  staff  is  working  off-detailed  I
plans  for  the  final  offensive  which  General  Navarre  has  indicated  to  me  as
Chief  MAAG  will  occur  during  the  next  dry  season,  1954-55.

Although  Navarre  demands  that  his  requirement  for  U.S.  equipment  should
not  be  challenged  by  this  MAAG,  the  fact  is  that  the  small  inadequate  French
staff  handling  this  function  is  not  capable  of  accurately  presenting  requirements


Documents  497

for  Indochina.  Were  it  not  for  the  screening  which  these  requests  undergo  by
MAAG,  material  would  be  wastefully  supplied,  and  many  critical  and  sudden
shortages  would  occur.  Many  examples  of  this  lack  of  planning  foresight  can  be
found  in  the  files  of  this  MAAG,  such  as  requests  for  specialized  equipment
;  requiring  specially  trained  operators  with  no  companion  plan  to  provide  such
:  operators — request  for  a  specific  amount  of  ammunition  in  January  is  constitute
j  a  year,  supply  only  to  double  the  request  in  April — not  because  of  an  oversight
I  or  error  but  because  of  poor  planning  for  the  operations  to  occur  during  the
1  intervening  months.

! This  lack  of  French  staff  capability  and  to  a  great  extent  the  conservative  and
;  defensive  attitude  of  the  entire  theater  of  operations,  is  due  in  large  measure  to
;  the  fact  that  many  of  the  officers  on  duty  in  this  theatre  are  over  age  in  grade
according  to  U.S.  standards,  and  are  lacking  in  drive  and  imagination.  Lack
of  command  supervision  is  obvious  in  all  echelons,  the  best  evidence  of  which  is
the  absence  of  command  inspections  and  maintenance  inspections  of  equipment  of
commanders.  End-use  inspections  by  members  of  this  MAAG  frequently  reveal
that  higher  commanders  have  never  made  an  inspection  of  equipment  in  their
j  subordinate  units.  Shortage  of  personnel  is  another  contributing  factor  which
cannot  be  overcome  except  through  more  extensive  support  from  metropolitan
,  France.

\  POLITICAL  ASPECTS

I  A  strictly  military  solution  to  the  war  in  Indochina  is  not  possible.  Military
operations  are  too  closely  bound  to  concurrent  political  problems,  and  most  of
the  military  decisions  concerning  tactics  and  strategy  have  their  origin  in  the
politics  of  the  situation  here.  The  governments  of  the  three  Associated  States
are  comparatively  weak,  and  are  almost  as  insistent  upon  complete  autonomy
from  France  as  they  are  on  liberation  from  the  Communists.  It  is  doubtful  if
the  ordinary  people  understand  the  issues  at  stake  between  the  rebel  and  Asso-

iciated  States  objectives.  It  probably  appears  to  them  that  they  are  being  ground
between  the  two  political  groups,  one  of  which  seeks  to  achieve  autonomy  by
Communist  methods.  The  other  by  political  evolution.  They  are  not  aware  of  the
dangers  of  domination  by  Communism  nor  of  the  difference  between  democracy
and  the  Communist  People's  Government  as  we  understand  it.

!  The  French  have  a  tremendous  investment  in  Indochina  and  have  made  great
strides  in  bringing  the  advantages  of  Western  civilization  to  the  people.  Yet
the  French  are  not  wanted.  Colonialism  is  still  the  chief  argument  against  the
French  and  with  some  substance.  The  natives  are  still  considered  as  second-
rate  people  and  the  French  have  only  made  concessions  reluctantly  and  when
forced  to  do  so.  There  is  a  lack  of  camaraderie  between  the  native  soldier  and
officer  and  the  French.  Separate  messes  are  maintained,  due  in  some  measure
to  the  difference  in  dietary  preference,  but  also  due  to  this  lack  of  friendly  as-
jociation  in  a  common  cause.

■  The  Viet  Minh,  on  the  other  hand,  are  fighting  a  clever  war  of  attrition,  with-
t3ut  chance  of  a  major  military  victory,  but  apparently  feeling  that  time  is  work-

img  in  their  favor  and  that  French  and  U.S.  public  opinion  will  force  eventual
'avorable  negotiation.
PSYCHOLOGICAL  ASPECTS
^  In  1949  the  French,  in  a  search  for  Nationalist  support  against  Ho  Chi  Minh,
.ecognized  Bao  Dai,  playboy  scion  of  the  ancient  Annamite  emperors  as  Chief


498 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

of  State  of  Viet  Nam  which  was  given  its  independence  within  the  framework
of  the  French  Union.  Bao  Dai  is  popularly  believed  to  be  very  pro-French,  and
most  of  the  people  have  a  luke-warm  feeling  toward  the  Government  which
they  feel  is  not  earnestly  working  for  their  complete  independence  from  France.
The  French  promise  independence,  but  only  reluctantly  give  concessions.

The  key  to  this  problem  is  a  strong  and  effective  Nationalist  army  with  the
support  of  the  Populist  behind  it.  When  the  people  have  confidence  in  their
government  and  in  its  ability,  through  the  Nationalist  army,  to  give  them  the;
protection  from  Communist  terrorism  which  is  necessary  for  business  and  com-
merce, then  complete  victory  will  be  in  sight.

THE  US.  CONTRIBUTION  TO  THE  WAR  IN  INDOCHINA  \

The  U.S.  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  French  in  holding  Indo-|
china  from  the  beginning.  In  January  1951,  material  was  rushed  from  the  docks'
of  Haiphong  to  the  battlefield  of  Vinh  Yen,  then  being  fought  under  the  per-i
sonal  direction  of  Marshall  De  Lattre  himself.  Since  then,  delivery  of  aid  has
kept  pace  with  changing  French  needs,  often  on  a  crash  basis,  down  to  the!
present  heroic  defense  of  Dien  Bien  Phu.  U.S.  aid  has  consisted  of  budgetary  :
support,  furnishing  of  end  items,  military  hardware,  and  of  technical  training
teams.  The  magnitude  and  range  of  this  contribution  is  shown  by  the  following
very  few  examples.  All  of  these  figures  are  as  of  31  March  this  year.

a.  785  million  dollars  has  been  allocated  for  the  budgetry  support  of  the
French  Expeditionary  Force  and  the  Vietnamese  Army.  This  will  assist  in  meeting  |
budgetary  requirements  for  pay,  food,  and  allowances  for  these  troops.

b.  Under  MDA  Programs,  a  total  of  more  than  784  milHons  of  dollars  has  been
programmed  for  the  years  1950-54.  Of  this,  more  than  440  million  dollars  worth
of  military  end  items  have  been  received.

c.  To  date,  31  March  1954,  441  ships  have  delivered  a  total  of  478  thousands
of  long  tons  of  MDA  equipment  to  Indochina.

SOLUTION

As  in  Korea,  Iran,  Malaya,  and  Burma,  the  war  in  Indochina  is  not  a  separate
entity.  It  is  another  tentacle  of  the  octopus,  another  brush  fire  on  the  periphery
of  the  iron  and  bamboo  curtains.  The  problem  can  only  be  solved  completely
if  the  masters  of  the  Kremlin  decide  that  Indochina  should  be  abandoned  in
favor  of  more  profitable  enterprises  elsewhere.  However,  ways  and  means  exist
to  achieve  a  degree  of  success  with  respect  to  Indochina,  beginning  at  the  political
level — specifically  at  the  level  of  Chiefs  of  State.  What  is  then  necessary  is  as  ^
follows:

a.  An  agreement  must  be  reached  with  the  French  to  deliver  their  strongest
possible  assault  upon  the  Viet  Minh  as  soon  as  possible  to  reduce  their  efficiency
of  that  force  to  its  lowest  potential.

b.  Concurrently,  the  Associated  States  armies  must  be  put  through  a  train-
ing cycle  designed  to  produce  leaders  and  units  and  to  develop  confidence  through
skill  and  achievement.  Such  forces  must  be  developed  to  the  level  of  the  ROK
or  Greek  armies  under  American  tutelage  and  material  support  for  these  forces
must  be  in  being  and  capable  of  replacing  the  French  when  they  retire.

c.  A  defensive  alliance  of  democratic  nations  of  the  Orient  must  be  developed
to  provide  future  stability  for  the  Associated  States.  The  U.S.  must  establish
leadership  in  this  area  by  relieving  the  French  in  a  similar  manner  as  was  fol-
lowed in  relieving  the  British  for  the  responsibility  of  Greece.


Documents  499

• d.  The  sovereignty  and  territorial  borders  of  the  Associated  States  must  be
i  guaranteed — under  no  circumstances  should  the  country  be  allowed  to  divide
on  an  arbitrary  parallel  such  as  in  Korea.

CONCLUSION

j I  recommend  that  the  Department  of  Defense  urge  that  negotiations  for  agree-

'  ments  to  be  initiated  at  the  earliest  time  to  achieve  the  foregoing  objectives  and
that  upon  reaching  an  understanding  with  France  and  the  Associated  States,  a
full-scale  U.S.  training  mission  be  established  with  the  Associated  States  forces
to  achieve  an  effective  training  base  by  Spring  of  1956.  That  the  French  over-
whelm the  enemy  in  the  interim  is  a  vital  concurrent  requirement,  and,  again,
this  objective  must  be  achieved  by  governmental  agreement,  with  the  U.S.  in-

,  sisting  that  the  French  Government  establish  military  victory  as  a  primary  ob-
jective and  so  instruct  the  field  commander,  who  may  then  be  relieved  of  his
anxieties  regarding  casualties  and  indifferent  political  and  moral  support  from

1  France.

j  In  conclusion,  I  reaffirm  my  opinion  that  victory  in  Indochina  is  an  interna-
I  tional  rather  than  a  local  matter,  and  essentially  political  as  well  as  military.

i

[[Document  42]

NSC  195th  Meeting
6  May  1954

ITEM  1  (For  Discussion)

j REPORT  BY  MR.  DULLES  ON  GENEVA  AND  INDO-CHINA

j 1.  Secretary  Dulles,  who  was  rather  pessimistic,  in  reporting  to  the  President

[yesterday  morning  on  the  Geneva  Conference,  made  the  following  points:  (a)
there  is  no  responsible  French  Government  with  which  to  deal;  (b)  the  British
have  declined  to  take  a  position  regarding  a  Southeast  Asia  regional  group-

■  ing  until  after  the  Geneva  Conference;  (c)  the  British  however  are  willing
to  proceed  with  secret  talks  with  us  regarding  the  political  and  military  scope

j  of  our  plans  for  SEA;  (d)  the  expected  Communist  proposal  re  Indo-China  will
call  for  evacuation  of  all  foreign  troops  and  elections  to  be  supervised  by  a
joint  Vietminh- Vietnam  Commission;  (e)  French  have  no  particular  form  of
settlement  in  mind;  UK  is  still  thinking  in  terms  of  partition.

2.  It  is  not  clear  how  the  NSC  discussion  will  develop,  but  it  seems  desirable

jthat  certain  questions  be  clarified  at  the  meeting.  They  are  along  this  line:

a.  Should  the  U.S.  resign  itself  to  being  unable  to  influence  any  further
the  French  and  U.K.  positions  at  Geneva?  (i.e.,  is  it  still  not  possible  to
stiffen  their  spines  by  any  conceivable  means — Presidential  talks,  threats,
sending  Mr.  Dulles  back  with  a  new  mandate,  etc. — so  as  to  assure  they
will  not  accept  a  dangerous  compromise.)

b.  Is  or  is  not  the  U.S.  prepared  to  commit  its  combat  forces  in  the
near  future,  in  some  form  of  regional  effort  if  possible,  to  save  the  parti-
tion or  loss  of  Indo-China?  (A  decision  in  principle  seems  necessary  now.
As  the  situation  is  at  present  we  are  saying  we  will  consider  this  if  the


I


500 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

parliaments  of  Australia,  New  Zealand,  etc.  agree,  but  it  is  not  clear  whether
we  mean  before  or  after  Indo-China  is  lost.)

c.  Is  the  U.S.  prepared  to  acquiesce  in  the  clearly  engineered  Communist  ;

aggression  in  and  taking  over  of  Indo-China — with  Red  Chinese  support —  ■

even  though  we  evaluate  this  loss  as  very  serious  to  the  free  world  and  even  i

though  we  have  the  military  means  to  redeem  the  situation?  (The  A-bomb)  |

3.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  sent  you  a  memorandum  several  days  ago  (see  TAB  I

A)  recommending  that  you  "secure  governmental  acceptance"  of  the  following  j

position:  1

In  the  event  of  a  cease  fire  in  Indochina,  the  shipment  of  military  end  :

items  under  U.S.  MDAP  .  .  .  will  immediately  be  suspended,  except  for  ;

such  spares  and  associated  maintenance  items  necessary  to  the  main-  j

tenance  of  equipment  in  operations.  The  entire  question  of  U.S.  aid  to  jj

Indochina  will  be  re-examined  in  the  light  of  circumstances  then  existing,  j

The  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  (ISA)  has  suggested  you  for-  |

ward  the  memo  to  the  NSC  saying  you  concur,  but  you  have  not  yet  acted  on  |

the  matter.  You  may  wish  to  raise  it  during  the  discussion.  j


[Document  43]  [

May  6,  1954  j

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  I

TEDUL  37  I

PRIORITY  I

Secretary  held  hour  and  half  briefing  of  25  leading  members  Congress  yester-  ,
day.  Generally  friendly,  constructive  atmosphere,  no  direct  criticism,  although  j
considerable  discussion  on  future  plans  and  weakness  of  British  and  French.

Secretary  described  set-up  of  Conference  and  briefly  went  over  Korean  devel-  i
opments.  Explained  difficulty  with  Allies  on  all-Korean  elections  and  trouble
finding  someone  to  speak  up  in  defense  of  U.S.  against  Communist  vilification.
Congressmen  showed  interest  in  this  and  asked  about  positions  our  various  ;
Allies.

Turning  to  Indochina,  Secretary  traced  developments  in  our  thinking  and
plans  since  inception  massive  aid  program  last  fall.  Three  prerequisites  demanded  I
from  French  had  then  seemed  to  be  met:  understanding  A.S.  become  independ-
ent, effective  program  for  rapid  training  of  natives,  aggressive  military  plan.
Prerequisites  would  lead  to  our  desired  objectives.  Navarre  Plan  still  sound,  but  I
French  will  for  offensive  action  and  even  ability  govern  themselves  disintegrated.  :
Following  development  united  action  concept  and  as  French  military  situation  i
deteriorated,  we  began  think  of  U.S.  military  intervention.  In  April  3  meeting  ^
with  Congressmen  agreed  objectives  of  earlier  prerequisites  must  be  met  to  in-
creased degree  and  other  interested  nations  must  join  in  before  such  intervention  j
could  be  authorized.  Secretary  described  London-Paris  trip  and  Eden's  reneging
on  communique.  Some  adverse  Congressional  comment  on  latter  and  Secretary
said  thought  Nehru  had  pressured  British.

Secretary  described  two  informal  French  requests  for  U.S.  air  intervention  on
April  4  and  22  and  his  replies  thereto.  Described  French  mood  of  extreme  .


Documents  501


i  urgency  and  British  Cabinet  confirmation  of  reversal  of  agreement  in  com-

I  munique  of  April  13.  British  terrified  by  H-bomb,  pressured  by  Nehru,  con-

{  trasted  their  giving  up  India  with  French  call  for  help  to  keep  Indochina,  and

j  gave  higher  rating  to  risk  of  Chinese  intervention  and  global  war  if  West  inter-

j  vened.  Secretary  read  from  memo  of  conversation  in  which  he  had  chastised

i;  Eden  for  British  stand.  Number  adverse  Congressional  comments  on  British

I  position,  especially  Judd.

j  Secretary  said  had  reached  three  conclusions.  U.S.  should  not  intervene

I  militarily  until  and  unless  prerequisites  agreed  on  at  April  4  meeting  were  ful-

1  filled.  Conditions  must  exist  for  successful  conclusion  of  war  and  such  was  not

!  now  case.  Participation  other  allies  academic  since  French  had  not  fulfilled  pre-

I  requisites.  Considerable  opposition  to  internationalization  of  war  in  France  any-

j  way.  This  was  Administration  position  on  intervention.  No  Congressional  com-

i  ments  on  this.

;  Secondly,  U.S.  must  push  rapidly  for  development  of  SEA  community,

I  probably  without  Vietnam  but  hopefully  with  Laos  and  Cambodia.  British  might

j  come  in  and  they  might  want  Burma  and  India  too.  We  were  agreeable  to  Burma.

!  This  community  might  offer  fair  chance  quote  insulate  unquote  rest  SEA

I  against  possible  loss  of  Vietnam.

I  Third  conclusion  was  we  should  not  write  off  British  and  French  in  spite  of

*  their  weakness  in  Asia.  Lack  of  100  per  cent  cooperation  one  of  welcome  dis-

1  advantages  of  democratic  system.

DULTE  51  then  received  and  Secretary  read  pertinent  parts.  Considerable

discussion  ensued  on  Eden's  idea  of  quote  five  white  powers  unquote  consulta-

|i  tion  and  conclusions  2  and  3  above.  Judd  strongly  against  Eden  quote  plan

;  unquote,  wanted  Asians  in  even  without  U.K.  and  France.  Knowland  agreed  on

importance  of  Asians,  as  did  several  others.  Knowland  said  we  should  have

I  commitments  from  U.K.,  Australia,  New  Zealand  and  others  to  help  us  if  needed

,  in  Korea  or  Japan,  et  cetera,  if  we  were  to  have  collective  security  pact  with

;  them  for  SEA,  which  he  personally  favored.  Secretary  said  Burma,  Thailand,

|[  Philippines  plus  A.S.  would  help  and  that  he  told  Eden  he  wanted  Formosa  in  if

j  British  brought  in  India.  McCormack  and  Smith  supported  Secretary  on  con-

!j  elusion  three  and  several  others  did  too.

!'  Secretary  described  effect  of  Indochina  developments  on  French  government

!  and  EDC.  Russell  paid  fine  tribute  to  Secretary  for  briefings  and  cooperation
with  Congress  and  others  expressed  appreciation.

DULLES


I [Document  44]

The  White  House
Washington
May  7,  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

CHAIRMAN,  JOINT  CHIEFS  OF  STAFF

At  a  meeting  in  the  President's  office  with  the  President,  J.  F.  Dulles  and
Cutler,  the  President  approved  Paragraph  Ih  of  the  tentative  Record  of  Actions
jv  of  5/6/54  Meeting  of  the  National  Security  Council,  but  wished  that  the  advice
to  Smith  relative  to  Eden's  proposal  should  also  make  clear  the  following  points:


502 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

1.  Five  Power  Staff  Agency,  alone  or  with  other  nations,  is  not  to  the
United  States  a  satisfactory  substitute  for  a  broad  political  coalition  which
will  include  the  South  East  Asian  countries  which  are  to  be  defended.

2.  Five  Power  Staff  Agency  examination  is  acceptable  to  see  how  these
nations  can  give  military  aid  to  the  Southeast  Asian  countries  in  their  co-
operative defense  effort.

3.  The  United  States  will  not  agree  to  a  "white  man's  party"  to  determine  .
the  problems  of  the  Southeast  Asian  nations.

ROBERT  CUTLER
Special  Assistant
to  the  President

May  7,  1954  |

At  a  meeting  in  the  President's  office  this  morning  with  Dulles,  three  topics  \
were  discussed:  '

1.  Whether  the  President  should  approve  paragraph \b  of  the  tentative  j
Record  of  Action  of  the  5/6/54  NSC  Meeting,  which  covers  the  proposed  \
answer  to  the  Eden  proposal.  The  Secretary  of  State  thought  the  text  was  correct.  |;
Wilson  and  Radford  preferred  the  draft  message  to  Smith  for  Eden  prepared  j
yesterday  by  MacArthur  and  Captain  Anderson,  and  cleared  by  the  JCS,  which  j
included  in  the  Five  Power  Staff  Agency  Thailand  and  the  Philippines.  Radford
thinks  that  the  Agency  (which  has  hitherto  been  not  disclosed  in  SEA)  has  ;
really  completed  its  military  planning;  that  if  it  is  enlarged  by  top  level  personnel,  ■
its  actions  will  be  necessarily  open  to  the  world;  that  therefore  some  Southeast
Asian  countries  should  be  included  in  it,  and  he  fears  Eden's  proposal  as  an
intended  delaying  action.

The  President  approved  the  text  of  paragraph  \b,  but  suggested  that  Smith's
reply  to  Eden's  proposal  should  make  clear  the  following:

1.  Five  Power  Staff  Agency,  alone  or  with  other  nations,  is  not  to  the  ,
United  States  a  satisfactory  substitute  for  a  broad  political  coalition  which
will  include  the  Southeast  Asian  countries  which  are  to  be  defended.

2.  Five  Power  Staff  Agency  examination  is  acceptable  to  see  how  these
nations  can  give  military  aid  to  the  Southeast  Asian  countries  in  their  co-
operative defense  effort.

3.  The  United  States  will  not  agree  to  a  "white  man'^  party"  to  determine
the  problems  of  the  Southeast  Asian  nations.

I  was  instructed  to  advise  Wilson  and  Radford  of  the  above,  and  have  done  so.

2.  The  President  went  over  the  draft  of  the  speech  which  Dulles  is  going  to
make  tonight,  making  quite  a  few  suggestions  and  changes  in  text.  He  thought  ,
additionally  the  speech  should  include  some  easy  to  understand  slogans,  such  as  \
"The  U.S.  will  never  start  a  war,"  "The  U.S.  will  not  go  to  war  without  Con-
gressional authority,"  "The  U.S.,  as  always,  is  trying  to  organize  cooperative
efforts  to  sustain  the  peace."  )

3.  With  reference  to  the  cease-fire  proposal  transmitted  by  Bidault  to  the
French  Cabinet,  I  read  the  following,  as  views  principally  of  military  members  of  ,
the  Planning  Board,  expressed  in  their  yesterday  afternoon  meeting:

1.  U.S.  should  not  support  the  Bidault  proposal.

2.  Reasons  for  this  position:


Documents  503


a.  The  mere  proposal  of  the  cease-fire  at  the  Geneva  Conference  would
destroy  the  will  to  fight  of  French  forces  and  make  fence-sitters  jump  to
Vietminh  side.

b.  The  Communists  would  evade  covertly  cease-fire  controls.

j  3.  The  U.S.  should  (as  a  last  act  to  save  Indo-China)  propose  to  France  that
I  if  the  following  5  conditions  are  met,  the  U.S.  will  go  to  Congress  for  authority
ii to  intervene  with  combat  forces :

a.  grant  of  genuine  freedom  for  Associated  States

b.  U.S.  take  major  responsibility  for  training  indigenous  forces

c.  U.S.  share  responsibility  for  military  planning

d.  French  forces  to  stay  in  the  fight  and  no  requirement  of  replacement
by  U.S.  forces.

{e.  Action  under  UN  auspices?)
This  offer  to  be  made  known  simultaneously  to  the  other  members  of  the
proposed  regional  grouping  (U.K.,  Australia,  N.Z.,  Thailand,  Associated
States,  Philippines)  in  order  to  enlist  their  participation.

!  I  then  summarized  possible  objections  to  making  the  above  proposal  to  the
\  French:

a.  No  French  Government  is  now  competent  to  act  in  a  lasting  way.

b.  There  is  no  indication  France  wants  to  "internationalize"  the  conflict.

c.  The  U.S.  proposal  would  be  made  without  the  prior  assurance  of  a
regional  grouping  of  SEA  States,  a  precondition  of  Congress;  although  this
point  might  be  added  as  another  condition  to  the  proposal.

d.  U.S.  would  be  "bailing  out  colonial  France"  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.

e.  U.S.  cannot  undertake  alone  to  save  every  situation  of  trouble.

I  concluded  that  some  PB  members  felt  that  it  had  never  been  made  clear
I  to  the  French  that  the  U.S.  was  willing  to  ask  for  Congressional  authority,  if
I  certain  fundamental  preconditions  were  met;  that  these  matters  had  only  been
ij  hinted  at,  and  that  the  record  of  history  should  be  clear  as  to  the  U.S.  position.
:  Dulles  was  interested  to  know  the  President's  views,  because  he  is  talking  with
:  Ambassador  Bonnet  this  afternoon.  He  indicated  that  he  would  mention  these
matters  to  Bonnet,  perhaps  making  a  more  broad  hint  than  heretofore.  He  would
not  circulate  any  formal  paper  to  Bonnet,  or  to  anyone  else.

The  President  referred  to  the  proposition  advanced  by  Governor  Stassen  at  the
April  29  Council  Meeting  as  not  having  been  thoroughly  thought  out.  He  said
that  he  had  been  trying  to  get  France  to  "internationalize"  matters  for  a  long
time,  and  they  are  not  willing  to  do  so.  If  it  were  thought  advisable  at  this  time
to  point  out  to  the  French  the  essential  preconditions  to  the  U.S.  asking  for
'  Congressional  authority  to  intervene,  then  it  should  also  be  made  clear  to  the
i  French  as  an  additional  precondition  that  the  U.S.  would  never  intervene  alone,
'  that  there  must  be  an  invitation  by  the  indigenous  people,  and  that  there  must
be  some  kind  of  regional  and  collective  action.

I  understand  that  Dulles  will  decide  the  extent  to  which  he  cares  to  follow
this  line  with  Ambassador  Bonnet.  This  discussion  may  afford  Dulles  guidance  in
replying  to  Smith's  request  about  a  U.S.  alternative  to  support  the  Bidault
\  proposal,  but  there  really  was  no  decision  as  to  the  U.S.  attitude  toward  the
,  cease-fire  proposal  itself.


504 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  45]

Excerpts  from  the  First  Plenary  Session  |

The  Geneva  Conference  j

Indochina  Phase  !

Mays,  1954  !

I

The  French  Proposals  j

".  .  .  .  The  French  Government  is  thus  confident  that  it  has  done  every-  I
thing  in  its  power  to  put  an  end  to  the  conflict.  Not  only  has  it  removed  all  ||
reason  for  this  conflict  to  exist  by  recognizing  fully  and  unreservedly  the  in-  ]
dependence  of  Viet-Nam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  but,  furthermore,  the  French  I
Government  has  manifested  for  a  long  time  its  readiness  and  its  desire  of  obtain-  |
ing  a  reasonable  settlement  which  would  allow  for  the  hostilities  to  be  brought  i|
to  an  end.  This  is  the  main  and  primary  task  assigned  to  this  Conference.  .  •  •  ;

"We  propose  that  the  Conference  should,  first  of  all,  declare  that  it  adopt  the  |
principle  of  a  general  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Indochina  based  upon  the  f
necessary  guarantees  of  security.  ...  i,

".  .  .  .  in  agreeing  upon  the  withdrawal  of  the  invading  forces  and  the  restora-  \
tion  of  the  territorial  integrity  of  those  states.  ...  |

".  .  .  .  For  France  there  is  a  Viet-Nam  state  of  which  the  unity,  territorial  \
integrity  and  independence  must  be  respected.  ...

.  .  .  the  most  just  solution  of  the  political  problem  can  be  found  and
finally  assured  only  when  the  population  is  in  a  position  to  express  in  complete
freedom  its  sovereign  will  by  means  of  free  elections.  For  the  present  moment
I  repeat  the  problem  is  that  of  bringing  about  a  cessation  of  hostilities  and  the  :
guaranteeing  of  that  cessation.  These  guarantees,  in  our  opinion,  must  be  of  two  ;
kinds.  I

".  .  .  .  the  regular  forces  of  the  two  parties  would  be  brought  together  in
clearly  demarcated  regrouping  zones  ....  the  implementation  of  the  agree-
ment should  be  placed  under  the  supervision  of  international  commissions.  .  .  .

".  .  .  .  the  agreement  ....  should  be  guaranteed  in  appropriate  conditions
by  the  states  participating  in  the  present  Conference.  .  ;  .

".  .  .  .  The  French  proposal  is  as  follows:  \

'T.  Vietnam  \

1.  All  regular  units  to  be  assembled  in  assembly  areas  to  be  defined  by  the  ;:
Conference  on  the  basis  of  proposals  by  the  Commanders-in-Chief.  \

2.  All  elements  not  belonging  either  to  the  army  or  to  the  police  forces  to  be
disarmed.

3.  All  prisoners  of  war  and  civil  internees  to  be  released  immediately.  ;

4.  Execution  of  the  above  provisions  to  be  supervised  by  international  com-  •
missions.

5.  Hostilities  to  cease  as  soon  as  the  agreement  is  signed.  The  assembly  of
troops  and  disarmament  of  forces  as  above  provided  to  begin  not  later
than  X  days  (the  number  to  be  fixed  by  the  Conference)  after  the  signature
of  the  agreement.  ...


Documents  505


"II.  Cambodia  and  Laos

1.  All  regular  and  irregular  Vietminh  forces  which  have  entered  the  country
to  be  evacuated.

2.  All  elements  which  do  not  belong  either  to  the  army  or  to  the  police  forces
to  be  disarmed,

3.  All  prisoners  of  war  and  civil  internees  to  be  released  immediately.

4.  Execution  of  the  above  provisions  to  be  supervised  by  international  com-
missions.

"III.  These  agreements  shall  be  guaranteed  by  the  States  participating  in  the
Geneva  Conference.  In  the  event  of  any  violation  thereof  there  shall  be  an
immediate  consultation  between  the  guarantor  States  for  the  purpose  of
taking  appropriate  measures  either  individually  or  collectively.

"This,  Mr.  President,  is  the  proposal  submitted  to  the  Conference  on  the
responsibility  of  the  French  Delegation  and  by  that  Delegation.  Thank  you,
Sir.  .  .  .

The  Viet  Minh  Proposals

".  .  .  .  In  the  same  spirit,  expressing  the  sentiment  of  the  three  peoples  of
Vietnam,  Khmer,  and  Pathet  Lao,  the  delegation  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of
Viet  Nam  proposes  to  the  conference  that  it  invite  the  official  representatives  of
the  governments  of  resistance  of  Khmer  and  of  the  government  of  resistance
of  Pathet  Lao  to  take  part  in  its  work.  We  submit  this  proposal  having  in  mind
the  following:

".  .  .  .  the  peoples  of  Khmer  and  Pathet  Lao  have  liberated  vast  areas  of
their  national  territory.  .  .  .

".  .  .  .  These  governments  represent  the  great  majority  of  the  people  of  Khmer
and  Lao,  the  aspirations  of  whom  they  symbolize.  .  .  .

".  .  .  .  Alas,  the  delegation  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  pro-
poses to  the  conference  that  it  adopt  the  following  resolution:

In  view  of  the  present  situation  of  the  countries  of  Indochina  and  in  the
interests  of  the  thorough  and  objective  examination  of  the  question  of  the
cessation  of  hostilities  and  the  reestablishment  of  peace  in  Indochina,
the  conference  recognizes  the  necessity  to  invite  the  representatives  of  the
governments  of  resistance  of  Khmer  and  Pathet  Lao  to  take  part  in  the
work  of  the  conference  in  regard  to  the  question  of  the  reestablishment  of
peace  in  Indochina.

"Having  submitted  this  proposal  to  the  conference,  I  would  ask  the  President  of
this  meeting  to  authorize  me  to  continue  my  statement  when  the  conference  has
discussed  the  proposal  that  I  have  submitted.  .  .  ."

The  United  States  Proposal

"The  United  States  proposes  that  any  idea  of  inviting  these  nonexistent,  so-
called  governments  be  rejected.  .  .  .

I  The  Red  China  Position

.  .  .  The  delegation  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  fully  supports  the
views  of  Mr.  Pham  van  Dong.  .  .  .


506 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


The  Soviet  Union  Position  \

"In  view  of  the  aforesaid,  the  Soviet  Delegation  supports  the  proposal  of  the  !

delegation  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  to  invite  the  delegates  of  i

the  Democratic  Governments  of  Pathet  Lao  and  Khmer  to  take  part  in  our  con-  |
ference.  .  .  ."


[Document  46]  |

OFFICE  OF  THE  ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE  \
WASHINGTON  25,  D.C.  \

9  May  1954  \

INTERNATIONAL  SECURITY  AFFAIRS  |

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE  |i

SUBJECT: Future  U.S.  Action  Regarding  Indo-China  |

1.  In  light  of  the  French  having  tabled  an  armistice  proposal  at  Geneva,  the  !
United  States  must  now  decide  whether:  f

i

a.  To  intervene  actively  in  the  Indo-China  war  to  redeem  the  situation.  |

b.  To  exercise  all  feasible  pressure  to  require  the  French  Government  ;
to  avoid  all  compromise  at  Geneva  and  to  take  increased  effective  military  \
and  political  action  against  the  Viet  Minh  in  Indo-China.  This  appears  j
realistically  possible  only  if  the  decision  to  implement  a  above  is  also  made.  I

c.  To  adopt  a  passive  policy  toward  the  negotiations  at  Geneva  while  j
endeavoring  to  organize  hastily  a  regional  grouping,  with  U.S.  participation,  ,
to  hold  what  remains  of  Southeast  Asia.

2.  Decisions  a  plus  b  offer  the  only  sure  way  to  stop  the  Communist  advance.  '
They  involve  substantial  risk  of  war  with  Red  China  and  increased  risk  of  general
war.  However,  recognizing  the  steadily  increasing  Soviet  capabilities  in  nuclear
warfare  and  the  consequent  steady  diminution  of  the  present  military  advantage
of  the  U.S.  over  the  USSR,  these  increased  risks  can  more  surely  and  safely  be  ,
accepted  now  than  ever  again.

3.  Decision  c  would  be  a  compromise  involving  clear  possibilities  for  piece-
meal advancement  of  Communist  control  over  the  balance  of  free  Asia  despite
the  best  efforts  of  the  U.S.  to  the  contrary.  The  likelihood  of  further  such  ad-
vancement would  be  somewhat  diminished  if  the  U.S.  made  publicly  clear  that  i
the  further  support  by  Moscow  and  Peiping  of  Communist  aggression  or  subver-
sion, as  judged  by  the  U.S.,  would  entail  direct  military  action  by  the  U.S.  against
the  source  or  sources  of  this  support.  However,  it  might  be  months  or  years  \
before  further  subversion  would  enable  such  a  U.S.  judgment.  By  then  the  in-  ;
creased  Soviet  nuclear  capability  might  well  inhibit  the  U.S.  Government  from
implementing  its  announced  intention.  Asia  could  thus  be  lost.

4.  Therefore,  it  would  appear  that  the  U.S.  Government  must  decide  whether  j
to  take  the  steps  necessary  to  contain  Communism  in  Asia  within  Red  China  by  i
intervention  in  Indo-China  or  accept  the  probable  loss  of  Asia  to  Communism.

C.  H.  BONESTEEL,  III  '
Brigadier  General,  United  States  Army
Defense  Member,  NSC  Planning  Board


Documents  507


[Document  47]

12  May  1954

SENT  TO:  AMCON  GENEVA  TOSEC  138

FOR  THE  UNDER  SECRETARY  FROM  THE  SECRETARY

BEGIN  VERBATIM  TEXT

The  following  basic  instructions,  which  have  been  approved  by  the  President,
and  which  are  in  confirmation  of  those  already  given  you  orally,  will  guide  you,
as  head  of  the  United  States  Delegation,  in  your  participation  in  the  Indochina
phase  of  the  Geneva  Conference.

1.  The  presence  of  a  United  States  representative  during  the  discussion  at  the
Geneva  Conference  of  "the  problem  of  restoring  peace  in  Indochina"  rests  on
the  Berlin  Agreement  of  February  18,  1954.  Under  that  agreement  the  US,  UK,
France,  and  USSR  agreed  that  the  four  of  them  plus  other  interested  states
should  be  invited  to  a  conference  at  Geneva  on  April  26  "for  the  purpose  of
reaching  a  peaceful  settlement  of  the  Korean  question"  and  agreed  further,  that
"the  problem  of  restoring  peace  in  Indochina"  would  also  be  discussed  at
Geneva  by  the  four  powers  represented  at  Berlin,  and  Communist  China  and
other  interested  states.

2.  You  will  not  deal  with  the  delegates  of  the  Chinese  Communist  regime,
or  any  other  regime  not  now  diplomatically  recognized  by  the  United  States,  on
any  terms  which  imply  political  recognition  or  which  concede  to  that  regime
any  status  other  than  that  of  a  regime  with  which  it  is  necessary  to  deal  on  a
de  facto  basis  in  order  to  end  aggression,  or  the  threat  of  aggression,  and  to
obtain  peace.

3.  The  position  of  the  United  States  in  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Geneva
Conference  is  that  of  an  interested  nation  which,  however,  is  neither  a  belligerent
nor  a  principal  in  the  negotiation.

4.  The  United  States  is  participating  in  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Confer-
ence in  order  thereby  to  assist  in  arriving  at  decisions  which  will  help  the  nations
of  that  area  peacefully  to  enjoy  territorial  integrity  and  political  independence
under  stable  and  free  governments  with  the  opportunity  to  expand  their  econo-
mies, to  realize  their  legitimate  national  aspirations,  and  to  develop  security
through  individual  and  collective  defense  against  aggression,  from  within  or
without.  This  implies  that  these  people  should  not  be  amalgamated  into  the
Communist  bloc  of  imperialistic  dictatorship.

5.  The  United  States  is  not  prepared  to  give  its  express  or  implied  approval
to  any  cease-fire,  armistice,  or  other  settlement  which  would  have  the  effect  of
subverting  the  existing  lawful  governments  of  the  three  aforementioned  states  or
of  permanently  impairing  their  territorial  integrity  or  of  placing  in  jeopardy  the
forces  of  the  French  Union  in  Indochina,  or  which  otherwise  contravened  the
principles  stated  in  (4)  above.

6.  You  should,  insofar  as  is  compatible  with  these  instructions,  cooperate
with  the  Delegation  of  France  and  with  the  Delegations  of  other  friendly  par-
ticipants in  this  phase  of  the  Conference.

7.  If  in  your  judgment  continued  participation  in  the  Indochina  phase  of  the
Conference  appears  likely  to  involve  the  United  States  in  a  result  inconsistent
with  its  policy,  as  stated  above,  you  should  immediately  so  inform  your  Govern-


508 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

ment,  recommending  either  a  withdrawal  or  the  limitation  of  the  US  role  to  that
of  an  observer.  If  the  situation  develops  such  that,  in  your  opinion,  either  of
such  actions  is  essential  under  the  circumstances  and  time  is  lacking  for  con-
sultation with  Washington,  you  may  act  in  your  discretion.

8.  You  are  authorized  to  inform  other  delegations  at  Geneva  of  these  instruc-
tions.

DULLES


[Document  48]

19  May  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR:  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE
SUBJECT:  Indo-China

1.  I  am  becoming  increasingly  concerned  over  the  frequency  of  statements  by
individuals  of  influence  within  and  without  the  government  that  United  States
air  and  sea  forces  alone  could  solve  our  problems  in  Indo-China,  and  equally  so
over  the  very  evident  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  logistics  factors  affecting  opera-
tions in  that  area.

2.  Indo-China  is  almost  totally  devoid  of  local  resources  which  would  be  of
use  to  our  Armed  Forces.  It  has  a  tropical,  monsoon  climate  with  pronounced
wet  and  dry  seasons  and  the  disease  and  morale  hazards  are  high  for  Caucasian
troops.  The  population,  when  not  hostile,  is  untrustworthy.  However,  the  princi-
pal deficiency  of  Indo-China  as  a  base  for  the  support  of  large  military  operations
lies  in  the  inadequacy  of  its  facilities  for  the  movement  of  supplies.

3.  The  two  principal  ports  are  Saigon  and  Haiphong,  with  a  combined  daily
capacity  of  15,100  short  tons.  Both  are  inland  river  ports  requiring  considerable
dredging  before  maximum  potential  can  be  obtained.  There  are  nine  secondary
ports  whose  tonnage  capacities  vary  from  100  to  1,400  tons.

4.  Because  of  the  inadequacies  of  the  road,  railroad,  and  waterway  systems
north  from  Saigon,  this  port  would  be  of  very  little  use  for  the  support  of  opera-
tions in  the  Tonkin  Delta.  Haiphong  could  not  be  used  without  augmentation  of
its  capacity  including  full  use  of  secondary  ports  and  all  beaches.  The  tonnage
capacity  of  the  road  and  railroad  system  from  Haiphong  to  Hanoi  is  even  now
less  than  the  port  capacity  of  Haiphong.

5.  It  would  be  necessary  to  make  full  use  of  the  air  for  supply  and  evacua-
tion as  well  as  for  tactical  support.  Much  construction,  to  mclude  lengthening  I
and  reinforcing  of  runways,  of  extreme  difficulty  during  the  rainy  season,  would  '
be  necessary.  Only  three  airfields  in  Indo-China,  Haiphong/Cat  Bi,  Tourane  and
Tan  Sou  Nhut  (near  Saigon)  have  runways  over  7,500  feet  long  and  have  re-
ported pavement  strengths  which  could  support  B-45  bomber  operations.  Eight
fields  can  handle  transport  planes  as  large  as  a  C-119;  an  additional  seven  fields
can  accommodate  C-46's.  Sustained  operations  could  not  be  undertaken  on  most
of  these  fields  in  the  rainy  season.  Within  the  Delta  itself,  there  are  ten  airfields  '
of  all  types  of  which  only  one.  Cat  Bi,  is  currently  being  used  by  C-119's  or  ;
C-54's.  :

6.  Even  were  it  decided  to  limit  the  employment  of  United  States  forces  to  ;
naval  and  air,  which  in  itself  would  be  a  basically  faulty  military  decision,  it
would  devolve  upon  the  Army  to  perform  the  bulk  of  the  logistical  services  and

it  is  essential  that  the  magnitude  of  the  effort  required  be  clearly  understood.


Documents  509


j  7.  The  adverse  conditions  prevalent  in  this  area  combine  all  those  which  con-
fronted United  States  forces  in  previous  campaigns  in  the  South  and  Southwest

ij  Pacific  and  Eastern  Asia,  with  the  additional  grave  complication  of  a  large
native  population,  in  thousands  of  villages,  most  of  which  are  about  evenly  di-
vided between  friendly  and  hostile.

8.  The  complex  nature  of  these  problems  would  require  a  major  United  States

I logistical  effort.  It  explodes  the  myth  that  air  and  sea  forces  could  solve  the

I Indo-China  problems.  If  United  States  land-based  forces  are  projected  any  ap-

Ipreciable  distance  inland,  as  would  be  essential,  they  would  require  constant  local
security  at  their  every  location,  and  for  their  every  activity.  The  Army  would
I  have  to  provide  these  forces,  their  total  would  be  very  large,  and  the  time  to
I provide  them  would  be  extensive.

ROBERT  T.  STEVENS

I  Secretary  of  the  Army


{ [Document  49]

I  21  May  1954

I MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

{ Subject:  Defense  of  Southeast  Asia  in  the  Event
j  of  Loss  of  Indochina  to  the  Communists

j  1.  As  a  result  of  recent  military  and  poHtical  developments,  including  certain
1  public  statements  by  high-level  officials  of  the  United  States,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
I  Staff  consider  that  it  is  incumbent  upon  them  to  determine  what  military  forces
;  :and  resources  would  be  required  to  hold  Southeast  Asia  against  further  Com-
munist aggression  in  the  event  Indochina  is  lost  to  the  Communists.

2.  Currently  approved  United  States  Government  objectives  regarding  South-
east Asia  are  based  on  the  considerations  that :

a.  The  passing  of  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  into  the  Communist
orbit  would  be  inimical  to  the  security  interests  of  the  United  States,  and

b.  The  loss of  Indochina  to the Communist orbit could lead to  the
eventual  loss  of  the  other  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  to  the  Communist  orbit.

3.  In  the  event  that  Indochina  is  lost  to  the  Communists,  the  United  States
must  take  as  an  objective  the  prevention  of  the  loss  of  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia
(Thailand,  Burma,  and  Malaya) to  the  Communists.

4.  There  are  two  basic  military  concepts  for  the  defense  of  Southeast  Asia:

a.  Static  type  defense  (Korea  type) .

b.  An  offensive  to  attack  the  source  of  Communist  military  power  being
applied  in  Southeast  Asia.

5.  The  force  requirements  and  inherent  logistic  implications  for  a  "static"
defense  of  the  remaining  countries  of  Southeast  Asia — Burma,  Thailand,  and
Malaya  are  of  the  order  of  magnitude  as  shown  in  Appendices  "A"  and  "B"
hereto.  So  long  as  Burma  and  Thailand  are  not  under  Communist  control,  the
geography  of  the  area  and  the  lack  of  a  Chinese  Communist  capability  for  a
major  overseas  attack  renders  Malaya  secure  from  external  attack.  Therefore,


510 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

the  force  requirements  are  limited  to  those  necessary  to  defend  Burma  and  Thai-
land and  to  provide  internal  security  against  infiltration  and  subversion  in  Malaya.
Should  Burma  and  Thailand  be  lost,  to  the  Communists  prior  to  an  Allied  deci-
sion to  hold  a  line  in  Southeast  Asia,  the  defensive  position  would  have  to  be
established  in  Malaya.

6.  A  study  of  the  above  requirements  and  implications  reveals  the  following
extensive  and  damaging  weaknesses  inherent  in  this  concept:

a.  It  is  estimated  that  it  would  take  a  minimum  of  12  months  to  build
up  the  necessary  base  complex  and  facilities  required  to  support  the  forces
indicated.

b.  These  forces  would  have  to  remain  for  an  extended  period.

c.  The  commitment  in  manpower  and  material  incident  to  maintaining
these  forces  in  Southeast  Asia  for  such  a  period  would  be  unacceptable  from
the  overall  viewpoint.

d.  The  presence  of  large  numbers  of  United  States  Commonwealth,  and
French  troops  in  this  area  would  provide  a  basis  for  Communist  propaganda
to  develop  and  intensify  anti-Western  sentiment.

e.  The  dissipation  of  allied  strength  through  the  commitment  of  forces
of  this  magnitude  to  a  "static"  defense  of  Southeast  Asia  would  contribute
to  the  realization  of  the  politico-military  objectives  of  the  USSR  vis-a-vis
the  free  world.

/.  Execution  of  static  defense  plan  would  result  in  maldeployment  and
seriously  reduce  the  flexibility  of  employment  of  United  States  forces.  This
could  seriously  jeopardize  the  United  States  capability  of  supporting  logisti-
cally  our  present  war  plans.

7.  In  view  of  the  foregoing,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  from  the
military  viewpoint  the  concept  of  a  static-type  defense  is  unsound.

8.  In  stating  certain  implementing  actions  to  the  current  military  posture  of
the  United  States,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  stated  inter  alia:

Certain  other  countries  such  as  Indochina,  to  which  the  United  States
has  no  specific  commitment,  are  of  such  importance  to  the  United  States
that  an  attack  on  them  probably  would  compel  the  United  States  to  react
with  military  force  either  locally  at  the  point  of  attack  or  generally  against
the  military  power  of  the  aggressor.

It  is  considered  that  the  rest  of  the  Southeast  Asian  countries  are  included  in
the  above  category.

9.  In  view  of  the  above,  the  United  States  should  adopt  the  concept  of  offen-
sive actions  against  the  "military  power  of  the  aggressor,"  in  this  instance  Com-
munist China,  rather  than  the  concept  of  "reaction  locally  at  the  point  of  attack,"
which  is  the  thesis  of  the  action  outlined  in  paragraphs  5  and  6  above.

10.  The  force  requirements  and  the  logistic  support  for  the  operations  en-
visaged in  paragraph  9  above  are  being  considered  but  have  not  been  fully  de-
veloped. However,  it  is  felt  that  adoption  of  this  concept  would  provide  a  more
acceptable  return  for  the  manpower  and  resources  expended  than  would  be  the
case  in  the  concept  of  a  static  defense.


Documents  511


11.  Upon  the  decision  to  implement  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  courses
of  action,  it  would  be  necessary  to  insure  the  degree  of  mobihzation  required  to
take  care  of  the  increased  possibility  of  a  general  war.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff:

ARTHUR  RADFORD,

Chairman,

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  50]

26  May  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

Subject:  Studies  with  Respect  to  Possible  U.S.
Action  Regarding  Indochina

1.  Reference  is  made  to  the  memorandum  by  the  Acting  Secretary  of  Defense,
dated  18  May  1954,  subject  as  above,  wherein  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  were  re-
quested to  prepare  certain  studies,  and  agreed  outline  answers  to  certain  ques-
tions relating  thereto,  for  discussion  with  the  Acting  Secretary  of  Defense  on  or
before  24  May,  and  for  subsequent  submission  to  the  National  Security  Council
(NSC).

2.  a.  The  studies  requested  by  the  Acting  Secretary  of  Defense  were  devel-
oped within  the  parameters  prescribed  in  the  memorandum  by  the  Executive
Secretary,  NSC,  dated  18  May  1954,  subject  as  above.  This  memorandum  is
interpreted  as  assuming  no  concurrent  involvement  in  Korea.  This  assump-
tion may  be  quite  unrealistic  and  lead  to  malemployment  of  available
forces.  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  desire  to  point  out  their  belief  that,  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  United  States,  with  reference  to  the  Far  East  as  a
whole,  Indochina  is  devoid  of  decisive  military  objectives  and  the  allocation
of  more  than  token  U.S.  armed  forces  in  Indochina  would  be  a  serious  diver-
sion of  limited  U.S.  capabilities.  The  principal  sources  of  Viet  Minh  military
supply  lie  outside  Indochina.  The  destruction  or  neutralization  of  these
sources  in  China  proper  would  materially  reduce  the  French  military  prob-
lems in  Indochina.

b.  In  connection  with  the  above,  it  may  be  readily  anticipated  that,  upon
Chinese  Communist  intervention  in  Indochina,  the  French  would  promptly
request  the  immediate  deployment  of  U.S.  ground  and  air  forces,  additional
naval  forces,  and  a  considerable  increase  in  MDAF  armament  and  equip-
ment. The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  stated  their  belief  that  committing  to
the  Indochina  conflict  naval  forces  in  excess  of  a  Fast  Carrier  Task  Force
and  supporting  forces,  as  necessary  in  accordance  with  the  developments  in
the  situation,  of  basing  substantial  air  forces  in  Indochina,  will  involve
maldeployment  of  forces  and  reduce  readiness  to  meet  probable  Chinese
Communist  reaction  elsewhere  in  the  Far  East.  Simultaneously,  it  is  neces-
sary to  keep  in  mind  the  considerable  Allied  military  potential  available  in
the  Korea-Japan-Okinawa  area.

c.  In  light  of  the  above,  it  is  clear  that  the  denial  of  these  forces  to  Indo-
china could  result  in  a  schism  between  the  United  States  and  France  unless


512 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

they  were  employed  elsewhere.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  have  plans,  both  approved  and  under  consideration,  which
provide  for  the  employment  of  these  forces  in  combat  operations  outside
Indochina.  Nevertheless,  it  is  desired  to  repeat  that  this  particular  report  is
responsive  to  the  question  of  U.S.  intervention  in  Indochina  only.  j

ASSUMING  THE  CHINESE  COMMUNISTS  INTERVENE

I
I

3.  Strategic  Concept  and  Plan  of  Operation  \

Seek  to  create  conditions  through  the  destruction  of  effective  Communist  forces  '
and  their  means  for  support  in  the  Indochina  action  and  by  reducing  Chinese

Communist  capability  for  further  aggression,  under  which  Associated  States  forces  j

could  assume  responsibility  for  the  defense  of  Indochina.  In  the  light  of  this  con-  \

cept  the  major  courses  of  action  would  be  as  follows:  |!

a.  Employing  atomic  weapons,  whenever  advantageous,  as  well  as  other  '
weapons,  conduct  offensive  air  operations  against  selected  military  targets
in  Indochina  and  against  those  military  targets  in  China,  Hainan,  and  other
Communist-held  offshore  islands  which  are  being  used  by  the  Communists
in  direct  support  of  their  operations,  or  which  threaten  the  security  of  U.S.
and  allied  forces  in  the  area.

b.  Simultaneously,  French  Union  Forces,  augmented  by  U.S.  naval  and  I
air  forces,  would  exploit  by  coordinated  ground,  naval,  and  air  action  such  ;
successes  as  may  be  gained  as  a  result  of  the  aforementioned  air  operations
in  order  to  destroy  enemy  forces  in  Indochina.

c.  Conduct  coordinated  ground,  naval,  and  air  action  to  destroy  enemy
forces  in  Indochina.

d.  In  the  light  of  circumstances  prevailing  at  the  time,  and  subject  to  an
evaluation  of  the  results  of  operations  conducted  under  subparagraphs  a
and  b  above,  be  prepared  to  take  further  action  against  Communist  China
to  reduce  its  war-making  capability,  such  as:

(1)  Destruction  of  additional  selected  military  targets.  In  connection
with  these  additional  targets,  such  action  requires  an  enlarged  but  highly
selective  atomic  offensive  in  addition  to  attacks  employing  other  weapons  :
systems.

(2)  Blockade  of  the  China  coast.  This  might  be  instituted  progressively
from  the  outset.  i

(3)  Seizure  or  neutralization  of  Hainan  Island.  i

(4)  Operations  against  the  Chinese  mainland  by  Chinese  Nationalist
forces.

4.  Forces  Required  of  Each  Nation  Participating  '

The  forces  which  would  be  employed  under  current  plans  during  the  initial
phases  of  the  above  operations  are  those  indicated  in  the  Appendix  hereto.  The
duration  of  the  commitment  of  these  forces  would  depend  on  the  success  of
French  Union  forces  operations  supported  by  U.S.  naval  and  air  operations  in
defeating  communist  forces  in  Indochina.

5.  Normal  Service  logistic  arrangement  for  United  States  Forces  would  pre-
vail. CINCPAC  would  be  responsible  for  providing  logistic  support.  CINCFE
would  assist  by  providing  material  and  logistic  support  as  mutually  agreed  with


Documents  513


CINCPAC,  or  as  directed  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  The  facihties  of  MATS
and  MSTS  would  be  made  available  to  CINCPAC  as  directed.  Existing  U.S.
bases  in  Western  Pacific  are  available.  Bases  with  limited  facilities  in  Indochina
and  the  Philippines  (other  than  U.S.)  would  be  available.  Effort  would  be  made
to  obtain  or  utilize  bases  on  Formosa,  if  required.  The  French  would  provide

i  their  own  logistic  support  within  capabilities.  United  States  logistical  support  of
French  Union  Forces  and  Associated  States  would  be  provided  as  required.  The
Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group,  Indochina,  would  coordinate  and  arrange
for  utilization  of  facilities  and  services  and  would  provide  logistic  support  to

I the  United  States  Liaison  Groups  and  Training  Missions.  In  the  event  operations

j should  involve  the  use  of  NORC  Forces,  United  States  logistic  support  above  the

I current  NORC  MDA  Program  would  be  provided.

6.  Plan  for  Command  Structure

In  accordance  with  the  Unified  Command  Plan,  CINCPAC  would  exercise
i unified  command  of  assigned  forces.  He  would  insure  the  coordination  of  all
i operations  in  Southeast  Asia  and  provide  for  the  necessary  ground-air  coordi-
I nation  between  French  Union  Forces  and  U.S.  Navy  and  Air  Force  forces  which
I operate  in  support  of  the  land  battle.  In  addition,  CINCPAC  would  select  targets
I and  conduct  air  operations  with  assigned  forces  against  military  targets  in  Indo-
I china  and  those  in  China  which  directly  support  Chinese  Communist  aggression.
I COMSAC  would  support  CINCPAC  in  these  operations,  and  in  addition  would
j! conduct  air  operations  to  further  reduce  the  Chinese  Communists  war-making
capability,  as  directed  by  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  CINCFE  will  continue  to  pro-
vide for  the  security  of  Japan  and  the  Ryukyus  in  accordance  with  his  priority
mission  and  in  addition  would  support  CINCPAC  and  COMSAC  in  their  opera-
tions as  agreed  mutually.

7.  Plan  for  Training  Native  Troops

For  the  United  States  to  initiate  training  of  Associated  States  Forces,  it  is
i  estimated  that  approximately  2,270  U.S.  personnel  would  be  required,  as  an  aug-
mentation of  the  existing  Military  Assistance  Advisory  Group,  to  carry  out  this
program.  In  addition,  U.S.  personnel  would  be  required  to  provide  appropriate
logistic  support.  The  exact  size  and  composition  of  the  training  mission,  the  lo-
gistic support  requirements,  and  the  security  requirements  and  arrangements
will  be  determined  in  light  of  recommendations  which  have  been  requested  from
CINCPAC  and  the  Chief,  MAAG,  Indochina.  The  trainiag  of  Associated  States
Forces  would  be  patterned  after  the  training  program  conducted  for  RCK  forces
' in  Korea.


8. Plan  for  World-Wide  Military  Aid

The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  consider  that  action  should  be  taken  to  insure  ap-
propriate degree  of  mobilization  to  provide  for  the  greater  risk  of  a  general  war
and  be  prudently  prepared  under  this  alternate  assumption.  In  view  of  the  in-
creased risk  of  general  war  involving  the  Soviet  Bloc,  immediate  action  would
have  to  be  taken  to  strengthen  our  allies.  However,  due  to  the  overriding  mobili-
zation requirements  for  U.S.  forces,  such  aid  would  be  limited  to  those  allies  who
could  directly  support  the  U.S.  strategic  concept  for  general  war.  This  aid  would
further  be  limited  to  combat  essential  material,  essential  replacements,  and


514 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

spare  parts  which  are  beyond  the  capabilities  of  the  individual  countries  to  pro-
vide from  their  own  or  other  allied  resources.

ASSUMING  THE  CHINESE  COMMUNISTS  DO  NOT  INTERVENE

9.  Strategic  Concept  and  Plan  of  Action

Seek  to  create  conditions  by  destroying  effective  Communist  forces  in  Indo-
china, under  which  the  Associated  States  Forces  could  assume  responsibility  for
the  defense  of  Indochina.  In  the  light  of  this  concept,  the  major  courses  of  action
which  would  be  undertaken  are  as  follows:

a.  Conduct  air  operations  in  support  of  allied  forces  in  Indochina.  The
employment  of  atomic  weapons  is  contemplated  in  the  event  that  such  course
appears  militarily  advantageous.

b.  Simultaneously,  French  Union  Forces  augmented  by  such  armed
forces  of  the  Philippines  and  Thailand  as  may  be  committed  would,  in  co-
ordination with  U.S.  naval  and  Air  Force  forces,  conduct  coordinated
ground,  naval  and  air  action  to  destroy  enemy  forces  in  Indochina.

10.  Forces  Required  of  Each  Nation  Participating

The  forces  which  would  be  employed  under  current  plans  during  the  initial
phases  of  the  above  operation  would  include:

a.  French  Union  Forces  currently  operating  in  Indochina.

b.  A  U.S.  Fast  Carrier  Task  Force  and  supporting  forces  as  necessary  in
accordance  with  developments  in  the  situation.

c.  U.S.  Air  Force  units  operating  from  present  bases  outside  Indochina
as  required.

d.  Forces  as  may  be  contributed  by  other  friendly  nations.

The  duration  of  commitment  of  these  forces  cannot  be  determined  at  this  time.

11.  Plan  for  Logistic  Support

The  plan  for  logistic  support  would  be  the  same  under  this  assumption  as
under  the  assumption  that  Chinese  Communists  intervene  (see  paragraph  5
above) — except  for  the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  5.

12.  Plan  for  Command  Structure

Although  the  Allied  Commander  in  Chief  in  Indochina  should  be  French,
there  must  be  a  United  States  Deputy  with  sufficient  staff  assistance  to  provide
liaison  with  the  French  and  coordinate  U.S.  activities  with  the  over-all  operation.
CINCPAC  would  exercise  command  over  all  U.S.  forces  based  in  Indochina  and
other  forces  assigned  to  him  for  operations  in  Indochina.  In  addition,  a  U.S.
Air  Advisor  would  be  provided  the  French  Commander  in  Chief  for  the  purpose
of  advising  him  concerning  the  air  effort.  This  officer  would  have  no  command
responsibilities  but  would  be  under  the  direction  of  the  U.S.  Deputy.


Documents  515


13. Plan  for  Training  Native  Troops

I  The  plan  for  training  native  troops  would  be  the  same  under  this  assumption
I  as  under  the  assumption  that  Chinese  Communists  intervene  (see  paragraph  7
;  above).

I

I 14. Plan  for  World-Wide  Military  Aid

a.  Initially,  there  would  be  no  requirement  for  additional  material  and
equipment  over  and  above  current  IDAP  for  the  French  and  other  allied
forces  in  Indochina.  MDA  programs,  however,  would  require  augmentation
within  approximately  6  months  to  provide  equipment  and  support  necessary
I  to  equip  initially  and  maintain  a  total  of  3  new  ROK-equivalent  Associated

States'  divisions.  Thereafter,  increased  MDA  programs  would  be  required
to  support  additional  Associated  States'  divisions  as  developed.  The  maxi-

imum  number  of  such  divisions  probably  would  not  exceed  20.
b.  All  other  military  assistance  should  proceed  as  currently  programmed.
c.  Current  programs  for  equipping  and  modernizing  U.S.  forces  must
not  be  curtailed  as  a  result  of  any  of  the  foregoing.

I METHOD  OF  FINANCING  COMBAT  OPERATIONS

II

!  15.  Whether  or  not  the  U.S.  intervenes  in  Indochina,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
I  consider  that  it  is  vital  that  the  war  in  Indochina  be  financed  by  a  method  sepa-
rate and  distinct  from  the  world-wide  MDAP.  It  is  imperative  that  the  commander
be  provided  with  the  necessary  equipment  to  wage  war  effectively  without  the
I  financial  and  legal  restrictions  imposed  by  MDAP  procedures.  The  current  prac-
tice of  diverting  MDA  funds  from  approved  programs  to  support  emergency
requirements  such  as  those  resulting  from  combat  operations  in  Indochina  has
already  had  the  effect  of  hindering  the  attainment  of  our  world-wide  strategic
objectives.  Only  by  divorcing  the  fluid  requirements  which  exist  in  local  combat
situations  from  the  normal  MDA  programming  methods  and  procedures  can  the
orderly  achievement  of  our  objectives  in  other  world  areas  be  achieved.

For  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff :
ARTHUR  RADFORD,
Chairman
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff


[Document  51]

May  26,  1954

MEMORANDUM  FOR  THE  SECRETARY  OF  DEFENSE

1.  I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  memorandum.  May  25,  1954,
subject:  "Defense  of  Southeast  Asia  in  the  Event  of  Loss  of  Indochina  to  the

ji  Communists,"  with  an  attached  memorandum  to  you  from  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
!'  Staff,  dated  May  21,  1954,  same  subject.

2.  Your  memorandum  indicates  that  the  paper  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
deals  with  the  military  defense  of  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia,  if  Indochina  is  lost,


516 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"against  an  overt  Chinese  Communist  attack"  (although  these  specific  words  are
not  used  in  the  paper).  Given  this  clarification,  the  paper  takes  the  position,  in
the  event  of  overt  Chinese  Communist  attack,  that  a  static-type  defense  is  mili-
tarily unsound  and  that  the  proper  concept  is  an  offensive  against  Communist
China.

3.  It  is  clear  in  the  current  policy  of  the  United  States  towards  Southeast  Asia
that,  in  the  event  of  "overt  Chinese  Communist  attack"  against  Burma,  Thailand,
or  Malaya,  the  United  States  will  "take  appropriate  military  action  against  Com-
munist China"  (Paragraphs  42,  46,  and  48,  NSC  5405)  rather  than  employ  a
static-type  defense.

4.  In  view  of  this  existing  policy,  the  Joint  Chiefs'  paper  does  not  appear  to
involve  a  new  policy  issue  necessarily  requiring  its  circulation  to  the  members  of
the  National  Security  Council  at  the  present  time.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you
feel  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  circulate  the  paper  on  a  limited  basis,  with  an
appropriate  explanatory  note  as  above,  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  do  so.

ROBERT  CUTLER
Special  Assistant
to  the  President


[Document  52]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  4566,  May  27,  6  p.m.

SENT  DEPARTMENT  4566,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  GENEVA  305,
SAIGON  550.

EYES  ONLY  SECRETARY;  GENEVA  EYES  ONLY  UNDER  SECRETARY;
SAIGON  EYES  ONLY  CHARGE

PASS  DEFENSE  FOR  DEPARTMENT  ARMY  FOR  RIDGWAY
THIS  IS  JOINT  EMBASSY-TRAPNELL  MESSAGE

After  arriving  Paris,  Trapnell  called  first  on  Ambassador  for  general  background
discussion  and  subsequently  on  General  Gruenther  for  same  purpose.  He  was
originally  scheduled  to  call  on  Laniel  May  28  before  seeing  Ely  but  because  of
Prime  Minister's  preoccupation  with  Cabinet  meetings  and  other  urgent  business
meeting  was  postponed.  Trapnell  accompanied  by  Ambassador  seeing  Laniel  at
latter's  home  tomorrow  morning.  Meanwhile  Laniel  suggested  that  Trapnell  make
direct  contact  with  Ely.  This  was  done  this  morning  when  Trapnell,  accompanied
by  Embassy  Officer,  had  hour  and  half  interview  with  Ely,  accompanied  by
Colonel  Brohan.

As  conversation  opened,  it  became  apparent  that  Ely  was  not  fully  aware  of
reason  behind  Trapnell's  presence  in  Paris.  After  this  was  explained  Ely  launched
into  a  general  review  of  the  Indochina  situation  giving  particular  emphasis  to
following  points:

1.  He  recounted  content  of  talks  he  had  had  in  Indochina  with  O'Daniel.  He
was  agreeable  to  principle  of  American  instruction  Vietnamese  forces  but  not


Documents  517


entirely  in  accord  with  O'Daniel's  proposal  that  national  army  be  reorganized  on
divisional  basis.  He  believed  that  divisional  units  were  perhaps  too  weighty  and
that  lighter  units  of  perhaps  6,  7  or  8  battalions  per  division  were  more  prac-
ticable. Yet,  he  did  not  wish  to  press  this  point  as  he  regarded  it  as  a  detail
which  could  be  worked  out  subsequently.  He  pointed  out  that  if  O'Daniel's  con-
cept was  followed  and  US  instructor-advisers  remained  with  units  upon  com-
pletion of  training,  they  would  have  to  accompany  units  into  battle  and,  there-
fore, major  question  of  whether  US  prepared  to  participate  in  combat  operations
would  arise.  Only  alternate  to  this  would  be  replacement  of  US  instructor-
advisers  by  French  as  units  were  prepared  to  enter  combat.  This  would  be  un-
satisfactory because  training  and  advising  methods  of  French  and  Americans
were  dissimilar.

2.  Ely  stated  that  O'Daniel  had  presented  an  operational  plan  for  continuing  the
war  but  that  he  found  it  unrealistic  on  basis  that  it  gave  priority  to  operations
in  the  south  while  the  principal  and  immediate  threat  is  in  the  north.

3.  Ely  referred  to  increasing  frequency  of  American  criticism  of  French  conduct
of  war.  He  explained  that  it  was  easy  to  criticize  post  facto  and  when  things  went
wrong.  As  Trapnell  knew,  the  war  in  Indochina  was  of  a  very  special  nature  and
it  was  unfair  for  people  who  perhaps  didn't  understand  this  fact  as  well  as  he
and  Trapnell  to  criticize.  It  was  useless  to  compare  the  wars  in  Korea  and  Indo-
china; they  were  entirely  different.  He  hoped  that  Trapnell  could  use  his  in-
fluence to  reduce  the  degree  of  present  US  criticism  of  past  and  present  French
performance  in  Indochina  in  the  interests  of  good  Franco-American  working
relations  in  the  important  joint  tasks  at  hand.

4.  At  about  this  stage  of  the  conversation,  Ely  remarked  that  it  was  virtually
impossible  to  discuss  specific  military  questions  in  Indochina  without  getting  into
the  major  political  questions  including  the  possibility  of  US  intervention,  the
prospects  for  a  Pacific  pact  and  the  whole  question  of  where  the  defense  of  South-
east Asia  was  to  take  place  and  by  whom.  Trapnell  referred  to  his  terms  of
reference  which  prevented  him  from  discussing  other  than  specific  military  ques-
tions, particularly  that  of  the  regrouping  of  existing  forces  in  Indochina  for  the
defense  of  the  Delta.

5.  When  Trapnell  asked  Ely  what  the  immediate  military  prospects  were  in  the
Delta,  he  replied  that  the  five  Viet  Minh  divisions  released  from  Dien  Bien  Phu
were  moving  rapidly  forward  and  should  be  at  the  Delta  perimeter  between  the
10th  and  15th  of  June.  Normally  at  that  season  they  would  return  to  their  re-
grouping areas  for  rest,  "self-criticism"  and  general  revision.  Whether  they  will
do  so  this  year  or  not  is  still  uncertain,  although  there  are  indications  at  the
moment  that  some  Viet  Minh  forces  are  moving  to  regrouping  areas.

6.  When  Trapnell  asked  what  Ely  was  doing  to  regroup  his  forces  for  the  defense
of  the  Delta  he  replied  two  basic  things:  First,  removing  units  from  pacification
and  other  static  missions  to  the  Delta  to  become  part  of  mobile  defense  groups;
secondly,  he  was  recovering  units  from  inactive  posts  in  Laos,  Central  Annam
and  other  areas  for  transfer  to  the  Delta  to  become  part  of  these  same  mobile
forces.

7.  Ely's  plan  for  the  defense  of  the  Delta  centers  around  the  defense  of  what
he  termed  the  Hanoi-Haiphong  axis.  No  specific  detail  was  given  as  to  the  num-
ber of  units,  where  they  were  to  be  retained,  or  the  exact  area  to  be  defended.
He  was  particularly  and,  no  doubt,  designedly  pessimistic  on  the  aspects  for  the
defense  of  this  axis,  stating  that  if  Hanoi  had  to  be  surrendered  French  Union
Forces  would  move  to  Haiphong,  and  if  Haiphong  were  lost  they  would  at  least
be  able  to  move  out  from  there  to  "possibly  another  stand  in  the  south."  This,


518 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

too,  depended  entirely,  according  to  Ely,  on  what  was  decided  about  US  inter-
vention and  other  pending  high-level  political  decisions.

8.  Trapnell  pointed  out  that  French  superiority  in  aviation  and  armor  could  be
extremely  effective  against  a  Viet  Minh  coordinated  attack  in  the  Delta  because
of  the  terrain.  Ely  not  only  admitted  this  fact  but  stated  that  it  "is  our  trump
card."

9.  When  Trapnell  pressed  Ely  for  an  opinion  as  to  what  was  required  between
the  period  of  the  immediate  threat  and  the  period  when,  it  was  hoped,  the  Viet-
namese army  would  be  on  an  effective  footing,  Ely  replied  that  the  General  was
obviously  thinking  of  how  many  US  Marines  would  be  required  to  assure  the
defense  of  the  Delta.  He  went  on  to  say  that  in  his  opinion,  of  one  or  two  US
Marine  divisions  intervened  "there  would  be  no  problem."

Comment:  The  conversation  was  largely  unsatisfactory  from  our  standpoint  be-
cause our  efforts  to  obtain  specific  commitments  from  Ely,  including  any  state-
ment regarding  French  intentions  concerning  despatch  of  reinforcements  from
metropolitan  France  and  North  Africa  to  Indochina,  were  unsuccessful.  Nor  did
Ely  appear  particularly  interested  in  Trapnell's  recommendations  concerning  the
redeployment  of  forces.  We  attribute  this  to  the  fact  that  Ely  is  still  busily  engaged
in  consultations  with  the  Prime  Minister,  Pleven,  and  the  High  Council  of  Na-
tional Defense,  and  was  probably  being  very  careful  not  to  make  any  commit-
ments which  had  not  yet  been  cleared  by  the  government.  He  was  aware  that
Trapnell  is  seeing  Laniel  tomorrow  morning  with  the  Ambassador,  at  which  time
more  specific  matters  may  be  discussed.  In  the  meanwhile,  Ely  requested  that
Trapnell  continue  his  conversations  with  Colonel  Brohan  for  the  time  being  and
that,  of  course,  Ely  would  be  seeing  Trapnell  again  after  the  interview  with
Laniel.

DILLON


[Document  53]

June  7,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsulate  Geneva  TEDUL  171
EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADORS
RE  SECTO  389.

Defense  Dept  reports  that  five-power  military  conference  at  its  plenary  session
of  June  4,  under  chairmanship  General  Valluy,  amended  and  approved  Con-
ference Study  No.  I:  "Intelligence  Survey  of  Military  Situation  in  SEA  Area."

In  connection  with  review  of  intelligence  survey.  Gen  Valluy  presented  his
own  evaluation  military  situation  Tonkin  Delta  as  follows:

1.  If  Tonkin  is  lost,  military  line  will  not  rpt  not  be  reestablished  any-
where.

2.  Anyone  can  find  on  map  a  line  with  tactical  characteristics  which
theoretically  should  permit  reestablishment,  such  as  Laos  bottleneck  or
eighteenth  parallel,  but  Valluy  said  he  could  affirm  there  would  be  no  forces
to  man  this  line.

3.  Valluy  said  he  was  not  rpt  not  speaking  of  French  forces  in  this  con-
nection but  meant  to  indicate  that  there  were  no  rpt  no  southern  Vietnamese
who  could  oppose  northern  Vietnamese.


Documents  519


4.  Ho  Chi  Minh's  objective  is  Tonkin,  to  be  attained  either  by  negotiation
at  Geneva  or  by  assauh  on  Hanoi.

5.  Ho  Chi  Minh  wishes  to  entangle  us  in  negotiations  by  admitting  now,
for  first  time,  that  there  is  a  Communist  northern  state  and  a  non-Communist
southern  state  and  saying  that  both  might  be  incorporated  in  French  Union.

6.  What  Ho  Chi  Minh  seeks  is  Tonkin  and  its  political  capital  Hanoi  from
which  he  was  driven  in  1946.  He  wishes  obtain  Tonkin  either  by  negotiation
(Valluy  admitted  "among  military  men"  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  finds  across
negotiating  table  receptive  French  ears)  or  by  military  action.  To  prepare
for  such  action,  he  is  drawing  out  negotiations  to  gain  time  for  his  battle
corps  to  be  in  position  and  ready,  if  action  is  called  for.

7.  In  course  of  negotiating  toward  a  ceasefire  (which  is  demanded  by
French  public  opinion)  concept  of  partition  appears,  as  Ho  Chi  Minh  wants
occupy  all  Tonkin.  If  conditions  are  too  hard  and  talks  are  broken  off  he
will  strive  to  obtain  Tonkin  by  force.  In  such  a  military  action  his  chances
of  success  are  good.

8.  It  has  been  said  at  this  Conference  that  if  Tonkin  is  lost  we  will  fight
in  south.  However  French  will  not  rpt  not  fight  nor  will  Vietnam.  To  man
line  in  south,  conferees  will  have  to  provide  own  men.  Moreover  it  will  be
an  artificial  line  for  defense  of  which  Laos,  Cambodia  and  Thailand  can  do
nothing.

9.  Decisive  point  in  military  conference  is  this:  if  other  conferees  do
not  rpt  not  underwrite  today's  battle  for  Tonkin,  tomorrow  they  will  fight
without  French  in  Saigon  and  Bangkok.  Valluy  said  he  could  affirm  that  if
Tonkin  were  lost,  no  Vietnamese  would  fight  against  other  Vietnamese,  and
sooner  or  later  (probably  sooner)  the  whole  of  Vietnam  will  become  Com-
munist.

10.  Valluy  said  he  did  not  rpt  not  mean  to  dramatize  but  only  to  be
realistic  among  soldiers.  Truth  cannot  be  disguised.  Each  of  allies  has  share
of  responsibility  and  if  battle  for  Tonkin  is  lost,  allies  will  have  to  fight  alone
on  actual  main  line  of  resistance  much  farther  away.

Admiral  Carney  remarked  that  Gen  Valluy's  appraisal  was  of  interest  and
important  to  all  conferees  and  suggested  it  might  be  put  in  writing  and  appended
to  intelligence  survey  as  representing  unilateral  views  of  one  representative.  End
Defense  Dept  summary.

Foregoing  for  your  own  info  only.  Valluy  was  speaking  in  confidence  and  as  an
individual.  Your  comments  requested.

DULLES


[Document  54]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  DULTE  164,  June  9,  10  p.m.

EYES  ONLY  SECRETARY

I  had  a  long  talk  with  Eden  this  morning.  He  said  that  we  are  clearly  coming  to
end  here  on  Indochina.  Three  major  issues  have  emerged  on  which  we  cannot


520 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

compromise  and  on  which  Communists  show  no  intention  of  receding.  These  are
( 1 )  separate  treatment  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,  which  are  clearly  victims  of
Viet  Minh  aggression;  (2)  status  and  powers  of  impartial  international  super-
visory authority;  and  (3)  composition  of  international  supervisory  authority.
He  is  convinced  that  we  can  get  no  further  on  these  issues  and  should  break  ,
within  next  few  days.  While  he  feels  no  useful  negotiating  purpose  would  be
served,  he  is  inclined  to  think  that  for  public  opinion  it  would  be  desirable  that
he  privately  see  Molotov  once  more  before  a  break  in  order  to  make  clear  to
Molotov  firmness  our  position  and  obtain  Communist  position.  He  is  hopeful
of  forcing  Molotov  into  public  rejection  Colombo  powers  for  supervisory  or-
ganization. This  will  have  very  beneficial  effects  in  south  and  southeast  Asia  I  \
pointed  out,  and  he  agreed,  that  French  situation  is  such  that  we  would  probably
have  to  leave  the  French  and  Viet  Minh  military  officers  here  talking  about  zones  ;
in  Vietnam.

Immediately  following  break  he  feels  Cambodia  and  Laos  should  put  their  cases  i
to  the  UN  entirely  divorced  from  Thailand  request.  (I  gathered  that  he  was
thinking  of  something  more  than  just  a  POC.)  He  thinks  it  highly  important  i
that  they  move  rapidly  after  the  conference  is  wound  up,  but  equally  important
until  that  time  there  be  no  hints  or  press  leaks  whatever  that  such  action  is  con-
templated. He  feels  that  if  properly  handled  and  appeals  are  spontaneous  on
their  part,  with  no  implication  of  US-UK  initiative  or  prodding,  they  will  re-
ceive general  Asian  support.  I  pointed  out,  and  he  agreed,  that  France  might  op-
pose but  we  should  go  ahead  anyway.  In  meanwhile  he  feels  very  strongly  we
must  not  now  complicate  matter  by  insisting  on  broadening  Thailand  appeal  to
Laos  and  Cambodia.  He  rightly  points  out  that  language  in  Security  Council
draft  resolution  is  largely  academic,  as  it  will  in  any  event  be  voted.  Resolu-
tion can  be  written  any  way  that  appears  desirable  at  the  time  matter  comes  be-
fore General  Assembly.  He  said  he  would  send  instructions  to  Dixon  to  try  to
work  out  with  Lodge  some  language  that  would  meet  his  point,  while  not  nec-
essarily precluding  POC  operations  outside  Thailand.  I  am  sending  separate
telegram  repeated  to  USUN  replying  to  your  TOSEC  378  giving  only  latter
part  this  paragraph.

Eden  said  he  had  not  yet  put  to  cabinet  his  ideas  with  regard  to  UN  appeal  by
Cambodia  and  Laos,  and  therefore  asked  that  the  matter  be  treated  with  strict-
est secrecy.

Eden  also  said  he  was  considering  recommendation  reduce  strength  of  Common-
wealth division  in  Korea  by  about  half  or  one  brigade  in  order  to  reinforce  Ma-
laya. If  things  eased  up  in  Egypt,  he  was  also  hopeful  that  forces  could  be  spared
from  there  for  Malaya.  I  told  him  that  in  view  of  more  critical  situation  in  south-
east Asia  and  our  ability  within  the  armistice  to  train  and  equip  ROK  forces
as  replacements,  I  thought  we  would  have  no  objection.

Clear  that  Eden  now  considers  negotiations  here  have  failed.  Believe  he  is  pre-
pared to  move  ahead  quickly  in  southeast  Asia  coalition  which  would  guarantee
Cambodia  and  most  of  Laos  under  umbrella  of  some  UN  action  with  respect  to
those  two  countries.  He  expects  active  cooperation  from  Burma,  and  hopes  for
benevolent  neutrality  from  India,  He  apparently  does  not  feel  much  can  be  sal-
vaged in  Vietnam.

As  you  know,  Bidault  is  not  here  and  we  will  not  know  where  French  stand  until  .
Assembly  debate  completed,  if  then.  If  French  continue  negotiations,  point  will
probably  arrive  shortly  when  deteriorating  military  situation  will  force  them  ac-
cept simple  cease-fire  in  attempt  temporarily  salvage  something.  Therefore  one
question  we  may  shortly  face  is  what  we  and  UK  do  if  France  insists  on  con-


Documents  521


tinuing  negotiations  somewhat  longer.  It  is  one  thing  to  withdraw  if  France  ne-
gotiates an  agreement  with  which  we  cannot  pubHcly  associate  ourselves,  and
another  to  withdraw  prior  to  that  time.
Eden's  tactics  recommend  themselves  very  strongly  to  me.

Chauvel  spoke  to  me  after  the  above  was  dictated.  In  Bidault's  absence  he  and
others  have  been  considering  recommending  to  Bidault  that  France  and  three

i Associated  States  together  make  appeal  to  UN.  He  had  reports  from  Valluy,
part  of  which  he  read  to  me.  He  is  obviously  convinced  that  things  will  go  badly
in  Delta.  I  made  no  comment  except  to  suggest  that  Laos  and  Cambodia  com-
manded a  certain  sympathy  in  Asia  and  Middle  East  which  France  plus  Vietnam
j did  not.  I  asked  him  categorically  if  France  wanted  to  internationalize  on  con-
I ditions  we  had  tabled  some  time  ago,  saying  neither  you  nor  I  knew  where
France  stood.  He  replied  that  he  did  not  know: — that  "Bidault  still  hoped  to
get  something  here",
i  i I  would  appreciate  your  thoughts  and  guidance.

'  With  respect  Korea,  Eden  indicated  he  would  probably  speak  next  plenary  (which
I  we  plan  for  Friday  or  Saturday).  He  would  not  be  adverse  to  making  this  last
1  session  on  Korea.  However,  not  all  of  sixteen  are  yet  prepared  to  do  this.  I  do
'  not  know  whether  we  will  be  able  get  them  lined  up.  If  not,  one  more  plenary
may  be  necessary.

SMITH


[Document  55]

i FROM:  Saigon
; TO:  Secretary  of  State
NO:  2714,  June  10,  2  p.m.

N

SENT  DEPARTMENT  2714,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  PARIS  967,
GENEVA  214.

i PARIS  FOR  AMBASSADOR.

f

i GENEVA  FOR  UNDER  SECRETARY.

}

General  Valluy's  appreciation  of  the  situation  as  set  out  Department  telegram
2527,  sent  Geneva  TEDUL  171,  repeated  Paris  4448  is  exceedingly  good — in
fact  almost  too  good.  Although  there  are  one  or  two  points  to  which  we  might
take  exception  from  purely  military  aspect,  I  desire  to  confine  my  comment  to
political  connotations  of  Valluy's  statement.  I  have  impression  that  under  in-
structions he  made  this  very  concise  evaluation  less  with  military  considerations
I  I in  mind  than  with  political  objectives  in  view.  I  think  that  Valluy  was  looking
\  \ as  much  at  the  French  Parliament  as  he  was  at  the  Tonkin  delta  when  he  made
I his  speech.  General  Ely  has  twice  in  my  presence  stated  that  his  keenest  desire
; is  for  United  States  to  enter  this  war.  Only  yesterday  his  Chief  of  Staff,  Colonel
Brohan,  repeated  this  comment.  My  belief  is  that  purpose  of  Valluy  statement
was  either  to  bring  us  and,  if  possible,  other  five  powers  into  conflict  here  or,
I failing  that,  to  prepare  excuse  before  history  for  an  impending  armistice  which
French  would  then  request  of  Viet  Minh.

MC  CLINTOCK


522 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  56]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  4841,  June  14,  5  p.m.

SENT  DEPARTMENT  4841;  REPEATED  INFORMATION  GENEVA
393.

DEPARTMENT  EYES  ONLY  SECRETARY
GENEVA  EYES  ONLY  UNDER  SECRETARY

1.  In  all  probability  one  of  first  acts  of  any  new  French  Government  will  be  re-
quest precise  statement  immediate  and  future  US  intentions  regarding  military
intervention  Indochina.

2.  During  past  week,  I  have  gathered  the  very  definite  impression  that  because
of  (A)  our  reluctance  to  send  ground  forces  to  Indochina;  (B)  deterioration  of
military  and  political  situation  in  Indochina  during  last  month;  (C)  extreme
reluctance,  if  not  refusal,  of  ANZUS  partners  to  consider  joining  US  in  any
military  intervention  in  Delta  area,  the  chances  of  US  responding  favorably  to
French  request  for  military  assistance  even  after  they  have  met  all  conditions
are  approximately  nil.

3.  Hardening  of  Communist  position  in  Geneva  as  indicated  by  Molotov  and
Chou  En-lai  last  week  would  seem  to  indicate  that  Communists  no  longer  fear
possibility  of  US  military  intervention  in  Indochina  provided  there  is  no  overt
Chinese  attack.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  Viet  Minh  and  Chinese  will  not
accept  any  armistice  which  does  not  clearly  pave  the  way  for  Communist  take-
over in  Indochina.

4.  Lacking  the  possibility  of  US  military  support,  it  would  seem  to  be  only  a
question  of  time,  weeks  or  a  few  months  at  very  most,  before  French  are  forced
to  accept  Viet  Minh  terms.  In  the  meantime,  there  is  the  constant  risk  of  an  all-
out  assault  on  the  Delta  which  could  lead  to  a  serious  French  reverse,  if  not
total  annihilation  of  expeditionary  corps  in  Tonkin.

I  have  continually  pointed  out  that  such  a  reverse  might  have  a  disastrous  effect
on  French  public  opinion.  Today  I  am  more  certain  than  ever  that  such  would  be
the  case.  Rightly  or  wrongly,  US  would  be  blamed  by  French  public  opinion  for
having  built  up  French  hopes  of  intervention  and  then  for  having  failed  in  the
crisis.  The  result  could  well  be  a  neutralist  government  in  France  that  would
reduce  French  military  commitments  to  NATO  and  would,  at  the  same  time,
be  completely  intransigeant  on  question  of  German  rearmament.  Such  a  govern-
ment would  also,  in  all  probability,  make  a  strong  effort  to  strengthen  relations
with  the  Soviet  Union  and  to  recreate  the  wartime  Franco-USSR  alliance  in  order
to  prevent  German  rearmament.

From  this  distance,  I  cannot  judge  what  the  effect  of  such  French  actions  would
be  on  American  public  opinion  and  particularly  on  our  Congress,  but  I  suspect
that  it  might  lead  to  an  irresistible  demand  for  the  recall  of  some,  if  not  all,  of
our  troops  from  Europe,  which,  in  effect,  would  mean  the  end  of  the  North
Atlantic  Alliance  followed  eventually  by  the  isolation  of  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere.


Documents  523


5.  In  view  of  these  very  serious  and  grave  dangers  which  we  will  run  if  we
allow  the  French  to  be  defeated  militarily  in  the  Delta,  and  if  my  assumption
in  paragraph  2  above  is  correct,  I  recommend  that  you  give  serious  considera-
tion to  promptly  informing  the  French  that  because  of  either  (A)  the  deterio-
ration of  the  military  situation  in  Indochina  or  (B)  the  reluctance  of  the  ANZUS
powers  to  take  action,  or  both,  the  President  is  no  longer  prepared  to  request
military  intervention  from  the  Congress  even  if  the  French  should  now  fully
j  meet  our  conditions.  While  such  action  on  our  part  would  hasten  what  now  ap-
I  pears  to  be  the  inevitable  loss  of  Vietnam  and  might  cause  a  certain  additional
jj  temporary  loss  of  face  for  the  US,  it  would  put  the  French  on  notice  that  they
!  should  promptly  accept  the  Viet  Minh  armistice  terms  and  thus  would  save  the
'  French  Expeditionary  Corps  from  possible  military  disaster.  In  the  event  of  a
I  withdrawal  from  Indochina  under  such  circumstances,  I  would  not  forsee  any
I  serious  or  long  term  repercussions  on  France's  position  in  the  North  Atlantic
Alliance.  If  we  allow  the  French  to  continue  to  fight  in  the  false  hope  that  in
the  event  of  a  crisis  in  the  Delta,  they  may  get  US  military  assistance,  the  best
j  we  can  hope  for  is  to  delay  the  Communist  conquest  of  Vietnam  by  a  few  months,
j  while  we  risk  the  very  existence  of  the  North  Atlantic  Alliance,
j  From  my  viewpoint  here  in  Paris,  the  possibility  of  a  few  months  delay  in  the
I Communist  takeover  of  Indochina  does  not  seem  at  all  commensurate  with  the

risk  of  the  possible  collapse  of  the  defense  of  Western  Europe.
I 6.  While  I  have  several  times  made  it  clear,  both  to  Laniel  and  Maurice  Schu-
j mann,  that,  as  indicated  in  paragraph  8  of  your  TEDUL  185  from  San  Fran-
cisco, our  decision  would  have  to  be  made  in  the  light  of  "conditions  at  the
time";  this  is  not  at  all  clear  to  French  public  opinion  and  is  not  even  very
clear  to  Schumann  himself,  as  he  has  no  means  of  knowing  how  we  will  judge
"the  conditions  at  the  time".  Therefore,  what  I  am  in  effect  recommending  is
; that  we  adopt  your  suggestion  contained  in  paragraph  8  of  TEDUL  185  of  put-
ting a  time  limit  on  our  intervention  offer  with  the  additional  proviso  that  I
would  suggest  that  the  time  limit  be  now.

DILLON


[Document  57]

June  14,  1954

SENT  TO: Amconsul  GENEVA  PRIORITY  TEDUL  197
Re  DULTE  174

Department  is  giving  this  thorough  consideration  with  Defense.  My  personal
opinion  is  that  we  should  try  to  carry  situation  along  with  avoidance  of  either
formal  refusal  now  train  Vietnamese  and  also  without  anything  like  a  massive
commitment  of  some  two  to  three  thousand  MAAG  personnel  which  under  pres-
ent conditions  could  not  but  carry  strong  political  overtones  and  might  raise
Congressional  complications.

With  reference  to  your  last  paragraph  suggestion  on  QTE  expedite  conclu-
sion of  final  agreement  with  French  UNQTE  this  is  quite  impossible  so  long  as
French  have  not  made  up  their  mind  whether  or  not  they  want  to  internationalize
war  and  now  are  further  from  internationalizing  it  than  ever  before.  They  want,


524 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  in  effect  have,  an  option  on  our  intervention  but  they  do  not  want  to  ex-
ercise it  and  the  date  of  expiry  of  our  option  is  fast  running  out.

DULLES


[Document  58]

June  14,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  4579  PRIORITY

EYES  ONLY  FOR  AMBASSADOR  AND  UNDER  SECRETARY  FROM
SECRETARY

FYI

It  is  true  that  there  is  less  disposition  now  than  two  months  or  one  month
ago  to  intervene  in  Indochina  militarily.  This  is  the  inevitable  result  of  the
steady  deterioration  in  Indochina  which  makes  the  problem  of  intervention  and
pacification  more  and  more  difficult.  When  united  defense  was  first  broached,
the  strength  and  morale  of  French  and  Vietnam  forces  were  such  that  it  seemed
that  the  situation  could  be  held  without  any  great  pouring-in  of  U.S.  ground
forces.  Now  all  the  evidence  is  that  the  morale  of  the  Vietnamese  Government,
armed  forces  and  civilians  has  deteriorated  gravely;  the  French  are  forced  to
contemplate  a  fall-back  which  would  leave  virtually  the  entire  Tonkin  Delta
population  in  hostile  hands  and  the  Saigon  area  is  faced  with  political  disinte-
gration.

What  has  happened  has  been  what  was  forecast,  as  for  example  by  my  Em-
bassy Paris  4117  TEDUL  78  of  May  17.  I  there  pointed  out  that  probably  the
French  did  not  really  want  intervention  but  wanted  to  have  the  possibility  as  a
card  to  play  at  Geneva.  I  pointed  out  that  the  Geneva  game  would  doubtless
be  a  long  game  and  that  it  could  not  be  assumed  that  at  the  end  the  present
U.S.  position  regarding  intervention  would  necessarily  exist  after  the  Commu-
nists had  succeeded  in  dragging  out  Geneva  by  winning  military  successes  in
Indochina.  This  telegram  of  mine  will  bear  rereading.  That  point  of  view  has
been  frequently  repeated  in  subsequent  cables.

I  deeply  regret  any  sense  of  bitterness  on  Bidault's  part,  but  I  do  not  see
that  he  is  justified  in  considering  unreasonable  the  adaptation  of  U.S.  views  to
events  and  the  consequences  of  prolonged  French  and  U.K.  indecision.

I  do  not  yet  exclude  possibility  U.S.  intervention  on  terms  outlined  PARIS
402  and  TEDUL  54.  UK  it  seems  is  now  more  disposed  to  see  movement  in
this  direction  but  apparently  the  French  are  less  than  ever  disposed  to  inter-
nationalizing the  war.


DULLES


Documents  525


[Document  59]

SNIE  10-4-54
15  JUNE  1954

COMMUNIST  REACTIONS  TO  CERTAIN  US  COURSES
OF  ACTION  WITH  RESPECT  TO  INDOCHINA

THE  PROBLEM

To  estimate  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  the  courses  of  action
and  consequent  situations  indicated  below. i

THE  ESTIMATE

PART  I
ASSUMPTIONS

A.  The  treaties  of  independence  between  France  and  the  Associated  States
will  have  been  signed.

B.  A  regional  security  grouping  including  at  least  the  Associated  States,  Thai-
land, the  Philippines,  Australia,  France,  and  the  United  States,  and  possibly
including  also  New  Zealand  and  the  United  Kingdom,  will  have  been  formed.

C.  The  Associated  States  will  have  publicly  requested  the  direct  military  par-
ticipation of  members  of  the  regional  grouping  in  the  war  in  Indochina.

D.  The  French  will  have  undertaken  to  continue  at  least  the  present  level  of
their  military  commitment  in  Indochina.

REQUIREMENT  1

To  estimate  the  initial  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  the  par-
ticipation of  US  air  and  naval  forces  with  French  Union  forces  and  token  Thai
and  Philippine  forces  in  coordinated  ground,  naval,  and  air  operations  designed
to  destroy  the  Communist  military  forces  in  Indochina.  Air  operations  would
be  limited  to  targets  in  Indochina.  Nuclear  weapons  would  be  employed  if  their
use  were  deemed  militarily  advantageous  but  nuclear  attacks  on  the  Indochinese
civil  population  as  a  target  system  would  be  avoided.  -

Chinese  Communist  Reaction

1.  The  intervention  of  US  and  allied  forces  in  Indochina  probably  would  cause
the  Chinese  Communists  to  believe  that  sooner  or  later  they  would  have  to
decide  whether  to  accept  the  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  or  to  intervene  in  force
in  order  to  try  to  prevent  such  defeat.  Their  decision  would  probably  rest
mainly,  though  not  exclusively,  upon  their  weighing  of  the  risks  and  disadvan-
tages arising  from  the  Viet  Minh  defeat  against  the  likelihood  of  involvement  in

^  The  assumptions  and  estimative  requirements  stated  herein  were  furnished  to  the
intelligence  community  for  the  purposes  of  this  estimate.  We  interpret  the  hypothetical
action  as  occurring  within  the  next  twelve  to  eighteen  months.


526 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

major  war  with  the  US  and  the  probable  consequences  of  such  a  war  for
Communist  China.  Available  evidence  gives  no  unmistakeable  indication  of
what  the  Chinese  Communist  decision  would  be.  On  balance,  however,  we  be-
lieve that  the  chances  are  somewhat  better  than  even  that  the  Chinese  Com-
munist would  decide  to  take  whatever  military  action  they  thought  required
to  prevent  destruction  of  the  Viet  Minh,  including  when  and  if  necessary,  open
use  of  Chinese  Communist  forces  in  Indochina.^  ^

2.  The  nature  of  the  assumed  US  action  is  such  that  ample  warning  would
almost  certainly  be  given  in  advance  of  actual  operations.  The  Chinese  Com-
munists have  the  capability  now  to  intervene  quickly  and  in  such  force  as  to
drive  French  Union  forces  out  of  the  Delta.  The  Chinese  Communists  might
choose  to  exercise  this  capability  before  US  intervention  could  be  effected.

3.  We  believe  it  somewhat  more  likely,  however,  that  even  if  the  Chinese
Communists  had  determined  not  to  accept  the  defeat  of  the  Viet  Minh  they
would  not  intervene  openly  immediately  following  the  assumed  US  intervention.
They  might  estimate  that  US  air  and  naval  forces  could  not,  in  the  absence  of^
US  ground  forces,  decisively  alter  the  course  of  the  war.  They  might  therefore
consider  their  intervention  unnecessary  at  this  point  and  might  postpone  final
decision  as  to  their  course  of  action  until  they  had  observed  the  initial  scale
and  success  of  the  allied  military  operations  and  had  estimated  the  probable
nature  and  extent  of  US  aims  in  the  conflict.

4.  In  this  connection,  US  use  of  nuclear  weapons  in  Indochina  would  tend  to
hasten  the  ultimate  Chinese  Communist  decision  whether  or  not  to  intervene.
It  would  probably  convince  the  Chinese  Communists  of  US  determination  to
obtain  a  decisive  military  victory  in  Indochina  at  whatever  risk  and  by  what-
ever means,  and  of  the  consequent  danger  of  nuclear  attack  on  Communist
China.  Whether  this  conviction  would  precipitate  or  deter  Chinese  Communist
intervention  would  depend  on  the  military  situation  in  Indochina  at  the  time,
the  observed  military  effect  of  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons,  and  the  observed
political  and  psychological  effect  of  such  use,  particularly  its  effect  on  the  co-
herence of  the  regional  security  grouping  and  the  Atlantic  alliance.

5.  In  any  case,  the  Chinese  Communists  would  almost  certainly  greatly  in-
crease their  logistic  support,  delivery  of  arms  and  equipment,  and  technical  as-
sistance to  the  Viet  Minh.  The  Chinese  Communists  would  probably  increase
their  deliveries  of  AA  weapons  and  might  send  in  Chinese  AA  gun  crews.
Moreover,  the  Chinese  Communists  would  probably  deploy  ground  and  air
units  near  the  Indochina  border  in  order:  (a)  to  warn  the  US  and  its  allies,
and  (b)  to  have  forces  ready  either  to  intervene  on  behalf  of  the  Viet  Minh
or  to  defend  the  southern  border  of  China.

6.  While  maintaining  a  posture  of  military  readiness,  the  Chinese  Communists

^The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  recommends  deletion  of  the
last  sentence  of  this  paragraph  and  would  substitute  the  following:

"However,  their  decision  would  be  largely  determined  by  the  Chinese  estimate  of
the  probable  extent  and  effect  of  US  initial  action."
The  Director  of  Intelligence,  USAF,  believes  that  the  last  sentence  of  this  paragraph
should  read  as  follows:

"Communist  China  will  probably  not  choose  knowingly  any  course  of  action  likely
to  expose  its  fundamental  national  strengths  in  war  with  a  major  power.  However,  we
believe  that  Communist  China's  strength  for  conducting  various  kinds  of  warfare  is
such,  and  the  motives  and  judgment  of  its  leaders  are  such  as  to  make  Communist
China's  courses  of  action  dangerously  unpredictable  under  outside  pressure  of  any  ap-
preciable magnitude."


Documents  527


would  intensify  political  and  propaganda  activities  designed  to  exploit  anti-
Western  and  anticolonial  feelings  of  the  indigenous  population  of  Indochina
and  the  war-fears  of  neutralist  Asian  nations  and  of  certain  US  allies.  They
would  also  seek  to  label  the  US  as  an  aggressor.  In  the  meantime  and  through-
out the  period  of  military  operations,  the  Communists  would  almost  certainly
agitate  and  propagandize  for  a  "cease-fire"  and  political  settlement,  which  would
preserve  the  Communist  position  and  prospects.

Soviet  Reaction

7.  In  the  assumed  situation,  the  USSR  probably  would  estimate  that  the  US
action,  though  limited  to  air  and  naval  forces,  would  considerably  increase  the
risks  of  unlimited  war  between  the  US  and  Communist  China.  The  USSR
would  probably  prefer  that  such  a  war  not  develop  out  of  the  Indochina  situa-
tion. Nevertheless,  the  USSR  would  assure  Communist  China  of  continuing
military  assistance.  The  USSR  would  also  give  complete  diplomatic  and  propa-
ganda support  to  Communist  China  and  the  Viet  Minh  regime.

REQUIREMENT  2

To  estimate  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  the  success  of  the
operations  envisaged  in  the  assumptions  above  {i.e.,  to  the  impending  effective
destruction  of  the  Communist  forces  in  Indochina)

Chinese  Communist  Reaction

8.  As  stated  in  Paragraph  1,  we  believe  that  the  chances  are  somewhat  better
than  even  that  the  Chinese  Communist,  in  the  assumed  situation,  would  inter-
vene militarily  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  Viet  Minh.  If  they  decided  to
do  so,  we  believe  that  the  exact  timing  and  nature  of  their  action  would  depend
on  various  factors,  but  principally  on  the  scope  and  character  of  the  US/allied
operations  they  were  seeking  to  counter.^  ^

Soviet  Reaction

9.  In  this  assumed  situation,  the  USSR  would  probably  continue  to  support  the
Chinese  Communists.  If  the  Chinese  Communists  intervened  openly  in  support

*  The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Department  of  the  Army,  believes  that  the  results
in  this  requirement  could  not  be  achieved  by  the  unbalanced  and  insufficient  forces
envisaged.

''The  Director  of  Intelligence,  USAF,  believes  that  this  paragraph  should  read  as  fol-
lows:

"Communist  China  will  probably  not  choose  knowingly  any  course  of  action  likely
to  expose  its  fundamental  national  strengths  in  war  with  a  major  power.  However,  we
believe  that  Communist  China's  strength  for  conducting  various  kinds  of  warfare  is
such,  and  the  motives  and  judgment  of  its  leaders  are  such  as  to  make  Communist
China's  courses  of  action  dangerously  unpredictable  under  outside  pressure  of  any  ap-
preciable magnitude."

®  The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  believes  that  paragraph  8  should
read  as  follows:

"Communist  China  would  conclude  from  the  assumed  impending  destruction  of
Communist  forces  in  Indochina,  by  limited  forces  employing  nuclear  and  conventional
weapons,  that  its  open  military  intervention  would  invite  an  extension  of  similar  action
to  Communist  China,  and  would,  therefore,  probably  not  intervene  militarily."


528 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

of  the  Viet  Minh,  the  USSR  would  rapidly  increase  military  assistance  to  Com-
munist China.  The  Soviet  diplomatic  and  propaganda  campaigns  against  the  US
would  continue  full-scale,  and  the  USSR  might  ask  the  UN  to  condemn  the  US
as  an  aggressor.  Thinly  veiled  threats  of  Soviet  involvement  in  the  fighting  and
references  to  the  Sino-Soviet  Treaty  of  1950  would  multiply.

PART  II

ASSUMPTIONS

A.  The  treaties  of  independence  between  France  and  the  Associated  States
will  have  been  signed.

B.  A  regional  security  grouping  including  at  least  the  Associated  States,  Thai-
land, the  Philippines,  Australia,  France,  and  the  United  States,  and  possibly
including  also  New  Zealand  and  the  United  Kingdom,  will  have  been  formed.

C.  The  Associated  States  will  have  publicly  requested  the  direct  military
participation  of  members  of  the  regional  grouping  in  the  war  in  Indochina.

D.  The  French  will  have  undertaken  to  continue  at  least  the  present  level  of
their  military  commitment  in  Indochina.

E.  The  Chinese  Communists  will  have  openly  intervened  with  military  forces
in  Indochina  in  order  to  counter  US  direct  participation  as  defined  in  Require-
ment 1.

REQUIREMENT  3

To  estimate  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  an  extension  of  allied
offensive  air  operations  to  include  military  targets  in  Communist  China  directly
supporting  Communist  military  operations  in  Indochina  or  directly  threatening
the  security  of  Allied  forces  in  the  area  J  Nuclear  weapons  would  be  employed
in  these  operations  if  it  were  deemed  militarily  advantageous  to  do  so,  but  nuclear
attacks  on  the  Chinese  civil  population  as  a  target  system  would  be  avoided.

Chinese  Communist  Reaction

10.  We  consider  it  probable  that  before  intervening  in  Indochina  the  Chinese
Communists  would  have  accepted  the  likelihood  of  US  air  attacks  against  mili-
tary targets  in  China.  Consequently,  they  would  not  feel  compelled  to  withdraw
their  forces  from  Indochina  solely  as  a  result  of  the  initiation  of  the  air  opera-
tions assumed  above.  At  the  same  time,  we  believe  that  the  Chinese  Commu-
nists, in  order  to  prevent  further  destruction  to  this  area  of  China  and  par-
ticularly to  avoid  the  spread  of  unlimited  US  attacks  to  the  whole  of  China,
would  intensify  efforts  to  induce  the  US  to  enter  negotiations  for  a  settlement
which  would  preserve  the  Communist  position  and  prospects  in  Indochina.

11.  Meanwhile  the  Chinese  Communists,  to  the  full  extent  of  their  capabilities,
would  prosecute  the  war  on  the  ground  in  Indochina  and  attack  allied  air
bases,  aircraft  carriers,  and  other  installations  directly  supporting  allied  opera-
tions in  the  area.  They  would,  however,  probably  try  to  keep  the  war  centered
in  Indochina  and,  as  a  consequence  probably  would  confine  their  attacks  to
such  directly  supporting  bases  and  installations.

^  In  this  requirement  we  interpret  targets  "directly  supporting"  Communist  military
operations  to  be  generally  south  of  the  Yangtze  River  and  to  consist  primarily  of  trans-
port lines,  troop  concentrations,  and  air  fields  in  the  area.


Documents  529


12.  The  use  of  nuclear  weapons  under  the  restrictions  given  above  would
greatly  increase  Chinese  Communist  concern  about  US  intentions  but  probably
would  not  by  itself  cause  them  to  adopt  new  courses  of  military  action  at  this
time.  However,  they  would  threaten  nuclear  retaliation.  They  would  also  ex-
ploit to  the  fullest  resultant  psychological  opportunities  and  in  particular  would
charge  that  the  US  was  using  weapons  of  mass  destruction  on  the  civilian
population. 8

13.  The  Chinese  Communists  would  attempt  by  all  means  possible  to  convince
other  Asian  nations  that  the  US  had  undertaken  to  destroy  the  Chinese  Commu-
nist regime  in  order  to  thwart  its  efforts  on  behalf  of  an  indigenous  independence
movement.  If  the  Chinese  had  not  previously  done  so,  they  would  probably  ap-
peal to  the  UN  to  brand  US  action  as  a  threat  to  the  peace.

Soviet  Reaction

14.  In  this  assumed  situation,  the  USSR  would  greatly  increase  its  military  as-
sistance to  Communist  China,  especially  supplying  modern  aircraft  and  small
naval  vessels,  possibly  including  submarines,  with  Soviet  personnel  to  train
and  advise  the  Chinese  and  probably  to  participate  in  air  defense  operations.
The  USSR  would  probably  not  openly  commit  combat  units  of  the  Soviet
armed  forces  and  probably  would  not  release  nuclear  weapons  for  Chinese
Communist  use.

15.  The  Kremlin  would  also  continue  its  diplomatic  and  propaganda  cam-
paigns against  the  US,  undertaking  in  the  UN  to  brand  the  US  as  an  aggressor
if  this  had  not  previously  been  attempted.  The  USSR  would  support  Chinese
charges  concerning  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  against  civilian  populations.  At
the  same  time,  the  USSR  would  probably  advise  the  Chinese  Communists  to
negotiate  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo  at  the  time
and  would  try  to  establish  a  position  as  peacemaker.

REQUIREMENT  4

To  estimate  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  the  following  addi-
tional allied  courses  of  action,  undertaken  subsequently  to  those  above:

a.  Extension  of  allied  offensive  air  operations  to  additional  selected  military

^  The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  believes  this  paragraph  should
read:

"Nuclear  weapon  attacks  on  Communist  China  would  undoubtedly  result  in  a  much
greater  Chinese  Communist  reaction  than  nuclear  attacks  on  the  Indochinese  battle-
ground. In  addition,  such  attacks  would  probably  indicate  to  the  Chinese  Communists
a  US  willingness  to  exploit  its  superiority  in  nuclear  weapons  and  delivery  capability
to  force  them  out  of  Indochina.  Since  the  nuclear  attack  contemplated  in  this  require-
ment is  of  a  limited  nature,  the  Chinese  Communist  rulers  would  retain  control  of  the
government  and  country  and,  with  the  initial  attacks,  they  would  probably  make  urgent
appeals  to  the  USSR  for  nuclear  weapons  and  additional  military  assistance.  They  might
also  increase  the  tempo  of  their  military  operations  and  would  undoubtedly  endeavor
to  induce  the  United  States  to  enter  negotiations  in  the  hope  of  forestalling  further
attacks.  A  Chinese  Communist  decision  to  withdraw  or  not  would  be  dependent  pri-
marily upon  continued  or  increased  US  nuclear  attacks  and  other  US  action  as  well
as  upon  Soviet  reaction.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  the  Chinese  Communists  would
be  willing  to  withdraw  from  Indochina  rather  than  be  subjected  to  further  destruction
of  their  homeland."


530 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

targets  in  Communist  China,  including  the  use  of  atomic  weapons  under  the
same  conditions  as  above.

b.  Naval  blockade  of  the  China  coast.

c.  Seizure  or  neutralization  of  Hainan.

d.  Chinese  Nationalist  operations  against  the  Chinese  mainland.
Chinese  Communist  Reaction

16.  As  a  consequence  of  this  allied  broadening  of  the  war,  the  Chinese  Com-
munists would  probably  conclude  that  the  US  was  prepared  to  wage  unlimited
war  against  them.  They  would  continue  to  defend  themselves  to  the  limit  of
their  capabihties  and  would  probably  make  vigorous  efforts  to  secure  the  full
participation  of  the  USSR.  At  the  same  time,  they  would  intensify  their  efforts
to  end  the  war  by  negotiations,  and  might  eventually  indicate  in  some  way
their  wilHngness  to  withdraw  from  Indochina  in  order  to  obtain  a  cease-fire.^
If  unable  to  obtain  a  cease-fire  agreement,  the  Chinese  Communists  would
accept  the  fact  of  unlimited  war  with  the  US  and  would  wage  such  war  to  the
full  extent  of  their  remaining  capabilities.

Soviet  Reaction

17.  In  this  assumed  situation,  the  USSR  would  continue  to  provide  military
assistance  to  Communist  China  as  indicated  above,  but  would  probably  refuse
Chinese  Communist  demand  for  full  Soviet  participation  in  the  war.  The  Krem-
lin would  strongly  urge  the  Chinese  Communists  to  negotiate  for  a  cessation
of  hostihties  on  the  basis  of  withdrawing  from  Indochina.^^  If  the  Chinese  Com-
munists could  not  obtain  a  cease-fire  agreement,  the  USSR  would  provide  Com-
munist China  with  military  assistance  in  every  way  short  of  openly  committing
combat  units  of  the  Soviet  armed  forces  in  operations  against  US  and  allied
forces  outside  Communist-held  territory.  The  USSR  would  provide  military
resources  and  equipment  for  Chinese  Communist  attacks  on  US  bases  or  US
forces  anywhere  in  the  Far  East.  At  this  stage  of  the  conflict,  the  USSR  might
provide  Communist  China  with  nuclear  weapons  and  the  technical  personnel
required  for  their  use.^^

18.  The  USSR  would  continue  its  diplomatic  and  propaganda  campaigns
against  the  US,  insisting  that  the  Soviet  aim  was  purely  the  defense  of  China
against  outright  aggression.  The  USSR  would  also  begin  at  least  partial  mobiliza-

^  The  Deputy  Director  for  InteUigence,  The  Joint  Staff,  and  the  Director  of  Intelligence,
USAF,  suggest  that  the  words  "might  eventually"  in  this  sentence  should  be  replaced
with  "would  probably."

"The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Department  of  the  Army,  recommends  the  de-
letion of  "on  the  basis  of  withdrawing  from  Indochina,"  believing  that  at  this  state  of
the  conflict  the  Kremlin  would  not  willingly  acquiesce  in  the  surrender  of  any  Com-
munist-held territory  in  Indochina  or  elsewhere.

"  The  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence,  The  Joint  Staff,  and  Director  of  Intelligence,
USAF,  believe  that  this  sentence  should  read:

"We  do  not  believe  that  the  USSR  would  release  nuclear  weapons  for  Chinese  Com-
munist use."

The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Department  of  the  Army,  substitutes  for  the  last
sentence :

"It  is  also  believed  that  the  USSR  would  give  serious  consideration  to  making  a  sub-
stantially greater  military  contribution  including  nuclear  weapons  and  the  technical  per-
sonnel required  for  their  use."


Documents  531


tion  of  its  own  military  forces  on  a  war  basis.  It  would  issue  thinly  veiled
threats  of  general  war,  suggesting  attacks  on  Western  Europe  and  on  the  con-
tinental US  but  would  probably  confine  its  operations  to  the  defense  of  China
so  long  as  the  US  did  not  attack  Soviet  territory.

REQUIREMENT  5

To  estimate  Chinese  Communist  and  Soviet  reactions  to  the  success  of  the
foregoing  operations  {i.e.,  to  the  impending  effective  destruction  of  the  Chinese
Communist  capability  to  conduct  military  operations  outside  the  borders  of
Communist  China)  .1^

Chinese  Communist  Reaction

19.  Unless  the  USSR  was  willing  to  make  an  unlimited  commitment  of  Soviet
forces  to  prevent  the  success  of  the  assumed  US  and  allied  operations,  we  be-
lieve that  the  Communist  Chinese,  under  the  assumed  circumstances,  would
accept  any  US  terms  for  a  settlement  which  preserved  the  integrity  of  China
under  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.

Soviet  Reaction

20.  In  this  assumed  situation,  we  believe  the  USSR  would  urge  the  Chinese
Communists  to  accept  any  US  terms  for  a  settlement  which  preserved  the  in-
tegrity of  China  under  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.^^  So  long  as  the  fight-
ing continued,  however,  the  USSR  would  continue  its  aid  to  China.


[Document  60]

June  17,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  TEDUL  212  PRIORITY

From  your  DULTE  187  it  is  evident  that  QUOTE  underground  military
talks  UNQUOTE,  even  more  than  conference  proceedings,  are  pointing  toward
de  facto  partition  under  conditions  such  that  Communist  take-over  of  all  Viet-
nam looms  ahead  clearly.

Chauvel's  mention  of  difficulty  of  QUOTE  selling  UNQUOTE  Vietminh  pro-
posal to  Vietnamese  and  his  doubt  that  Hanoi-Haiphong  area  can  be  held
indicate  to  us  that  French  may  end  by  accepting  any  Vietminh  proposition
which  offers  hope  of  extricating  Expeditionary  Corps.  In  this  connection  we
note  failure  of  Vietminh  thus  far  to  react  to  French  question  regarding  evacua-
tion French  troops  and  citizens  and  Vietnamese  Catholics.

There  can  of  course  be  no  repeat  no  question  of  US  participation  in  any
attempt  to  QUOTE  sell  UNQUOTE  a  partition  to  non-Communist  Vietnamese.

DULLES

"The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Department  of  the  Army,  believes  that  the  re-
sults assumed  in  this  requirement  could  not  be  achieved  by  the  unbalanced  and  insuffi-
cient force  envisaged.

"The  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-2,  Department  of  the  Army,  would  add  "and  re-
tained a  Communist  foothold  in  Indochina."


532 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  61]

June  18,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  TEDUL  222  PRIORITY

EYES  ONLY  UNDER  SECRETARY  FROM  SECRETARY

NO  DISTRIBUTION  TEDUL  221

Supplementing  immediately-preceding-cable,  five-power  staff  report  suggesting
Thakhek-Donghoi  line,  coupled  with  rapid  Delta  deterioration,  is  leading  us  to
reexamine  possible  de  facto  partition  Vietnam.

DULLES


[Document  62]

FROM:  Geneva
TO:  Secretary  of  State
NO:  DULTE  195,  June  18,  3  p.m.

SENT  DEPARTMENT  DULTE  195,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  PARIS
455,  SAIGON  177.

PARIS  EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADOR;  SAIGON  EYES  ONLY  AMBASSA-
DOR

Johnson  saw  Chauvel  this  morning  and  discussed  with  him  conference  situation
in  light  TEDUL  211.  Johnson  stated  seemed  to  us  that  such  fundamental  ques-
tions as  composition,  voting  procedures  and  authority  or  international  control
commission  should  be  dealt  within  conference  rather  than  by  committee.  If
conference  reached  decision  on  fundamental  principles,  working  out  of  details
could  be  done  by  committee  of  experts  of  principally  interested  parties  in  same
pattern  as  present  Franco-Viet  Minh  military  conversations.
Chauvel  said  this  would  be  agreeable  except  that  question  of  authority,  which
he  termed  "relationship  between  international  commission  and  joint  commit-
tees" could  be  dealt  with  by  technical  committee,  thus  implying  France  not
(repeat  not)  prepared  to  maintain  principle  of  subordination  joint  committees
to  international  commission.  As  French  have  already  circulated  proposal  con-
tained SECTO  460  through  secretariat,  it  was  agreed  we  would  make  suggestion
along  foregoing  lines  at  today's  restricted  meeting.  Chauvel  said  they  did  not
(repeat  not)  yet  have  any  further  indication  as  to  what  attitude  Chinese  would
take  on  French  proposal  entirely  clear  from  conversation  with  Chauvel  that
his  main  interest  is  in  keeping  some  conference  activity  of  nine  going  and  that
if  regardless  of  level  representation  we  prepared  continue  some  conference  meet-
ings would  probably  meet  French  point  of  view.  Appears  French  proposal  made
on  assumption  that  there  would  be  complete  recess  of  conference  with  de-
parture of  Smith  and  Eden.

Chauvel  made  reference  to  his  conversation  with  Smith  yesterday  (DULTE
193 — last  paragraph),  making  inquiry  as  to  exactly  what  we  had  in  mind.
Johnson  in  reply  read  to  him  paragraphs  5,  6  and  7  basic  instructions  (TOSEC


Documents  533


138)  stating  that  French  willingness  surrender  even  minimum  enclave  in  north
of  Haiphong  would  so  clearly  contravene  the  principles  which  the  US  con-
sidered essential  as  to  require  our  public  dissociation  with  such  a  solution.
In  reply  to  Chauvel's  questions,  Johnson  made  it  clear  we  were  speaking  only
of  public  disassociation  from  such  a  settlement.  The  US  had  in  the  past  and
of  course  would  continue  working  with  and  supporting  France  in  every  possi-
ble way  and  wherever  we  could.  Chauvel  indicated  full  understanding  our  po-
sition. He  said  they  had  come  to  conclusion  that  what  he  termed  any  "leopard
spot"  solution  was  entirely  impracticable  and  unenforceable.  From  standpoint
of  future  it  would  be  much  better  to  retain  a  reasonably  defensible  line  in
Vietnam  behind  which  there  would  be  no  (repeat  no)  enclaves  of  Viet  Minh
I  and  do  all  possible  behind  that  line  to  build  up  eflfective  Vietnamese  Govern-
ment  and  defense.  They  had  no  (repeat  no)  intention  of  "any  immediate  sur-
render of  Haiphong"  which  in  any  event  must  remain  under  their  control  for
a  considerable  period  for  purely  military  reasons  to  effect  evacuation  of  French
Union  Forces  from  the  north.  However,  if,  as  appeared  likely,  choice  was  giv-
ing Viet  Minh  an  enclave  in  south  in  exchange  for  French  enclave  in  Haiphong,
they  thought  it  preferable  to  give  up  Haiphong.  He  said  no  (repeat  no)  French
parliament  would  approve  conditions  which  the  US  had  laid  down  for  its  inter-
vention, and  French  had  no  (repeat  no)  choice  but  made  the  best  deal  they
could,  obtaining  as  strong  position  as  possible  in  south.  Chauvel  understood
fully  we  would  probably  not  (repeat  not)  be  able  to  publicly  associate  our-
i  selves  with  such  a  solution,  but  he  hoped  that  when  it  came  time  to  put  it  to
the  Vietnamese  the  US  would  consider  it  possible  very  discreetly  to  let  the
Vietnamese  know  that  we  considered  it  best  that  could  be  obtained  under  the
1  circumstances  and  our  public  disassociation  would  not  (repeat  not)  operate  so
I  as  to  encourage  Vietnamese  opposition.  Johnson  replied  he  did  not  (repeat  not)
I  see  how  it  would  be  possible  for  us  to  do  this,  and  in  any  event  he  would  of
,  course  have  to  see  what  the  solution  was.  Chauvel  said  that  such  a  solution  as
partition  should  come  as  no  (repeat  no)  surprise  to  the  Vietnamese  as  Buu  Loc
had  sometime  ago  indicated  to  DeJean  there  had  been  conversations  between
Vietnamese  and  Viet  Minh  in  which  Viet  Minh  had  made  it  clear  that  only
two  alternatives  were  coalition  government  or  partition.  Chauvel  said  Ngo  Dinh
\  and  Diem  are  very  unrealistic,  unreasonable,  and  would  probably  prove  to  be
!  "difficult."

i  Chauvel  said  the  line  French  had  in  mind  had  been  made  available  to  US
I  defense  representatives  at  some  five-power  talks,  but  was  vague  about  time
i  and  place.  He  referred  to  it  as  "line  of  the  chalk  cliffs,"  which  he  said  was  de-
'  fensible  position  running  from  the  sea  across  Vietnam  and  Laos  to  the  Mekong.
Understand  this  is  a  line  roughly  19  parallel  running  from  vicinity  of  Dong  Hoi
to  Thakhek.  Replying  to  query,  Chauvel  said  French  Union  Forces  removed
from  the  north  would  be  deployed  along  that  line.

Chauvel  said  all  indications  were  Mendes-France  would  succeed  in  forming  gov-
;  ernment  next  day  or  two  and  would  probably  himself  assume  Foreign  Minister
i  post.  Said  he  had  been  in  touch  with  Mendes-France  and  had  sent  emissary  to
i  Paris  this  morning  to  brief  him  on  situation  in  Geneva.  Chauvel  said  was  anxious
to  show  complete  continuity  of  French  effort  here  in  Geneva  and  hoped  there
could  be  another  restricted  meeting  tomorrow.  Chauvel  said,  "Under-ground
jimilitary  talks"  last  night  had  been  completely  unproductive,  Viet  Minh  obvi-
j  ously  taking  strong  line  in  view  of  French  Government  situation.

SMITH


534 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  63]

OUTGOING  TELEGRAM  1426

June  19,  1954

Sent  to:  SECSTATE  DULTE  202

RPTD  INFO:  Amembassy  Moscow  138  EYES  ONLY  FOR  AMBASSADOR

I  saw  Molotov  at  his  villa  yesterday  evening  at  my  request  to  inform  him  of
my  departure,  and  because  I  felt  time  had  come  to  sound  a  note  of  warning:
Talk  lasted  more  than  hour  and  a  half.  Molotov  asked  what  I  thought  would
be  best  thing  to  do  with  Conference,  to  adjourn  it  temporarily  or  to  keep  it
going.  I  replied  as  far  as  we  concerned  should  be  kept  going  while  there  was
hope  of  reaching  reasonable  settlement,  but  that  there  was  no  use  referring  to
"committees"  matters  of  major  policy  which  must  be  decided  by  the  Con-
ference as  a  whole.  Before  my  departure  I  felt  it  would  be  desirable  to  exchange
views,  in  order  that  mistakes  of  the  past  should  not  be  repeated  as  the  result
of  misunderstanding  of  our  respective  positions.  With  regard  to  Korean  phase,
I  had  only  to  say  that  in  reserving  our  position  re  final  Chinese  proposal  had
not  implied  to  exclude  Communist  China  from  future  discussions  on  Korean
question.  As  matter  of  fact,  China  was  belligerent  there  against  UN  and  for  ;
practical  reasons  would  have  to  be  party  to  settlement.

Regarding  Indochinese  phase  Molotov  said  he  had  impression  US  avoided
reaching  solution  and  cited  in  this  regard  Robertson  objection  in  yesterday's
restricted  session  to  acceptance  Chou's  proposal  on  Laos  and  Cambodia.  I  said  ;
that  while  proposal  might  be  satisfactory  in  some  respects  it  made  no  mention  \
of  Vietminh  withdrawal  or  of  adequate  supervision.  So  long  as  regular  Vietminh  '
forces  remained  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  we  could  not  help  but  view  situation  ;
in  very  serious  light.  Molotov  cited  Pham  Van  Dong's  remarks  regarding  with-  ■
drawal  Vietminh  "volunteers"  and  emphasized  importance  of  beginning  direct
negotiations  regarding  Laos  and  Cambodia  of  type  now  taking  place  regarding
Vietnam.  I  regretted  that  I  was  not  at  all  convinced  that  Pham  Van  Dong  really
meant  what  he  said.  His  statements  sounded  well  enough,  but  his  written  pro-  i
posals  did  not  bear  them  out.

I  said  I  wanted  to  make  our  position  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  entirely  clear.
In  addition  to  regular  Vietminh  forces  in  these  countries,  which  I  enumerated,
there  were  some  dissident  elements  in  Laos  and  a  much  smaller  number  in
Cambodia.  If  regular  Vietminh  forces  were  withdrawn,  elections  could  be  held,  i
with  guarantees  that  individuals  would  be  discriminated  against  as  regards  their
electoral  rights  for  having  supported  either  side.  Dissidents  would  be  able  to
vote  for  any  candidates  they  chose.  Communists  included.  However,  while  Viet-  '
minh  forces  remained  in  these  countries,  there  could  be  no  peace  nor  could
free  elections  be  held.

In  private  conversations  with  Mr.  Eden  and  others,  Communist  delegates,  in  i
particular  Chou  En-lai,  had  taken  an  apparently  reasonable  view  on  Laos  and  ;
Cambodia,  but  that  here  again,  when  we  came  to  the  point  of  trying  to  get  ,
open  agreement  on  specific  points  we  were  unable  to  do  so.  I  specifically  men-
tioned Chou  En-lai's  statements  to  Eden  in  which  he  said  that  China  would
have  no  objections  to  recognizing  the  kingdoms  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  or  to
these  States  having  forces  and  arms  sufficient  to  maintain  security,  or  their  '


Documents  535


remaining  in  French  Union  so  long  as  they  were  not  used  as  military  bases  by
the  United  States.  We  could  not  disagree  with  any  of  this,  although  if  we  kept
j out  the  Chinese  would  have  to  keep  out,  and  these  small  states  would  have  to
! be  allowed  to  join  with  their  neighbors  in  whatever  regional  security  arrange-
I ments  would  best  protect  their  integrity  without  constituting  a  threat  to  any
1 one  else.  Chou  En-lai  might  be  anxious  about  possibility  of  US  bases  in  Laos
\ and  Cambodia.  We  wanted  on  our  part  to  be  sure  that  these  countries  were  not
i handed  over  to  the  Chinese.  Molotov  said  that  while  he  did  not  know  about  what
j attitude  Chinese  might  have  on  other  questions  in  future,  he  could  assure  me
I that  Chinese  attitude  on  this  particular  question  was  not  at  all  unreasonable,
1 and  that  there  was  nothing  in  it  which  would  give  rise  to  conflicts.  He  added,
however,  that  if  we  continued  to  take  a  one-sided  view  and  insist  on  one-sided
solutions,  he  must  "in  all  frankness  say  that  this  would  not  succeed."  There
were,  he  said,  some  differences  of  view  between  us  on  Laos  and  Cambodia,  espe-
cially in  regard  to  our  refusal  to  recognize  resistance  movements;  point  he
wanted  to  make,  however,  was  that  basis  for  reaching  agreement  was  present
i and  that  agreement  could  be  reached  so  long  as  neither  side  "adopted  one-
1 sided  views  or  put  forward  extreme  pretensions."  This,  he  said,  could  only  lead
\ to  other  side's  doing  same.

! Resistance  movements  existed,  in  Laos  and  Cambodia,  Molotov  asserted.

About  50%  of  the  territory  of  Laos  was  not  under  the  control  of  official  gov-
, ernment.  It  was  true  that  much  smaller  resistance  movement  existed  in  Cam-
) bodia.  He  said  that  in  fact  conditions  in  all  three  Indochinese  countries  were
different — large  resistance  movement  controlling  three-quarters  of  territory  in
Viet  Nam,  substantial  movement  in  Laos  controlling,  as  he  had  indicated,  about
half  territory,  and  much  smaller  movement  in  Cambodia.  I  said,  with  regard  to
' two  latter  counts  solution  was  simple.  Withdraw  invading  Vietminh  forces  and
I let  dissident  elements  elect  communist  representatives  to  general  assemblies  if
jl they  wished.  But  the  elections  must  be  actually  "free."  Regarding  Viet  Nam,
i I  said  we  recognized  relative  strength  of  the  Vietminh  but  they  were  demand-
j ing  too  much.  It  seems  Vietminh  demanded  all  Delta,  including  both  Hanoi
|: and  Haiphong.  The  French  were  our  allies,  and  we  took  grave  view  of  this
extreme  pressure.  Molotov  said  that  if  French  were  to  have  something  in  South
and  something  in  North,  and  probably  in  center  as  well,  this  would  add  up  to
three-quarters  of  country  or  better,  which  was  wholly  unreasonable.  He  said
there  was  old  Russian  proverb  that  if  you  try  to  chase  two  rabbits  at  once  you
are  apt  to  miss  both  of  them,  and  added  that  in  this  case  wanting  something  in
North  and  in  South  was  like  chasing  two  rabbits.  If  French  were  to  give  way
to  Vietminh  in  North,  they  would  gain  territory  probably  greater  in  extent  in
South  in  recompense.  I  said  appearance  of  "partition"  was  repugnant  to  US,
and  that  as  far  as  proverb  about  rabbits  went  I  felt  that  Vietminh  were  chasing
two  rabbits  in  wanting  both  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.  Vietminh  demands  for  all
the  Delta,  or  efforts  take  it  all  by  force  prior  to  reaching  political  solution
through  elections,  was  serious  matter  in  view  of  my  Government.  Molotov
: disagreed,  stating  that  present  French  position  in  area  was  due  only  to  Vietminh
restraint,  and  that  two  cities  did  not  even  have  normal  communications  between
:  each  other.  In  regard  to  US  aversion  to  partition,  he  said  that  this  problem
could  easily  be  solved  by  holding  elections  at  once,  which  would  decide  "one
y  way  or  the  other."  He  repeated  that  important  thing  in  reaching  agreement  on
any  of  these  questions  relating  Indochina  was  to  be  realistic  about  actual  facts,
and  to  avoid  putting  out  one-sided  views  or  extreme  pretensions.  If  French  were
' encouraged  to  disregard  actual  situation  and  to  ask  for  too  much,  he  said,  one


536 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

could  only  expect  conflict  to  continue.  (He  made  it  clear  that  he  considered  US
as  party  likely  to  do  the  encouraging.)  I  replied  that  US  was  not  one  of  princi-
pals to  Indochinese  dispute  and  did  not  cast  deciding  vote,  to  which  Molotov
remarked  "maybe  so,  but  you  have  veto,  that  word  I  hear  you  use  so  often,"
and  went  on  to  say  that  among  other  delegations  present  at  Conference  there
seemed  to  be  real  willingness  to  reach  agreement.  Agreement  had  in  fact,  he
added,  very  nearly  been  reached,  although  he  hoped  I  would  realize  this  was
not  information  for  publication.  (This  remark,  obviously,  referred  to  private
French-Vietminh  military  conversations  which  I  have  mentioned.)  I  said  I  must
emphasize  my  Government  held  serious  views  on  issues  involved  in  Indochina
situation,  more  serious,  perhaps,  than  did  some  of  other  governments  repre-
sented at  Conference.  I  hope  he  would  give  consideration  to  this,  and  assist  in
overcoming  some  of  the  deep-rooted  suspicions  of  Asiatic  participants,  which
became  apparent  every  time  we  tried  to  reconcile  formal  proposals.

COMMENT:

Throughout  conversation  Molotov  maintained  friendly  and  mild  tone  evident  j
in  all  informal  conversations.  He  is  completely  sure  of  himself  and  of  his
position.  What  he  had  to  say  regarding  Delta,  Laos  and  Cambodia  confirms  |
Communist  intentions  to  play  all  the  cards  they  hold.  His  avoidance  of  endors-  \
ing  Chou's  remarks  to  Eden  concerning  Laos  and  Cambodia  indicated  that
simple  withdrawal  of  Vietminh  forces  from  these  countries  was  not  acceptable  •
and  that  some  form  of  de  facto  partition  was  intended  in  Laos,  at  least.  His  !
remarks  seemed  to  indicate  that  Communists  have  eye  on  as  much  as  half  of
country.  This  conversation,  together  with  the  inflexible  position  which  Molo-
tov took  during  his  last  conversation  with  me  regarding  the  composition  of  a
Neutral  Nations  Supervisory  Commission  for  Indochina,  as  well  as  his  speech
on  Tuesday,  June  8,  and  all  subsequent  speeches  on  the  Communist  side,  which
took  firm  positions  on  points  the  Communists  know  to  be  unacceptable  to  Eden,
Bidault  and  me,  are  highly  significant.  The  recent  emphasis  by  all  three  Com-
munist spokesmen  that  France  should  carry  on  direct  political  as  well  as  direct
military  negotiations  with  Vietminh  show  their  interest  in  having  a  convenient
way  of  holding  out  for  greater  gains  in  their  direct  negotiations  with  the  French
as  well  as  within  the  framework  of  the  Conference.

Molotov  in  effect  told  France  in  his  June  8  speech  that  her  position  and  that
of  the  Government  she  was  supporting  in  Indochina  were  hopeless  and  that  she  ,
had  best  face  up  to  facts  and  capitulate  in  direct  negotiations  with  the  Viet-
minh. His  speech,  of  course,  was  in  large  part  intended  to  assist  in  the  destruc-
tion of  the  French  Government  for  the  implications  that  that  would  have  on  the
European  as  well  as  the  Asiatic  scene.  Nevertheless,  his  harsh  and  even  insulting  ^
language  seemed  to  reflect  the  confident,  nearly  triumphant  mood  in  which  he
has  been  lately.  It  would  be  misleading  to  ascribe  the  harder  line  which  Molotov
brought  back  with  him  from  Moscow  entirely  to  Soviet  tactical  considerations
in  regard  to  the  French  Government  crisis.  While  the  Soviets  may  think  that
the  blocking  of  EDC  through  the  destruction  of  the  French  Government  would  .
reduce  future  threats  to  them  in  Europe,  the  fact  remains  that  the  Indochina  \
conflict  potentially  involves  a  much  more  immediate  threat  of  general  war.

It  is  probable  that  initial  Soviet  tactics  were  to  forestall  US  intervention  in
the  Delta  by  some  kind  of  a  compromise  formula  involving  Hanoi  and  Haiphong
if  it  appeared  that  such  intervention  were  imminent.  The  recent  raising  of  the
ante  in  the  negotiations  here  by  the  Communist  side  probably  reflects  an  esti-


Documents  537


\  mate  on  their  part  that  our  intervention  is  improbable  and  that  they  are  safe
to  go  ahead  there,  keeping,  of  course,  a  sharp  eye  out  for  indications  of  change
in  our  attitude.

While  the  Communist  position  on  Laos  and  Cambodia  remains  more  flexible
I  than  their  position  in  regard  to  the  Delta,  they  will  get  all  they  can  in  Laos
j  now.  In  the  whole  are  the  determining  factor  for  the  Communists  will  continue
;  to  be  their  estimate  of  the  likelihood  of  US  or  joint  intervention  and  nothing
short  of  a  conviction  on  their  part  that  this  intervention  will  take  place  will
■  stop  them  from  going  ahead  with  their  plans  for  taking  all  of  it  eventually,
l|  through  military  conquest,  French  capitulation,  or  infiltration.
I Realize  much  of  above  is  repetitious,  but  it  will  serve  as  final  summary.

I  SMITH


!i  [Document  64]

:  FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State
■  NO:  5035,  June  24,  10  p.m.

i

'  SENT  DEPARTMENT  5035;  REPEATED  INFORMATION  GENEVA  443.
LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION.

Since  Mendes  was  tied  up  in  National  Assembly  today,  he  asked  me  to  see
I  Parodi  and  Chauvel  regarding  his  talk  with  Chou.  Chauvel  did  all  the  talking  and
'  described  the  meeting  as  follows:

!  He  said  that  Mendes  opened  the  meeting  telling  Chou  that  he  had  been  glad
,  to  agree  to  Chou's  idea  of  a  meeting  and  that  he  was  interested  to  hear  any-
I  thing  Chou  had  to  say.  Chou  then  spoke  very  fully  and  most  of  the  time  at  the
j  meeting,  which  lasted  a  little  over  two  hours,  was  taken  up  by  Chou's  state-
1  ments  and  the  necessary  translations.
Chou  in  general  followed  the  same  line  as  he  previously  had  taken  with  Eden
and  Bidault,  with  certain  important  exceptions,  which  Chauvel  considered  to
represent  a  considerable  advance  over  Chou's  previous  position.
;  Chou  started  by  talking  about  Laos  and  Cambodia.  He  said  that  the  immediate
,  problem  was  to  obtain  the  withdrawal  of  all  foreign  forces  including  Viet  Minh
from  the  entire  territory  of  both  countries.  He  said  that  then  the  governments
of  the  two  countries  should  arrange  political  settlements  within  their  own  coun-
tries based  on  the  will  of  the  majority  of  the  people.  Chou  said  that  while  there
should  be  no  persecution  of  minorities,  he  had  no  objection  to  the  two  coun-
tries retaining  their  monarchical  form  of  government  if  they  so  desired.  The
one  thing  upon  which  he  insisted  was  that  there  should  be  no  (repeat  no)  US
bases  in  either  Laos  and  Cambodia.  He  stated  that  he  saw  no  objection  to  Laos
and  Cambodia  remaining  within  the  French  Union,  provided  they  so  desired.
I  The  talk  then  turned  to  Vietnam  where  Chauvel  considered  important  advances
ji  in  Chou's  position  were  revealed.  Chou  said  that  he  recognized  that  there  were
1  now  two  governments  in  the  territory  of  Vietnam,  the  Viet  Minh  Government
j,  and  the  Vietnamese  Government.  According  to  Chauvel,  this  was  the  first  time
'>  that  Chou  had  recognized  the  valid  existence  of  the  Vietnamese  Government.
Chou  then  said  that  the  settlement  in  Vietnam  should  be  reached  in  two  stages.


538 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

First,  an  armistice  which  should  be  reached  as  soon  as  possible,  and  second,
peace,  which  would  obviously  take  longer  to  achieve.  Chauvel  said  that  Chou
clearly  accepted,  and  for  the  first  time,  the  French  thesis  that  there  should  be
two  phases;  first  military  and  second  political  to  the  eventual  settlement  of  Viet-
nam. Regarding  military  settlement,  Chou  said  that  there  should  be  regroupment
of  troops  in  large  zones  in  order  to  stop  the  fighting.  Chou  said  that  he  was  ready
to  discuss  the  division  of  zones  if  Mendes  so  desired.  Mendes  answered  that  he
was  not  yet  prepared  for  such  a  detailed  discussion  and  said  he  preferred  that
it  be  handled  by  the  delegations  at  Geneva.  Therefore,  there  was  no  discussion
in  detail  regarding  the  make-up  of  the  eventual  zones.

Regarding  the  final  political  settlement,  Chou  said  this  should  be  reached  by
direct  negotiations  between  the  two  governments  in  Vietnam,  i.e.,  the  Vietnamese
Government  and  the  Viet  Minh  Government.  Chou  further  said  that  France
might  be  able  to  help  in  these  negotiations.  He  added  that  he  saw  no  reason
why  the  eventually  united  state  of  Vietnam  should  not  remain  within  the  French
Union.

Mendes  at  this  point  said  that  since  the  war  had  been  going  on  for  8  years  and
passions  were  high,  it  would  take  a  long  time  before  elections  could  be  held  as
the  people  must  be  given  a  full  opportunity  to  cool  off  and  calm  down.  Chou
made  no  objection  to  this  statement  by  Mendes  and  did  not  press  for  early
elections.

Mendes  then  told  Chou  that  negotiations  with  the  Viet  Minh  for  reasons  not
very  clear  to  the  French  had  been  at  a  practical  standstill  for  the  past  week  or
ten  days  and  he  suggested  that  a  word  from  Chou  to  the  leader  of  the  Viet  Minh
delegation  might  be  helpful  in  speeding  things  up  which  seemed  to  be  Chou's
desire  as  well  as  Mendes'.  Chou  agreed  to  intervene  with  the  Viet  Minh  and
ask  them  to  speed  up  negotiations.

The  conversation  never  touched  on  any  subject  other  than  Indochina.  According
to  Chauvel,  no  other  item  of  Far  Eastern  policy  was  touched  upon,  nor  was
Europe  nor  the  UN  or  possible  recognition  of  China  by  France  ever  mentioned.
Chauvel  is  returning  to  Geneva  tonight  and  will  see  the  head  of  the  Viet  Minh
delegation  tomorrow  in  an  attempt  to  get  the  military  talks  under  way  again.

DILLON


[Document  65]

June  24,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  TOSEC  478
Reference  SECTO  512.
Our  position  remains  that  in  TOSEC  461.

The  imminence  of  a  settlement  between  Mendes-France  and  the  Communists,
which  in  some  form  will  probably  be  brought  before  a  revived  conference  for
its  approval,  emphasizes  the  importance  of  adhering  to  these  instructions.  Other-
wise we  may  be  involved  in  committee  work  leading  to  the  making  of  decisions
which  we  might  be  obliged  publicly  to  disavow.

We  should  avoid  being  drawn  into  the  French  effort  to  give  conference
semblance  of  vitality  by  means  of  a  series  of  committee  operations.

FYI  Our  thinking  at  present  is  that  our  role  at  Geneva  should  soon  be  re-


Documents  539


stricted  to  that  of  observer,  and  now  that  Lord  Reading  has  departed,  you  should
I  leave  in  a  few  days.  Bonsai  could  continue  as  chief  observer  in  accord  with  terms
I  i  of  TEDUL  211 .  Let  us  have  your  views.

DULLES


i [Document  66]
1954  JUN  28
SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  4852
!  TOSEC

Following  is  translation  aide  memoire  delivered  by  Bonnet  to  Secretary  and
Eden  June  26.  Text  coordinated  US-UK  reply  contained  next  following  mes-
sage.

"The  coming  weeks  will  be  of  decisive  importance  insofar  as  Indochina  is
\  concerned.  Following  his  conversation  with  Mr.  Chou  En-lai,  the  head  of  the
I  French  Government  has  instructed  M.  Chauvel  to  approach  M.  Phan  Van
Dong  with  a  view  to  carrying  on  with  him  directly  negotiations  to  ascertain
I  whether  a  basis  can  be  found,  in  his  opinion,  for  a  territorial  settlement  in  Viet-
■  nam  or  not.

j  "The  objective  of  the  French  Government  is  to  arrive  at  a  regrouping  which
[  will  assure  the  State  of  Vietnam  a  territory  as  solid  as  possible,  and  without  the
I  de  facto  division  which  will  result  being  too  cut  up.  That  is  the  reason  why  the
1  French  Government  will  insist  on  maintaining  Haiphong  as  long  as  possible  and
[  on  obtaining  the  neutralization  of  the  bishoprics  of  Bui  Chu  and  Phat  Diem.

"It  is  difficult  to  predict  the  result  of  this  negotiation  in  which  the  French
I  authorities  must  face  two  sorts  of  difficulties:  on  the  one  hand  it  will  be  most
j  difficult  to  obtain  concessions  from  the  Viet  Minh  in  the  north;  and  on  the
other  hand  the  negotiations  risk  causing,  if  the  agreement  is  concluded,  danger-
ous reactions  by  the  Vietnamese  Government  whose  citizens  are  serving  at  the
present  time  under  the  orders  of  the  French  command,  comprising  a  major  pro-
jj  portion  thereof.

I "The  French  Prime  Minister  feels  that  the  allied  American  and  British  govern-
!  ments  should  be  as  well  informed  as  possible  of  these  possibilities.  M.  Mendes-
France  wishes  especially  to  call  the  attention  of  these  two  Governments  to  the
following  aspects  of  the  situation :

"(1)  If  the  Viet  Minh  appears  disposed  to  negotiate,  it  is  for  a  series  of  reasons
among  which  figure  without  doubt  the  fear  of  a  spreading  of  the  conflict,  a
spreading  which  nothing  at  the  present  time  would  lead  us  to  expect,  but  which
the  general  world  situation  does  not  permit  us  to  exclude.  Although  the  fear  of
such  an  extension  of  the  conflict  may  have  a  determining  influence  on  the
decisions  of  our  adversaries,  the  French  Government  realizes  that  precise  declara-
i  tions  on  this  subject  are  not  possible  at  this  time.  But  it  considers  it  would  be
:  very  useful  if  the  final  communique  of  the  Anglo-American  talks  in  Washington
j  could  state  in  some  fashion  or  other  that,  if  it  is  not  possible  to  reach  a  reason-
able settlement  at  the  Geneva  Conference,  a  serious  aggravation  of  international
;  relations  would  result.

"(2)  The  problem  which  is  posed  with  regard  to  Vietnam  is  different.  It  is
I  to  be  feared  that  any  solution  providing  for  an  indefinite  period  a  division  of
the  country  will  cause  a  violent  and  unreasoning  reaction  on  the  part  of  the
Vietnamese  patriots.  While  this  reaction  may  be  in  a  large  measure  inevitable,


540 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

every  effort  should  nevertheless  be  made  to  canaUze  this  reaction  in  a  direction
in  conformity  with  the  interests  of  Vietnam,  France  and  their  allies.

'To  this  end  it  appears  highly  desirable  to  the  Prime  Minister  of  France  to
obtain  the  assurance  of  the  United  States  Government  that  nothing  will  be  done
by  the  latter  which  might  even  implicitly  encourage  such  a  reaction.  Under
present  circumstances  such  action  could  lead  to  no  result  but  to  ruin  any
hope  of  seeing  Vietnam  consolidate  herself  in  such  a  fashion  as  to  create  in
the  face  of  the  Viet  Minh  an  authentically  national  and  independent  force.  It  is
for  this  reason  that  the  French  Government  strongly  hopes  it  can  count  on  the
United  States  at  the  proper  moment  to  intervene  with  the  Vietnamese  to  counsel
upon  them  wisdom  and  self-control  and  to  dissuade  them  from  refusing  an
agreement  which,  if  it  is  reached,  is  dictated  not  by  the  spirit  of  abandoning
them,  but  on  the  contrary  by  the  desire  to  save  in  Indochina  all  that  can  possibly
be  saved,  and  to  give  the  Vietnamese  state,  under  peaceful  conditions,  opportuni-
ties which  have  not  always  been  possible  heretofore  because  of  the  war."

DULLES


[Document  67]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  5117,  June  30,  7  p.m.


SENT  DEPARTMENT  5117,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  SAIGON  634,
GENEVA  449  i

EYES  ONLY  MCCLINTOCK  SAIGON,  JOHNSON  GENEVA

Jebb  came  to  see  me  this  morning  after  his  interview  with  Mendes-France  in  \
the  course  of  which  he  delivered  reply  to  French  aide-memoire  of  June  26
(DEPTEL  4853)  in  the  form  of  aide-memoire,  followed  by  verbal  comments
along  lines  outlined  in  paragraph  2  reference  telegram.

Jebb  reported  that  Mendes  was  pleased  with  text  reply  and  stated  that  Parodi
would  give  us  definite  French  position  in  day  or  so.  Mendes  also  confirmed  that
negotiations  with  Viet  Minh  at  Geneva  were  stalled  (Geneva  SECTO  544,  re-
peated Paris  as  519).

Mendes  was  somewhat  perplexed  by  reference  to  "line  running  generally  west
from  Dong  Hoi"  as  possible  partition  line  for  while  Dong  Hoi  approximately  at
17.5  degrees  French  had  been  holding  out  for  18th  parallel  in  face  Viet  Minh  ,
wanting  13th.

On  question  of  elections,  Jebb  quoted  Mendes  as  stating  that  the  Viet  Minh
wanted  them  to  be  held  in  six  months  but  that  the  French  were  taking  the  posi-
tion that  they  should  be  delayed  for  a  year  after  final  settlement  and  withdrawal
of  troops  had  been  achieved.  This,  as  presently  envisaged,  would  mean  a  year  [
and  half  to  two  years  from  now.

As  reported  EMBTEL  5099,  we  delivered  reply  to  aide-memoire  to  Foreign
Office  this  morning.

DILLON


Documents  541


[Document  68]

July  2,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  39

RPTD  INFO:  Amembassy  SAIGON  31
Amconsul  GENEVA  9

REDEPTEL  4852,  June  28;  Saigon  2746;  Geneva  489

It  seems  to  me  that  new  Vietnamese  Prime  Minister  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  who  has
reputation  of  uncompromising  nationalist,  is  quite  in  the  dark  about  develop-
ments critically  affecting  country  he  is  trying  to  lead.  We  fear  that  if  results  of
French  negotiations  with  Communists  are  revealed  to  him  as  a  fait  accompli,
the  very  reaction  French  wish  to  avoid  will  result.

You  should  therefore  indicate  our  concern  to  the  French  and  ascertain  their
own  intentions  with  respect  to  consulting  him  or  minimizing  his  resentment  and
their  views  with  respect  to  plans  and  prospects  for  maintaining  order  in  South
Vietnam.

DULLES


[Document  69]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  32,  July  2,  8  p.m.

SENT  DEPARTMENT 32, REPEATED INFORMATION GENEVA  2,

SAIGON  4.

Re  DEPTELs  5  and  8.

I  took  up  reference  telegrams  with  Mendes  this  afternoon.  Regarding  present
withdrawals  in  the  delta  Mendes  said  that  these  had  been  planned  in  May  by
the  Laniel  government  and  he  had  made  no  change  in  the  original  plan.  The
withdrawals  represent  a  definite  shortening  of  the  French  lines  to  protect  Hanoi,
Haiphong  and  the  connecting  road.

He  said  he  had  been  much  surprised  to  read  in  the  papers  that  a  State  Depart-
ment spokesman  had  said  that  the  US  had  not  had  prior  information  regarding
these  withdrawals.  He  had  assumed,  he  said,  that  Ely  had  fully  informed  O'Daniel
of  his  plans.  He  then  accordingly  asked  Ely  this  morning  if  that  was  not  the  case
and  Ely  had  told  him  that  he  had  not  informed  O'Daniel.  Mendes  accordingly
offered  his  apologies  and  said  that  he  had  instructed  Ely  in  the  future  to  keep
O'Daniel  fully  informed  on  the  spot.

Regarding  withdrawals  themselves  he  said  they  were  necessary  to  ensure  the
safety  of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps.  He  said  that  the  French  had  offered  to
0  take  with  them  those  members  of  the  local  population  who  desired  protection  and
j-^  that  the  French  forces  had  provided  transportation  for  such  people.  He  said  he
'  had  not  seen  the  latest  figures  but  a  fairly  substantial  number  of  people  had


542 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon'  Papers /Vol.  I  i

availed  themselves  of  this  opportunity.  On  the  other  hand,  there  had  been  many
who  preferred  to  stay  where  they  were.

In  this  connection  he  said  that  since  Dien  Bien  Phu  the  Viet  Minh  had  not  con-
ducted reprisals  when  they  occupied  new  territory  but  had  behaved  very  well  '
toward  the  local  population.  He  said  that  he  realized  that  this  might  only  be  a  \
temporary  policy  to  facilitate  negotiations  at  Geneva,  but  that  for  whatever  it  \
was  worth,  it  was  the  fact.  He  then  said  that  the  withdrawals  were  not  yet  com-  ;
pleted  and  showed  me  on  a  rough  map  where  further  withdrawals  were  sched-  \
uled.  These  include  the  Phu  Ly  area  and  a  portion  of  the  area  to  the  west  of  i
Hanoi.  1
Regarding  the  right  of  population  transfer  as  contained  in  paragraph  6  of  |
DEPTEL  4853,  Mendes  said  that  he  was  thoroughly  in  accord  that  this  would  \
be  a  good  thing  from  the  French  point  of  view.  He  said  that  it  had  been  men-  |
tioned  to  the  Viet  Minh  in  Geneva  and  that  they  had  made  no  answer  either  !
favorable  or  unfavorable.  When  I  reiterated  the  importance  that  we  attach  to  this  j
subject,  Mendes  made  a  note  of  it  and  said  that  he  was  writing  Chauvel  tonight  \
and  would  include  in  his  letter  of  instruction  a  reference  to  this  subject.  I  think  \
it  would  be  useful  if  Johnson  would  stress  this  subject  in  his  next  talk  with  \
Chauvel.  1;
Mendes  then  said  negotiations  in  Geneva  had  been  at  a  standstill  and  that  he  [
had  instructed  Chauvel  to  go  to  Berne  for  two  days  to  show  that  the  French  \
were  in  no  greater  hurry  than  the  Viet  Minh.  He  said  that  the  Soviet  representa-  |
five  at  Geneva  had  told  Chauvel  not  to  worry  about  the  slow  pace  of  the  negotia-  \
tions  as  at  conferences  such  as  these  everything  was  always  settled  in  last  few
hours.  !
Regarding  DEPTEL  8,  use  of  word  "withdrawal"  was  intended  only  to  mean  !
deployment  agreed  regroupment  areas.  Mendes  said  that  the  French  on  timing  i
of  election  are  holding  out  for  18  months  after  completion  of  regrouping  which,
he  said,  would  mean  22  or  23  months  after  cease-fire.  Viet  Minh  are  asking  for
elections  six  months  after  cease-fire.  Mendes  expects  the  final  result  will  be  a
compromise  somewhere  in  between.  t
He  then  commented  that  Diem  had  made  an  unhelpful  speech  the  other  day  in  ;
Saigon  when  he  was  quoted  as  having  said  that  he  was  in  favor  of  the  elections  -
within  a  year.  Mendes  thinks  that  this  is  too  soon  and  not  in  the  interests  of
Vietnam,  and  it  runs  counter  to  what  the  French  were  trying  to  obtain  at  Geneva.

DILLON


[Document  70]

1954  Jul  3

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  52  PRIORITY

EYES  ONLY  FOR  AMBASSADOR  FROM  SECRETARY

We  are  considering  here  what  position  we  should  take  as  regards  the  French
negotiations  in  Indochina.  These  negotiations  appear  to  have  gone  underground
and  we  have  little  reliable  knowledge  of  what  is  really  in  the  minds  of  the  French
Government  or  what  is  likely  to  emerge.  We  have  ourselves  agreed  with  the
British  on  the  7  points  previously  communicated  to  you.  However,  we  have  the
distinct  impression  that  the  British  look  upon  this  merely  as  an  optimum  solu-


Documents  543


tion  and  that  they  would  not  encourage  the  French  to  hold  out  for  a  solution  as
good  as  this.  Indeed,  during  the  talks  here  the  British  wanted  to  express  these
7  points  merely  as  a  "hope"  without  any  indication  of  firmness  on  our  part.  The
word  "respect"  was  agreed  on  as  a  compromise.  The  fact  is  however  that  the
US  would  not  want  to  be  associated  in  any  way  with  a  settlement  which  fell
materially  short  of  the  7  point  memorandum.

I  We  fear  the  French  may  in  fact  without  prior  consultation  with  us  of  more
[than  perfunctory  character  agree  to  a  settlement  which  though  superficially  re-
i.sembling  the  7  points  will  in  fact  contain  such  political  clauses  and  restrictions
that  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Southern  Vietnam  will  almost  surely  fall  in  a  few
months  under  Communist  control.  No  doubt  such  a  solution  would  be  accepted
with  satisfaction  by  the  French  people  and  parliament  who  would  rejoice  in  the
ending  of  the  fighting  and  close  their  eyes  to  the  possible  future  implications
of  the  settlement.  At  this  point  the  US  may  be  asked  as  one  of  the  powers  which
convoked  and  participated  in  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Geneva  Conference  to
sign  or  otherwise  adhere  to  the  settlement.  Also  the  Communists  may  insist  upon
this  and  take  the  position  that  if  we  did  not  do  so  that  would  be  a  violation  of
the  understanding  upon  which  the  armistice  was  negotiated  and  they  might  even
threaten  to  withdraw  their  armistice  terms  if  the  US  did  not  adhere  to  them.  This
Communist  tactic  would  well  serve  their  purpose  of  creating  animosity  between
i  France  and  the  US  at  a  time  when  the  defeat  of  EDC  is  a  major  Soviet  objective.

We  are  giving  consideration  to  various  possibilities  such  as  the  withdrawal  of
the  remnants  of  our  delegation  from  Geneva  or  clarification  of  our  position  as
regards  the  French  position.  This  latter  matter  would  not  (rpt  not)  serve  the
desired  purpose  unless  it  were  public  and  if  it  were  public  it  might  be  looked
upon  as  a  threat  which  would  create  the  French  antagonistic  reaction  which  we
want  to  avoid.

Possibly  you  could  find  out  whether  or  not  there  is  the  danger  which  we  ap-
prehend and  whether  or  not  the  French  are  negotiating  on  the  assumption  that  we
may  not  be  a  party  to  the  settlement.  If  the  French  are  operating  on  this  basis
and  if  they  know  that  the  Communists  also  accept  this  premise,  the  situation
is  not  dangerous.  If  either  or  both  French  and  Communists  are  operating  on
assumption  we  will  adhere  to  any  settlement  they  agree  to,  then  we  may  be  headed
for  serious  trouble.  I  would  like  your  personal  thoughts  on  this  matter.

I  DULLES


[Document  71]  ^  ^

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  41,  July  4,  3  p.m.

IeYES  ONLY  SECRETARY
jReference  DEPTEL  52.

;I  can  well  understand  difficulties  we  face  as  described  in  reference  telegram.  I
jfeel  that  French  position  is  fairly  clear  as  of  now  but  difficulty  may  well  arise
;'in  last  days  or  hours  of  conference  after  Ministers  have  returned  to  Geneva.


544 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol  I

In  that  connection  we  face  following  problem.  If  we  withdraw  delegation  from
Geneva  we  lose  all  possibility  of  influencing  French  to  stand  firm,  and  we  also
throw  away  whatever  restraining  influence  we  may  still  have  on  Communist
delegations.  French  would  feel  abandoned  and,  with  only  Eden  to  advise,  would  '
undoubtedly  accept  a  result  more  favorable  to  the  Communists  than  if  we  stayed  ;
at  Geneva.  The  same  effect  but  to  a  lesser  extent  would  result  if  neither  Under
Secretary  nor  you  return  to  Geneva  for  closing  negotiations.  i
On  the  other  hand  even  if  we  do  maintain  a  full  delegation  at  Geneva  headed  \
by  you  or  Under  Secretary  there  is  always  the  possibility  and  maybe  even  prob-
ability  that  French  will  accept  a  settlement  that  does  not  fully  accord  with  7  -
points  in  US-UK  agreement.  This  will  be  particularly  apt  to  happen  if  Eden  ;
does  not  stand  firm  in  final  negotiations.  (
I  do  not  feel  that  public  statement  of  our  position  would  be  helpful  as  it  would  ;
create  the  antagonism  mentioned  in  next  to  last  paragraph  of  reference  telegram.
Even  if  we  do  not  consider  final  settlement  satisfactory  to  us,  I  feel  that  unless  j
we  agree  not  to  use  force  to  upset  it  we  will  be  in  an  untenable  position  here  '
vis-a-vis  Soviet  and  neutralist  propaganda  that  will  picture  US  as  the  nation  which  \
by  its  acts  clearly  shows  that  it  wants  war.  \
Mendes  is  fully  conscious  that  we  may  feel  that  we  cannot  be  a  party  to  the  !
settlement.  However,  I  do  not  feel  that  this  would  necessarily  weigh  very  heavily  |
with  him  in  final  settlement,  particularly  if  he  can  obtain  Eden's  support.  Nat-  »
urally  I  have  no  idea  what  is  in  mind  of  Communists  on  this  score.  *
We  have  one  strong  card  which  so  far  we  have  apparently  not  cared  to  use.  That
is  we  can  trade  willingness  to  give  full  diplomatic  support  to  French  in  their  '
effort  to  sell  settlement  to  Vietnam  in  return  for  a  settlement  that  we  can  support.  \
The  indication  which  French  now  have  that  no  matter  what  the  settlement  may  '
be,  we  cannot  be  counted  upon  for  support  with  Vietnam  obviously  greatly
weakens  our  influence  with  French.

In  conclusion  if  we  base  our  actions  solely  on  the  attempt  to  get  the  best  possible
settlement  I  feel  that  we  should  (1)  maintain  our  delegation  at  Geneva,  (2)  have
you  or  the  Under  Secretary  return  to  head  the  delegation  when  the  other  Foreign
Ministers  return,  (3)  tell  the  French  at  once  that  we  will  support  them  in  selling  '
settlement  to  Vietnam  provided  that  settlement  is  satisfactory  to  us,  (4)  main-
tain close  contact  with  and  pressure  on  Eden  so  he  sticks  to  7  points  US-UK
agreement.

I  fully  realize  that  domestic  political  considerations  must  also  be  taken  into  \
account,  but  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  evaluate  them  so  I  have  confined  these
thoughts  to  a  description  of  the  best  method  available  to  US  to  influence  the  final  \
settlement  at  Geneva  in  the  direction  we  desire.

DILLON


Documents  545


'  [Document  72]

FROM:  Paris
!tO:  Secretary  of  State

|nO:  66,  July  6,  11  p.m.

i

ISENT  DEPARTMENT  6,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  GENEVA  8,
I  SAIGON  11.

After  finishing  discussion  of  Kerr  article,  Mendes  said  that  the  second  major
thing  which  he  wished  to  discuss  with  me  was  the  question  of  the  resumption  of
the  Geneva  talks  at  the  Ministerial  level.  He  said  that  it  was  now  clear  that  the
Ministers  would  have  to  make  the  decisions  as  the  technical  committees  had
been  unsuccessful.  Therefore,  and  in  view  of  his  July  20  deadline,  he  personally
hoped  that  Ministerial  discussions  could  commence  as  soon  as  possible.
In  this  connection  he  mentioned  a  report  that  Molotov  might  return  to  Geneva
on  July  8.  He  said  that  Chauvel  had  tried  to  confirm  this  with  the  Russians  at
Geneva  but  they  replied  that  they  were  without  information.  Mendes  said  he
very  much  did  not  (repeat  not)  want  to  be  in  a  position  of  talking  at  Geneva
with  only  Molotov  and  Chou  En-lai.  Therefore,  he  would  like  very  much  to  find
out  what  US  intentions  and  plans  were  as  to  when  the  Secretary  or  Under  Secre-
tary would  return  to  Geneva.  He  said  that  Massigli  was  making  similar  inquiries
of  Eden  on  his  arrival  today.

I  said  that  I  was  unfamiliar  as  to  US  plans  and  asked  Mendes  what  his  under-
standing was  as  to  when  the  conference  would  resume.  He  replied  that  it  was  his
definite  understanding  that  all  five  Foreign  Ministers  had  agreed  to  return  to
Geneva  not  (repeat  not)  later  than  July  12,  to  recommence  their  discussions.
Referring  to  US,  he  indicated  that  he  expected  that  either  the  Secretary  or  the
Under  Secretary  would  return  at  that  time.  I  told  him  that  I  was  not  informed
but  that  I  would  inquire  and  let  him  know  as  soon  as  possible.

,  Mendes  then  informed  me  that  he  will  announce  tomorrow  to  the  National
Assembly  that  if  a  cease-fire  is  not  (repeat  not)  agreed  to  prior  to  July  21,  it
will  be  necessary  for  the  Assembly  to  approve  the  sending  of  conscripts  to  Indo-
china and  that  the  last  act  of  his  government  before  resigning  will  be  to  introduce
a  law  to  authorize  the  sending  of  conscripts  to  Indochina.  This  law  would  be
introduced  on  July  21,  and  the  Assembly  would  be  required  to  vote  on  it  the
same  day  as  they  will  have  had  two  weeks  from  the  date  of  his  announcement  to
consider  the  matter.  He  said  that  his  government  would  definitely  not  (repeat  not)
resign  until  such  a  law  had  been  passed.  Mendes  also  said  that  the  shipping  to
move  the  first  group  of  conscripts  to  Indochina  would  be  ready  on  July  25,  so
that  his  schedule  for  parliamentary  action  would  cause  no  (repeat  no)  delay  in
the  movement  of  troops.

I  then  mentioned  DEPTEL  39,  and  Mendes  said  that  he  recognized  that  this
posed  a  real  problem.  He  said  that  Ely  had  been  instructed  to  keep  Diem  as
fully  informed  as  possible  and  that  he  had  stressed  the  matter  again  in  a  tele-
gram to  Ely.  Mendes  said,  however,  that  no  (repeat  no)  matter  what  occurs  or
what  action  is  taken,  he  expects  there  would  be  difficulties  with  Diem,  and  he
said  that  he  wanted  again  to  ask  for  our  assistance  at  that  time.  He  said  he
j  realized  that  the  US  would  probably  be  unable  to  underwrite  any  settlement  which


546 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I  \

might  come  out  of  Geneva.  He  said  he  also  realized  that  it  would  not  (repeat  not)  i
be  easy  for  us  to  tell  Diem,  to  accept  everything.  Mendes  said  he  did  not  (repeat  i
not)  want  to  ask  us  to  do  anything  we  could  not  (repeat  not)  do,  but  that  he
hoped  we  could  by  unofficial  means  discourage  Diem  from  being  too  stubborn  and
difficult  if  a  solution  along  general  lines  of  US-UK  formula  had  been  reached,  i

DILLON  ;


[Document  73]  f

July  7,  1954  j

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  LONDON  NIACT  101  \
Rptd  Info  Amembassy  PARIS  NIACT  68  |

EYES  ONLY  ALDRICH  AND  DILLON  FROM  SECRETARY  ji

Please  deliver  following  personal  message  to  Eden:

QTE  Dear  Anthony:  We  have  an  inquiry  from  Mendes-France  as  to  whether  \
or  not  Bedell  or  I  will  return  to  Geneva  and  if  so  when.  He  apparently  con-  i
templates  a  reunion  at  the  ministerial  level  July  12.  I  understand  he  is  making  a
similar  inquiry  of  you.  i

It  is  my  present  feeling  that  it  would  be  better  if  neither  Bedell  nor  I  were  ;
back.  As  you  know,  it  would  not  be  feasible  for  us  to  be  parties  to  a  settlement
which  fell  below  the  seven  point  paper  which  we  drew  up  together  in  Washington
and  gave  the  French  through  our  Ambassadors.  Our  position  in  that  respect  is
perhaps  a  little  different  from  your  own.  In  any  event,  I  fear  that  the  French,
whether  or  not  Bedell  or  I  are  there,  will  take  a  solution  considerably  worse  than
this  and  in  that  event  our  high-level  presence  at  Geneva  might  prove  an  em-  '
barrassment  to  all  concerned.  In  view,  however,  of  our  joint  efforts  for  this  area,  i
I  wanted  to  let  you  know  of  our  present  thinking  and  I  would  welcome  quickly
knowing  how  you  yourself  visualize  this  matter  working  out.  Sincerely  yours,
Foster.  UNQTE

DULLES

i


[Document  74]

July  7,  1954  '

SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  77

Re  EMBTEL  50  j

We  see  no  real  conflict  between  paragraphs  4  and  5  US-UK  terms.  We  realize  j!
of  course  that  even  agreement  which  appears  to  meet  all  seven  points  cannot
constitute  guarantee  that  Indochina  will  not  one  day  pass  into  Communist  hands.  '
Seven  points  are  intended  provide  best  chance  that  this  shall  not  happen.  This  i
will  require  observance  of  criteria  not  merely  in  the  letter  but  in  the  spirit.  Thus
since  undoubtedly  true  that  elections  might  eventually  mean  unification  Vietnam
under  Ho  Chi  Minh  this  makes  it  all  more  important  they  should  be  only  held


Documents  547


as  long  after  cease-fire  agreement  as  possible  and  in  conditions  free  from  in-
timidation to  give  democratic  elements  best  chance.  We  believe  important  that  no
date  should  be  set  now  and  especially  that  no  conditions  should  be  accepted  by
French  which  would  have  direct  or  indirect  effect  of  preventing  effective  inter-
national supervision  of  agreement  ensuring  political  as  well  as  military  guarantees.
Also  note  paragraph  3  of  President  and  Prime  Minister  joint  declaration  of  June
29  regarding  QTE  unity  through  free  elections  supervised  by  the  UN  UNQTE.

Our  interpretation  of  willingness  QTE  respect  UNQTE  agreement  which  might
be  reached  is  that  we  would  not  (repeat  not)  oppose  a  settlement  which  con-
formed to  seven  points  contained  Deptel  4853.  It  does  not  (repeat  not)  of  course
mean  we  would  guarantee  such  settlement  or  that  we  would  necessarily  support  it
publicly.  We  consider  QTE  respect  UNQTE  as  strong  a  word  as  we  can  possibly
employ  in  the  circumstances  to  indicate  our  position  with  respect  to  such  ar-
rangements as  French  may  evolve  along  lines  points  contained  DEPTEL  4853.
QTE  respect  UNQTE  would  also  mean  that  we  would  not  seek  directly  or  in-
directly to  upset  settlement  by  force.
I You  may  convey  substance  above  to  French.

DULLES

i

I

\

i  [Document  75]

July  8,  1954

1  SENT  TO:  Amembassy  PARIS  85  PRIORITY

FOR  DILLON,  ALDRICH  AND  JOHNSON

I  I  think  it  is  probably  true  that  if  we  had  put  together  all  of  the  bits  of  informa-
\  tion  given  at  various  times  and  at  various  political  and  military  levels  at  Paris,
I  Geneva,  Washington,  Saigon  and  Hanoi,  the  result  would  have  been  a  reason-
I  ably  clear  picture  of  French  military  intentions  as  now  revealed.  I  have  never
t  harbored  any  thought  of  any  wilful  concealment.  Also  I  have  always  con-
'  ceded  that  the  French  were  clearly  within  their  rights  in  making  their  own  plans.
;  I  have  repeatedly  said  at  press  conferences  that  we  recognize  that  the  French
had  the  primary  position  in  Indochina  and  that  our  role  was  that  of  a  friendly
observer  who  wanted  to  help  if  and  when  our  help  was  wanted.

I  do  feel  that  there  is  a  certain  lack  of  any  intimacy  which  is  perhaps  due
to  the  fact  that  we  have  not  in  the  past  worked  closely  with  the  personalities  of
the  present  Government  who  have  been  plunged  into  an  immense  and  engrossing
task.  In  this  respect  they  have  our  sympathy  and  I  hope  that  you  will  try  to
remove  any  impression  of  carping  criticism  on  our  part.

I  We  are  quite  prepared  to  agree  that  France  has  been  overextended  in  relation
I  to  Indochina  and  we  are  not  quarrelling  with  present  French  policy  designed  to

limit  its  commitments  more  nearly  within  the  bounds  of  its  strength.

Our  present  intentions  to  leave  representation  at  Geneva  at  the  present  level

of  Ambassador  Johnson  is  primarily  because  we  do  not  want  to  be  the  cause

of  any  avoidable  embarrassment  by  what  might  be  a  spectacular  disassociation
I  of  the  United  States  from  France.  Whatever  France  may  be  determined  to  do,
(,we  accept  as  within  its  prerogatives.  We  only  regret  that  we  cannot  agree  to

'  associate  ourselves  in  advance  with  an  end  result  which  we  cannot  foresee.

Equally,  we  do  not  want  to  be  in  a  position  of  seeming  to  obstruct  an  end


548 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

result  which  from  the  French  national  standpoint  seems  imperative  to  its  parlia-
ment and  people.

Since  starting  to  dictate  this,  I  have  received  through  Bonnet  a  message  from
Mendes-France  strongly  urging  that  either  Bedell  Smith  or  I  should  come  back.
This  apparently  based  on  my  today's  press  conference  statement  that  neither  of
us  had  any  present  plans  for  returning.

I  told  Bonnet  the  substance  of  the  preceding  paragraphs  to  the  effect  that  while
we  would  be  only  too  happy  to  contribute  to  a  united  front,  we  could  do  not  so  :
without  knowing  on  what  position  that  front  was  based.  If  there  were  a  position
which  France  was  able  to  define  and  state  that  she  would  not  accept  anything
else,  then  we  would  be  able  to  judge  whether  or  not  that  afforded  the  foundation  ;
for  a  united  front.  At  the  moment,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  less  danger  of
doing  irreparable  injury  to  Franco-American  relations  if  we  avoid  getting  into  i
a  position  at  Geneva  which  might  require  a  dissassociation  under  spectacular  \
conditions  which  would  be  deeply  resented  by  the  French  as  an  effort  on  our  '
part  to  block  at  the  last  minute  a  peace  which  they  ardently  desire.

We  have  not  yet  taken  any  irrevocable  decision  and  even  if  no  one  from  here
comes  over  for  the  12th,  we  would  be  standing  by  here  under  circumstances  such
that  if  developments  at  Geneva  seem  to  indicate  that  our  presence  there  would  ;
serve  a  really  constructive  purpose  one  or  the  other  of  us  could  get  to  Geneva
overnight.  j

Unless  you  perceive  objection,  I  would  like  you  to  explain  orally  my  position
to  Mendes-France,  making  clear  that  we  are  motivated  by  our  estimate  that  in  the
end  our  presence  at  Geneva,  even  though  initially  it  seemed  an  asset,  might  ;
subsequently  prove  a  liability  to  Franco- American  relations.

DULLES

Code  Room: — Please  note

FOR  LONDON  ONLY

Please  show  Eden  portion  of  this  cable  which  follows  first  two  paragraphs.
Portion  begins  QTE  We  are  quite  prepared,  etc.  UNQTE


[Document  76]

FROM  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  578,  July  9,  9  p.m.

LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION

PARIS  EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADOR

SAIGON  EYES  ONLY  AMBASSADOR


I  called  on  Chauvel  following  restricted  meeting  today.  He  has  just  returned  from
Paris.  His  impression  is  that  Mendes-France  position  unchanged  and  that  he
does  not  intend  make  further  concessions  to  secure  agreement  with  Communists.
Mendes-France  anticipates  active  week  of  discussions  followed  possibly  by  last


Documents  549


minute  agreement  on  evening  July  19.  Mendes-France  arrives  here  tomorrow
: afternoon.  He  will  see  Molotov  tomorrow  evening.

>  Chauvel  dined  last  night  with  Communist  Chinese.  Li  Konung  and  Chang  Wen-

i  tien,  Vice  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  Ambassador  to  USSR  who  has
|,  just  returned  here,  were  present.  Atmosphere  was  "very  cordial."  Chauvel  in-
I  formed  Chinese  that  military  discussions  with  Viet  Minh  not  going  well  and
1;  that  latter  had  made  both  for  Vietnam  and  for  Laos  unacceptable  proposals

ii  wholly  out  of  harmony  with  what  Chauvel  had  understood  Chou  En-lai's  position
I  to  be.  Chinese  expressed  surprise  but  did  not  go  into  details  of  situation.  He
f  told  Chauvel  that  Chou  En-lai  would  probably  return  here  early  next  week  saying
I  it  takes  three  to  four  days  to  fly  here  from  Peking  depending  on  weather.  Vice
[  Minister  stated  Chou  En-lai  had  had  "very  good  meeting"  with  Ho  Chi  Minh
I  and  results  "would  be  helpful  to  French."  Vice  Minister  has  spent  last  two  weeks
}  in  Moscow  and  Chauvel  believes  Communist  Chinese  and  Soviet  positions  re-
•  garding  problem  have  been  coordinated,  with  Chinese  views  on  Asian  problems
;  being  given  major  weight.

;  There  was  an  "underground"  meeting  between  French  Colonel  Brebisson  and
1  Viet  Minh  military  representative  yesterday.  At  this  meeting  Viet  Minh  made  two
I  proposals  (1)  A  demarcation  line  about  40  kilometers  north  of  Tuyhoa  line
j  and  (2)  "neutralization"  of  delta  in  order  to  permit  total  evacuation  of  French
'  Expeditionary  Corps  in  three  months  period.  French  representative  stated  both
I  these  proposals  wholly  unacceptable  and  not  even  worthy  of  discussion.  He

i  refused  to  set  date  for  next  meeting.

■  Chauvel  saw  Molotov  this  morning.  Molotov  expressed  interest  in  being  informed
of  progress  of  conference.  Chauvel  gave  him  general  review  touching  particularly
on  question  of  demarcation  line,  attitude  of  extreme  intransigence  being  adopted
\  by  Viet  Minh  in  military  talks  and  problem  of  international  controls.  Molotov
I  expressed  interest  but  claimed  unfamiliarity  with  details.  Chauvel  suggested  de-
i  sirability  of  contact  between  French  military  representatives  and  members  of
'  Soviet  delegation  in  order  that  Soviet  delegation  might  be  fully  informed  of
difficulties  being  encountered  and  of  attitudes  adopted  by  Viet  Minh.  Later  in
i  day  Soviet  delegation  got  in  touch  with  French  delegation  and  these  contacts
I  will  be  set  up.  Molotov  stated  that  he  had  seen  Chauvel's  working  paper  (SECTO
'  575)  and  that  while  there  were  points  requiring  clarification  and  further  study
!  he  thought  it  was  a  useful  contribution.

I  Chauvel  has  impression  both  Russians  and  Chinese  give  Viet  Minh  fairly  free
(  hand  to  see  how  far  they  can  go  but  that  when  they  find  Viet  Minh  demands
have  gone  beyond  limit  which  French  can  be  expected  to  accept,  they  intervene.
Chauvel  made  point  to  Molotov  that  any  agreement  reached  must  be  acceptable
not  only  to  Franco-Vietnamese  side  and  to  Viet  Minh  but  also  to  other  con-
ference members.  He  is  hopeful  that,  as  he  says  occurred  previously,  Chinese-
Russian  moderating  influence  will  now  be  brought  to  bear  on  Viet  Minh.  Chauvel
expressed  confidence  that  if  he  were  negotiating  only  with  Russians  and  Chinese,
I  he  could  almost  certainly  achieve  a  settlement  in  line  with  provisions  of  US-UK
aide-memoire.

Chauvel  told  me  that  he  is  having  his  staff  prepare  drafts  of  an  armistice  agree-
ment and  related  documents  so  as  to  be  ready  in  case  ministers  reach  agreements
I  on  major  matters.  He  stated  that  information  we  had  furnished  regarding  Korean
I  armistice  was  most  useful  to  them  and  was  much  appreciated.

ii  JOHNSON


550 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  77]

NIACT

SENT  TO:  AMEMB  PARIS  127  7/10/54
FOR  AMBASSADOR  FROM  SECRETARY

LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION  i

Following  is  personal  message  from  Secretary  Dulles  to  Mendes-France  which
is  to  be  delivered  by  Ambassador  Dillon  to  Mendes-France  in  person  as  promptly
as  possible  as  instructed  by  separate  cable.

BEGIN  TEXT:  My  dear  Mr.  President:  \

President  Eisenhower  (who  has  been  kept  closely  informed)  and  I  have  been  ■
greatly  moved  by  your  earnest  request  that  I  or  General  Bedell  Smith  should  i
return  next  week  to  Geneva  for  what  may  be  the  conclusion  of  the  Indochina
phase  of  the  Conference.  I  can  assure  you  that  our  attitude  in  this  respect  is  ;
dictated  by  a  desire  to  find  the  course  which  will  best  preserve  the  traditional
friendship  and  cooperation  of  our  countries  and  which  will  promote  the  goals  ^
of  justice  and  human  welfare  and  dignity  to  which  our  two  nations  have  been  f
traditionally  dedicated.  We  also  attach  great  value  to  preserving  the  united  front  i
of  France,  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  which  has  during  this  postwar  I
period  so  importandy  served  all  three  of  us  in  our  dealings  with  the  Communists,  i

What  now  concerns  us  is  that  we  are  very  doubtful  as  to  whether  there  is  a  '
united  front  in  relation  to  Indochina,  and  we  do  not  believe  that  the  mere  fact  ;
that  the  high  representatives  of  the  three  nations  physically  reappear  together
at  Geneva  will  serve  as  a  substitute  for  a  clear  agreement  on  a  joint  position
which  includes  agreement  as  to  what  will  happen  if  that  position  is  not  ac-
cepted by  the  Communists.  We  fear  that  unless  there  is  the  reality  of  such  a
united  front,  the  events  at  Geneva  will  expose  differences  under  conditions  which  ■
will  only  serve  to  accentuate  them  with  consequent  strain  upon  the  relations
between  our  two  countries  greater  than  if  the  US  does  not  reappear  at  Geneva
in  the  person  of  General  Smith  or  myself.

Beginning  early  last  April  the  US  worked  intensively  with  the  French  Govern-
ment and  with  that  of  Great  Britain  in  an  effort  to  create  a  common  position  of
strength.  This  did  not  prove  possible.  The  reasons  were  understandable,  and
derived  from  fundamental  causes  which  still  subsist  and  influence  the  possibility  •
of  achieving  at  the  present  time  a  genuine  "united  front."

During  the  talks  of  Prime  Minister  Churchill  and  Foreign  Secretary  Eden
with  President  Eisenhower  and  me,  an  effort  was  made  to  find  a  common  position
which  might  be  acceptable  to  the  two  of  us  and,  we  hoped,  to  the  French
Government.  This  was  expressed  in  the  seven-point  memorandum  of  which  you
are  aware.  I  believe  that  this  represented  a  constructive  contribution.  How-
ever, I  do  not  yet  feel  that  there  is  a  united  position  in  the  sense  that  the  three  '
of  us  would  be  prepared  to  stand  firmly  on  this  as  a  minimum  acceptable  solu-
tion and  to  see  the  negotiations  break  off  and  the  warfare  resume  if  this  position
was  not  accepted  by  the  Communist  side.  We  doubt  very  much  that  the  Com-  i
munists  will  in  fact  accept  this  seven-point  position  unless  they  realize  that  the
alternative  is  some  common  action  upon  which  we  have  all  agreed.  So  far,  there
is  no  such  alternative.

Under  these  circumstances,  we  gready  fear  that  the  seven  points  which  con-
stitute a  minimum  as  far  as  the  US  is  concerned  will  constitute  merely  an
optimum  solution  so  far  as  your  Government  and  perhaps  the  UK  are  con-


Documents  551


cerned,  and  that  an  armistice  might  be  concluded  on  terms  substantially  less
favorable  than  those  we  could  respect.

We  gather  that  there  is  already  considerable  French  thinking  in  terms  of  the
acceptability  of  departures  from  certain  of  the  seven  points.  For  example:

Allowing  Communist  forces  to  remain  in  Northern  Laos;  accepting  a  Vietnam
line  of  military  demarcation  considerably  south  of  Donghoi;  neutralizing  and

1  demilitarizing  Laos,  Cambodia  and  Vietnam  so  as  to  impair  their  capacity  to
maintain  stable,  non-Communist  regimes;  accepting  elections  so  early  and  so
ill-prepared  and  ill-supervised  as  to  risk  the  loss  of  the  entire  area  to  Communism;
accepting  international  supervision  by  a  body  which  cannot  be  effective  because
it  includes  a  Communist  state  which  has  veto  power.

These  are  but  illustrations  of  a  whittling-away  process,  each  stroke  of  which
may  in  itself  seem  unessential,  but  which  cumulatively  could  produce  a  result
quite  different  from  that  envisaged  by  the  seven  points.  Also,  of  course,  there
is  the  danger  that  the  same  unacceptable  result  might  come  about  through  the
Communist  habit  of  using  words  in  a  double  sense  and  destroying  the  significance

j  of  good  principles  with  stultifying  implementations.

I  We  do  not  for  a  moment  question  the  right  of  the  French  Government  to
exercise  its  own  judgment  in  all  of  these  respects.  Indeed,  we  recognize  that  the
issues  for  France  are  so  vital  that  the  French  Government  has  a  duty  to  exercise
its  own  judgment.  I  have  from  the  beginning  recognized  the  preponderant  interest
of  your  Government  as  representing  the  nation  which  has  borne  for  so  many
years  the  burden  of  a  cruel  and  costly  war.  However,  my  Government  equally
has  the  duty  not  to  endorse  a  solution  which  would  seem  to  us  to  impair  seriously
certain  principles  which  the  US  believes  must,  as  far  as  it  is  concerned,  be  kept
unimpaired,  if  our  own  struggle  against  Communism  is  to  be  successfully  pursued.
At  the  same  time,  we  do  not  wish  to  put  ourselves  in  the  position  where  we
would  seem  to  be  passing  moral  judgment  upon  French  action  or  disassociating
ourselves  from  the  settlement  at  a  moment  and  under  circumstances  which  might
be  unnecessarily  dramatic.

• It  is  also  to  be  considered  that  if  our  conduct  creates  a  certain  uncertainty

(  in  the  minds  of  the  Communists,  this  might  strengthen  your  hand  more  than  our
presence  at  Geneva  in  a  form  which  would  expose  probably  to  the  world,  and
certainly  to  the  Communists  themselves,  differences  which  the  Communists  would

I  exploit  to  the  discomfiture  of  all  three  of  us.

Under  all  these  circumstances,  it  seems  to  us  that  the  interests  of  both  of  our
countries  are  best  served  by  continuing  for  the  time  being  the  present  type  of
US  representation  at  Geneva.  This  consists  of  able  and  responsible  persons  who

I  are  in  close  contact  with  the  President  and  me.

If  circumstances  should  alter  so  that  it  appeared  that  our  common  interests
would  be  better  served  if  higher  ranking  officials  became  our  representatives,
than  we  would  be  alert  to  act  accordingly.

It  is  because  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  serious  and  solemn  nature  of  the  moment
that  I  have  gone  into  the  matter  at  this  considerable  length.  It  is  possible  that
by  the  first  of  the  week,  the  Communist  position  will  be  sufficiently  disclosed  so
that  some  of  the  answers  to  the  foregoing  queries  can  be  foreseen.  This  might

iclarify  in  one  sense  or  another  the  thinking  of  us  all.

In  this  connection,  let  me  emphasize  that  it  is  our  ardent  hope  that  circum-
stances might  become  such  that  consistently  with  the  foregoing  either  General
Bedell  Smith  or  I  can  personally  come  to  Geneva  and  stand  beside  you.

i  SND  TEXT

r  DULLES


552 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  78]

FROM:  Paris

j

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  134,  July  11,  9  p.m.  |

I

SENT  DEPARTMENT  134,  REPEATED  INFORMATION  GENEVA  21,  |
LONDON  35

FOR  SECRETARY  FROM  AMBASSADOR  \

I  delivered  Secretary's  message  Department  telegram  127  to  Mendes  in  Geneva  j
after  lunch  Sunday.  At  same  time,  I  gave  him  personal  message  contained  in  !
first  paragraph  Department  telegram  128.  In  view  Eden's  absence  (SECTO  585),
I  did  not  (repeat  not)  see  him.  Johnson  will  deliver  message  to  Eden  tomorrow,  j
if  Aldrich  has  not  (repeat  not)  already  done  so.

Mendes  was  very  touched  by  personal  message  in  Department  telegram  128  I
and  twice  asked  me  to  be  sure  and  thank  Secretary  on  his  behalf  for  this  thought,  j
Regarding  Department  telegram  127,  Mendes  expressed  extreme  disappointment
and  gave  concern  at  United  States  decision  not  (repeat  not)  to  be  represented  '
at  Ministerial  level.  He  divided  his  remarks  into  two  categories,  first,  the  effect
of  our  decision  on  Conference  itself,  and  second,  the  overall  effect  of  our
decision  on  world  affairs.

Regarding  first  category,  Mendes  stated  that  our  absence  made  French  bar-  :
gaining  position  far  weaker.  He  stated  that  if  Secretary  was  present,  France
would  not  (repeat  not)  accept  anything  at  Conference  that  was  unacceptable  to  \
United  States.  As  he  put  it  in  his  own  words,  presence  of  Secretary  would  give
United  States  in  effect  a  veto  power  on  decisions  of  Conference.  He  felt  it
particularly  important  that  we  have  someone  at  Geneva  who  could  take  strong  ,
personal  position  with  Molotov,  if  and  when  necessary,  and  without  having  to
refer  to  Washington  for  instructions.  Mendes  also  feels  that  United  States  absence  i
at  Ministerial  level  will  lead  Communists  to  increase  their  pressure  and  be  more
demanding  in  order  to  deepen  the  obvious  rift  between  the  Western  powers.  He
said  France  had  not  (repeat  not)  as  yet  departed  from  the  Seven  Point  United  :
States-United  Kingdom  position  and  he  did  not  (repeat  not)  make  any  com-
mitment to  hold  to  these  points  during  coming  week,  except  for  statement  re-  '
garding  United  States  veto  power  if  Secretary  present.

On  the  overall  effect  of  our  decision,  Mendes  pointed  out  that  this  will  be  first
time  since  the  war  that  United  States  not  (repeat  not)  represented  at  equal
level  with  other  powers  in  an  important  conference.  He  said  he  felt  certain  that
Europe  would  interpret  United  States  absence  as  first  step  in  return  to  a  policy  |
of  isolationism.  This,  he  felt,  would  have  catastrophic  effects  not  (repeat  not)
only  in  Far  East,  but  also  in  Europe  and  would  be  great  cold  war  victory  for  \
Communism.  According  to  Mendes,  we  would  in  effect  be  saying  "do  your  best,  \
you  have  our  sympathy,  but  result  is  no  (repeat  no)  real  concern  to  us."
I  tried  hard  to  dissuade  Mendes  from  this  viewpoint,  but  without  much  success.
His  statement  regarding  United  States  veto  power  if  Secretary  present,  led  me
to  point  out  that  there  must  also  be  an  agreed  alternative  if  Conference  failed.
Mendes  promptly  replied  that  only  alternative  to  cease-fire  at  Geneva  would  be
internationalization  of  war  with  United  States  military  forces  coming  prompdy


Documents  553


to  assistance  of  French.  This  aspect  of  our  talk  being  covered  more  fully  in
separate  telegram,  being  repeated  to  Saigon.

Finally,  Mendes  asked  if  there  was  anything  he  could  do  specifically  to  create  a
situation  that  would  make  it  possible  for  Secretary  to  come  to  Geneva.  He  asked
me  to  pass  this  question  on  to  Washington.  In  this  connection,  he  specifically
questioned  sixth  paragraph  of  Secretary's  letter,  and  said  he  knew  of  no  (repeat
no)  French  thinking  along  such  lines,  except  possibly  on  subject  of  international
supervision.  He  wondered  where  United  States  had  got  the  ideas  expressed  in  this
paragraph.

While  I  was  talking  with  Mendes,  Johnson  talked  with  Chauvel  and  showed  him
a  copy  of  Secretary's  letter.  Chauvel  showed  Johnson  a  cable  from  Bonnet  which
indicated  that  Bonnet  may  have  given  Secretary  the  impression  that  French  were
considering  retreating  from  Seven  Point  program.

Chauvel  and  Johnson  joined  us  at  the  end  of  our  talk,  and  Johnson  and  I  suggested
that  if  Mendes  developed  any  concrete  ideas  which  would  help  meet  United
States  fears,  it  would  be  helpful  if  he  put  them  into  a  reply  to  Secretary's  letter.
While  Mendes  was  non-committal  as  to  a  formal  reply,  I  rather  expect  he  will
make  one.  In  closing,  Mendes  said  he  would  keep  in  close  touch  with  Johnson.
During  talk,  Mendes  made  it  clear  that  while  presence  of  Under  Secretary  at
Geneva  would  be  most  helpful,  he  very  much  hoped  that  Secretary  himself  could
come.

DILLON


[Document  79]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  133,  July  11,  9  p.m.

i  PRIORITY

'  LIMIT  DISTRIBUTION
FOR  SECRETARY  FROM  AMBASSADOR  DILLON

During  conversation  with  Mendes  at  Geneva,  I  informed  him  of  contents  of
DEPTEL  84  and  of  our  feeling  that  Vietnam  Government  should  be  kept  more
fully  informed  by  French.  I  told  him  that  we  felt  time  had  now  come  for  Viet-
nam to  be  informed  of  general  lines  of  seven  point  program.  Mendes  said  he
would  consider  informing  Vietnamese  after  discussing  matter  with  his  advisors
during  afternoon:  He  said  he  had  originally  felt  it  preferable  not  to  inform
them  until  he  could  assure  them  that  US  was  prepared  to  guarantee  them
against  further  aggression  or  subversion.

He  then  spoke  at  length  of  necessity  for  a  clear-cut  US  guarantee  that  would
protect  Associated  States  in  the  event  that  the  Communists  did  not  honor  the
;  spirit  of  any  agreement  that  might  be  reached  at  Geneva.  Without  such  a  guar-
'  antee  he  said  that  a  settlement  would  not  be  worth  the  paper  it  was  written  on.
j  Mendes  asked  me  to  inquire  as  to  whether  if  a  settlement  within  seven  point
^framework  was  obtained,  Secretary  would  then  be  willing  to  come  to  Geneva
I'  to  close  conference  and  to  work  out  necessary  guarantees  to  protect  Associated
1  States.


554 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

He  then  discussed  in  some  detail  the  situation  which  would  arise  if  no  settle-
ment was  reached  at  Geneva.  He  said  the  sending  of  conscripts  to  Indochina
would  then  be  debated  on  July  22  and  23.  If  the  National  Assembly  approved,
the  first  division  would  leave  on  July  25  and  the  second  division  about  10  days
later.  It  would  take  a  month  to  reach  Indochina  and  three  more  weeks  to  get
troops  ready  for  action.  Therefore  the  first  division  of  conscripts  would  not  be
ready  in  Indochina  until  about  September.

This  schedule  for  reinforcements  would  be  known  to  Viet  Minh  and  the  result
would  undoubtedly  be  a  massive  Viet  Minh  assault  during  August  prior  to
arrival  of  new  troops.

Mendes  said  he  doubted  if  French  alone  could  successfully  resist  such  an  assault.
He  said  that  French  Government  would  officially  inform  US  of  these  facts  at
end  of  July  if  no  cease-fire  reached.

I  reminded  him  of  US  requirements  for  action  on  our  part,  and  he  said  he
could  not  foretell  how  French  Parliament  might  react.  They  might  react  strongly
and  request  US  help  to  continue  the  war  or  they  might  have  what  he  termed  a
"nervous  breakdown"  and  push  for  capitulation  at  any  price  to  save  expedition-
ary corps.

If  no  cease-fire,  Mendes  will  resign,  but  in  view  of  the  above,  I  feel  it  is  possible
that  if  no  cease-fire  is  reached  the  French  Government  which  will  succeed  Mendes
may  appeal  for  US  armed  help,  and  may  meet  all  US  terms.  Not  possible  to  esti-
mate timing  of  such  an  appeal  but  it  could  occur  during  August  when  US
Congress  no  longer  in  session.

DILLON


IDocument  80]

FROM:  Paris

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  179,  July  14,  9  p.m.

PRIORITY

Paris  Talks— III

In  addition  to  the  following  agreed  texts  of  Paris  meeting,  the  Secretary's  party
will  bring  full  memoranda  of  conversations:  (The  following  documents  are
classified  and  not  (repeat  not)  for  release.)

A.  Agreed  French-United  States  position  paper  on  Indochina.
QUOTE

1 .  France  and  the  Associated  States  of  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  are  recog-
nized to  be  those  which,  on  the  non-Communist  side,  are  primarily  interested
in  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Geneva  Conference.

The  United  States  is  interested  primarily  as  a  friendly  nation  which  desires  to
assist,  where  desired,  in  arriving  at  a  just  settlement,  but  who  will  not  (repeat
not)  seek,  or  be  expected,  to  impose  its  views  in  any  way  upon  those  primarily
interested.


Documents  555


2.  The  attached  7  points  constitute  a  result  which  France  believes  to  be  obtain-
able by  negotiation  at  Geneva  and  which  would  be  acceptable  to  France  and,
France  believes,  to  the  Associated  States.  The  United  States,  while  recognizing
the  right  of  those  primarily  interested  to  accept  different  terms,  will  itself  be
prepared  to  respect  terms  conforming  to  the  attached.  The  United  States  will
not  (repeat  not)  be  asked  or  expected  by  France  to  respect  terms  which  in  its
opinion  differ  materially  from  the  attached,  and  it  may  publicly  disassociate  itself
from  such  differing  terms.

3.  If  the  settlement  is  one  which  the  United  States  is  prepared  to  "respect"
its  position  will  be  expressed  unilaterally  or  in  association  only  with  non-Com-
munist states  in  terms  which  apply  to  the  situation  the  principles  of  non-use  of
forces  which  are  embodied  in  Article  2  (4)  and  (6)  of  the  Charter  of  the
United  Nations.

4.  The  United  States  is  prepared  to  seek,  with  other  interested  nations,  a  col-
lective defense  association  designed  to  preserve,  against  direct  and  indirect  aggres-
sion, the  integrity  of  the  non-Communist  areas  of  Southeast  Asia  following  any
settlement.

5.  If  there  is  no  (repeat  no)  settlement,  the  United  States  and  French  Govern-
ments will  consult  together  on  the  measures  to  be  taken.  This  will  not  (repeat
not)  preclude  the  United  States,  if  it  so  desires,  bringing  the  matter  before  the
United  Nations  as  involving  a  threat  to  peace  as  dealt  with  by  Chapter  VII

I of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations.

6.  France  reaffirms  the  principle  of  independence  for  the  Associated  States  in
equal  and  voluntary  association  as  members  of  the  French  Union.

UNQUOTE

B.  Annex  to  above  document  consisting  of  the  7  points  regarding  a  settlement
which  could  be  respected  as  agreed  during  Churchill-Eisenhower  conversations.
(Please  note  following  phrase  which  has  been  added  with  the  full  consent  of
Eden  and  Mendes-France  at  the  beginning  of  paragraph  2  of  the  7  points.)
"In  connection  with  the  line  of  military  demarcation,  preserves — "
"Memorandum  of  points  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  the  France-United  States
position  paper.
An  agreement  which:

"1.  Preserves  the  integrity  and  independence  of  Laos  and  Cambodia  and  assures
the  withdrawal  of  Viet  Minh  forces  therefrom;

"2.  In  connection  with  the  line  of  military  demarcation  preserves  at  least  the
,  southern  half  of  Vietnam  and  if  possible  an  enclave  in  the  deltas;  in  this  con-
I  nection,  we  would  be  unwilling  to  see  the  line  of  division  of  responsibility  drawn
further  south  than  a  line  running  generally  v/est  from  Dong  Hoi;
"3.  Does  not  (repeat  not)  impose  on  Laos,  Cambodia  or  retained  Vietnam  any
restrictions  materially  impairing  their  capacity  to  maintain  stable  non-Communist
regimes;  and  especially  restrictions  impairing  their  right  to  maintain  adequate
forces  for  internal  security,  to  import  arms  and  to  employ  foreign  advisers;
"4.  Does  not  (repeat  not)  contain  political  provisions  which  would  risk  loss  of
the  retained  area  to  Communist  control;

"5.  Does  not  (repeat  not)  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  ultimate  unification  of
the  Vietnam  by  peaceful  means;
h "6.  Provides  for  the  peaceful  and  humane  transfer,  under  international  super-
vision,  of  those  people  desiring  to  be  moved  from  one  zone  to  another  of
Vietnam;  and


556 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"7.  Provides  effective  machinery  for  international  supervision  of  the  agreement."

C.  Letter  from  Mendes-France  to  Secretary  (unofficial  translation  of  French
text).

QUOTE

Dear  Mr.  Secretary:

Following  our  frank  and  friendly  conversation  of  last  evening,  I  believe  I  under-
stand fully  the  position  of  the  United  States  with  regard  to  the  negotiations  at
Geneva  concerning  Indochina.

If  I  interpret  your  views  correctly,  you  recognize  fully  the  primary  right  of
France,  the  Associated  States  of  Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia,  to  decide  the
conditions  for  the  settlement  of  a  war  in  which  they  are  the  only  belligerents  on
the  non-Communist  side.  You  wish  to  aid  us  through  your  good  offices  in  obtain-  i
ing  a  just  and  honorable  settlement  which  will  take  into  account  the  needs  of  the
interested  peoples.  However,  you  are  not  (repeat  not)  prepared  to  participate  i
with  the  Communist  countries  in  any  settlement  which  might  appear  to  retain  ;
for  them  the  benefits  of  aggression  or  the  domination  of  non-willing  peoples.  ;
In  any  case,  if  a  settlement  should  be  arrived  at  between  the  parties  holding  the  '
primary  responsibility,  you  would  agree  to  indicate  that  you  would  comply  with  I
the  principles  which  are  contained  in  Articles  2  (4)  and  (6)  of  the  United
Nations  Charter  and  you  would  consider  any  violation  of  the  settlement  by  the
Communist  regimes  as  being  of  grave  concern.  j
It  being  your  belief  that  the  continuation  of  the  war  would  involve  a  serious
risk  of  an  extension  of  the  conflict,  both  as  concerns  the  combat  areas  and  the
belligerent  countries,  the  question  of  the  participation  of  the  United  States  would
be  guided  by  the  terms  defined  in  the  fourth  paragraph  of  the  letter  addressed  on
July  16,  1954,  by  President  Eisenhower  to  President  Coty.

You  have  indicated  to  me  that  you  would  fear,  in  the  present  state  of  negotia-
tions, that  the  sending  by  the  United  States  to  Geneva  of  representatives  chosen
at  a  high  level  and  bearing  instructions  from  President  Eisenhower  to  adhere  to
the  principles  noted  above,  could  cause  a  situation  capable  of  giving  rise  in
France,  under  the  most  regrettable  circumstances,  to  a  feeling  that  our  two  coun-
tries are  divided  and  that  it  might  risk  affecting  seriously  their  good  relations
which  are  so  important  to  the  whole  free  world.

I  have  noted  your  hesitation  to  come  to  Geneva  in  the  fear  of  having  eventually
to  disassociate  yourself  from  an  agreement,  or  certain  of  its  terms,  which  you
might  not  (repeat  not)  be  able  to  respect.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  understand-  ,
able,  but  in  my  opinion  it  does  not  (repeat  not)  respond  to  the  situation.  In
effect,  I  have  every  reason  to  think  that  your  absence  would  be  precisely  inter-
preted as  demonstrating,  before  the  fact,  that  you  disapproved  of  the  conference
and  of  everything  which  might  be  accomplished.  Not  (repeat  not)  only  would
those  who  are  against  us  find  therein  the  confirmation  of  the  ill  will  which  they  :
attribute  to  your  government,  concerning  the  re-establishment  of  peace  in  Indo-
china; but  many  others  would  read  in  it  a  sure  sign  of  a  division  of  the  western
powers.  Finally,  the  negotiations  would  thus  be  deprived  of  the  element  of
balance  indispensable  to  the  seeking  of  a  solution  as  recommended  in  the  memo-  '
randum  of  June  30.

I  consider  thus  that  such  an  absence  would  produce  an  effect  diametrically  op-
posed to  the  intentions  which  you  have  expressed  and  which  I  have  cited  above.
In  a  situation  as  difficult  as  this  only  the  unity  of  the  western  democratic  front.


Documents  557


supported  by  the  immense  potential  which  we  have  in  common,  can  bring  about
the  very  miUtary  and  strategic  unity  which  we  should  seek  eventually  to  establish
in  that  part  of  the  world.

It  is  in  this  spirit  that  the  French  Government  envisages,  aside  from  the  assur-
ances which  the  conference  itself  could  furnish,  the  establishment  of  a  collective
guarantee  by  virtue  of  which  the  signatories  would  declare  themselves  prepared
to  intervene  if,  in  Indochina,  one  of  the  three  states  was  a  victim  of  aggression.
I  am  fully  conscious  of  the  position  of  the  government  of  the  United  States  and
I  have  noted  with  care  the  consequences  which  it  might  imply;  but  for  the
reasons  which  I  have  just  enumerated,  I  have  the  profound  conviction  that  the
common  interests  of  our  two  countries  and  of  the  three  Associated  States  would
be  effectively  defended  only  if  you,  yourself,  or  the  Undersecretary  should
represent  in  person  your  government  at  Geneva.

If  the  situation  should  nevertheless  evolve  in  a  manner  which  would  confirm
your  fears,  I  engage  myself,  on  behalf  of  France,  to  make  known  publicly  the
conditions  under  which  you  have  acceded  to  my  request.

UNQUOTE

D.  Letter  from  Secretary  to  Mendes-France.
QUOTE

My  dear  Mr.  President:

I  have  received  your  letter  of  July  14  with  reference  to  participation  by  the
United  States  in  the  final  stages  of  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  Geneva  con-
ference.

In  the  light  of  what  you  say  and  after  consultation  with  President  Eisenhower,
I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  inform  you  that  the  President  and  I  are  asking  the
Undersecretary  of  State,  General  Walter  Bedell  Smith,  to  prepare  to  return
at  his  earliest  convenience  to  Geneva  to  share  in  the  work  of  the  conference
on  the  basis  of  the  understanding  which  we  have  arrived  at.

I  greatly  appreciate  the  opportunity  which  we  have  had  to  confer  together  and
I  believe  that  it  has  added  a  new  chapter  to  the  honorable  and  precious  tradition
of  Franco-American  cooperation.

UNQUOTE

E.  Letter  to  Mendes-France  from  Eden.
QUOTE

My  Dear  Mr.  President:

Thank  you  for  providing  me  with  copies  of  correspondence  exchanged  today
between  yourself  and  Mr.  John  Foster  Dulles  on  the  present  phase  of  the
Indochina  conference  at  Geneva.

I  have  noted  their  contents  and  wish  to  assure  you  that,  as  a  friend  and  ally,
I  shall  do  my  best  to  help  you  to  achieve  a  settlement  on  the  basis  set  out  in
this  correspondence.

I  am  sending  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  Mr.  Dulles.
UNQUOTE

DULLES


558 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I


[Document  81]

SECRETARY  DULLES'  REPORT  ON  HIS  RECENT  TRIP  TO  PARIS

At  the  NSC  meeting  of  15  July,  Secretary  Dulles  reported  on  his  recent  trip
to  Paris  as  follows:

1.  He  had  been  in  practically  continuous  meetings  with  Mendes-France
and  Mr.  Eden  from  the  time  of  his  arrival  to  his  departure,  sometimes  with
one  or  the  other  individually  and  sometimes  with  the  two  together.  He  had
told  Mendes  that,  in  his  opinion,  most  of  France's  troubles  stem  from  a
lack  of  French  decision  on  EDC.  Because  of  this,  the  Soviets  were  being
successful  in  splitting  France  and  Germany.  Therefore,  he  put  the  greatest  ■
urgency  on  French  action  on  EDC.  Mendes  said  that  it  might  not  be  pos-  !
sible  now  to  get  a  constitutional  majority  of  314  votes  in  the  Assemble  i
without  some  face-saving  formula.  He  hoped  this  could  be  done  through
minor  amendments  which  would  not  require  renegotiation,  but  in  any  event,  1
Mendes  had  promised  Secretary  Dulles  action  by  the  Assembly  by  early
August.  Mr.  Dulles  had  pointed  out  that  the  U.S.  public  was  getting  a  ;
trifle  short-tempered  on  the  EDC  topic  and  that  if  Mendes  was  not  careful,
the  U.S.  Congress  might  terminate  aid  to  NATO  which  would  be  detri-
mental to  the  military  eff'ort  of  all  Europe,  especially  France.

2.  a.  Regarding  the  dilemma  of  U.S.  participation  in  the  Geneva  Con-  1
ference,  Secretary  Dulles  had  pointed  out  that  if  the  U.S.  participates  in
the  Conference  and  then  finds  itself  unable  to  guarantee  the  results,  a
violent  French  public  reaction  against  the  U.S.  would  ensue.  Similarly,

if  the  U.S.  participates  and  so  stiffens  French  will  that  France  does  not
accept  the  Communist  best  offer,  then  again,  the  U.S.  would  be  blamed
and  a  major  strain  placed  upon  U.S.-French  relations.  Therefore,  the
U.S.  was  seeking  to  play  an  inconspicuous  role.

b.  The  original  VM  proposal  had  been  for  a  partition  line  along  the
14th  parallel;  their  second  proposal,  along  the  16th  parallel.  Both  had  been
rejected  and  the  French  position  was  to  hold  out  for  the  18th  parallel,
along  with  the  guaranteed  independence  of  Laos  and  Cambodia.

c.  The  Secretary  had  worked  up  with  the  French  a  joint  U.S.-French
paper  along  the  lines  of  the  seven  points  of  the  U.S.-U.K.  paper  which
had  resulted  from  the  Churchill-Eden  talks.  Mr.  Dulles  had  said  there
would  be  no  U.S.  guarantee  of  the  settlement,  but  rather  a  unilateral
declaration  that  the  U.S.  would  not  attempt  to  change  it  by  force.  Mendes
had  provided  Mr.  Dulles  with  a  letter  of  reply  and  acceptance  of  the  U.S.-
French position  paper.  Accordingly,  Gen.  Smith  was  returning  to  Geneva
with  his  instructions  contained  in  these  two  papers.

3.  Mr.  Dulles  said  that  the  Mendes  Government  put  more  emphasis  on  '
the  granting  of  independence  to  the  Associated  States  than  had  the  Laniel
Government.  Mendes  even  agreed  that  French  functionaries  and  eventually
armed  forces  would  have  to  leave  the  area.  It  was  current  French  planning
to  hold  Haiphong  until  French  forces  and  their  equipment  could  be  evacu-
ated but  not  to  attempt  to  maintain  Haiphong  as  a  permanent  enclave.

4.  When  asked  if  the  VM  would  agree  to  the  seven  points,  the  Secretary
said  he  was  not  sure  but  he  could  count  on  support  from  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia. Mr.  Allen  Dulles  felt  the  possibility  of  VM  uprising  against  the  ,
French  was  a  real  one.


Documents  559


5.  Mendes  had  assured  Secretary  Dulles  that  if  the  Geneva  Conference
was  a  failure,  he  would  send  two  additional  French  divisions  to  Indochina,
although  they  could  not  arrive  before  September,  1954.


[Document  82]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  632,  July  17,  7  p.m.

Following  account  of  Mendes-France-Eden-Molotov  meeting  last  night  is  based
on  report  of  this  meeting  to  Foreign  Office  made  available  to  Johnson  by  Caccia.
This  telegram  expands  upon  and  supersedes  preliminary  account  transmitted  in
first  three  paragraphs  SECTO  630  (repeated  information  Paris  76,  Saigon  48).
At  Eden's  suggestion,  French  enumerated  documents  before  conference:

(A)  Armistice  agreements  to  be  signed  by  local  commanders-in-chief.  French
have  prepared  drafts  for  Vietnam  and  Laos  and  Cambodians  draft  for  Cambodia.
Viet  Minh  delegation  preparing  counter  draft  for  Vietnam.

(B)  Control  arrangements.  French  have  circulated  papers  for  Vietnam,  Laos,  and
Cambodia.

(C)  Political  arrangements.  After  having  seen  military  documents,  certain  dele-
gations might  make  unilateral  statements.  For  example,  Laos  and  Cambodia  are
preparing  statements  on  their  willingness  to  limit  their  armed  forces.  Conference
as  whole  would  then  agree  upon  common  statement  taking  note  of  military
agreements  and  unilateral  declarations.  French  have  circulated  draft  of  such
statement.  Soviets  have  prepared  counter  draft  and  French  second  redraft.
French  explained  that  if  conference  did  not  (repeat  not)  have  time  to  agree  on
all  details  of  armistice,  it  might  approve  only  parts  providing  for  cessation  of
hostilities  and  first  stage  of  regroupment.  Remaining  aspects  of  agreements  could
be  covered  by  statement  of  general  principles  for  guidance  of  experts  who  would
work  out  details  after  conference  had  dispersed.

It  was  agreed  that  British,  French,  and  Soviet  experts  would  meet  July  17  to
consider  various  drafts,
i  At  Eden's  suggestion,  Mendes-France  summarized  main  outstanding  problems  as
(A)  demarcation  line  for  Vietnam;  (B)  elections,  and  (C)  control  arrangements.
Concerning  demarcation  line,  he  said  French  had  proposed  line  near  1 8th  parallel
whereas  Viet  Minh  proposed  16th  parallel.  On  elections  in  Vietnam,  he  said
question  was  whether  to  fix  firm  date  now  (repeat  now)  (Soviets  had  proposed
June  1955)  or  whether,  as  French  proposed,  to  settle  now  (repeat  now)  only
manner  in  which  date  would  be  set.  Elections  in  Laos  and  Cambodia  already
provided  for  in  constitutions  for  August  and  September  1955,  respectively.  On
control,  he  said  main  questions  were:  Whether  there  should  be  one  commission
or  three,  composition,  voting,  execution  of  commissions'  recommendations,  and
freedom  of  movement  for  inspection  teams.

Molotov  added  to  outstanding  issues:  (D)  time  required  for  regrouping  (French
i have  proposed  380  days  and  Soviets  6  months);  and  (E)  prevention  of  im-
portation of  new  arms  and  military  personnel  subject  to  certain  exceptions  for
j Laos  and  Cambodia,  prohibition  of  foreign  military  bases,  and  prohibition  of
^  military  alliances  by  three  states.

, Eden  added  (F)  question  of  regroupment  areas  for  resistance  forces  in  Laos.
Discussion  then  turned  to  substantive  issues:


560 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I

(A)  Elections  in  Vietnam.  Molotov  said  conference  should  fix  date  for  elections.
He  conceded  more  flexible  formula  might  be  found  than  firm  date  of  June  1955
previously  proposed  by  Soviets  and  suggested  agreement  merely  that  elections  be
held  during  1955  with  precise  date  to  be  fixed  by  Vietnamese  and  Viet  Minh
authorities.

Mendes-France  argued  that  it  would  be  imprudent  to  fix  date  as  early  as  the
end  of  1955.  He  suggested  two  ways  of  providing  necessary  flexibility  in  arrange-
ments: Date  for  elections  might  be  fixed  after  completion  of  regrouping;  or  exact
date  might  be  fixed  now  (repeat  now)  and  international  control  commission  be
given  authority  to  advance  date  if  necessary.

Eden  supported  Mendes-France  on  need  for  flexibility  and  suggested  that  two
parts  of  Vietnam  fix  date  after  completion  of  regrouping.  Mendes-France  agreed
to  consider  this  suggestion,  but  Molotov  continued  to  urge  elections  during  1955.

(B)  Demarcation  line.  Molotov  argued  that  in  moving  from  13th  to  16th  paral-
lel, Viet  Minh  had  made  substantial  concession  which  called  for  proper  response
from  French.  Mendes-France  disagreed,  arguing  that  Viet  Minh  would  be  giving
up  much  less  in  Annam  than  they  would  be  getting  in  Tonkin.  He  said  that  Pham
Van  Dong  had  admitted  that  line  on  16th  parallel  would  require  special  arrange-
ments for  Tourane,  Hue,  on  route  No.  9  leading  into  Laos.  Mendes-France  stated
that  necessity  for  such  special  arrangements  showed  how  unnatural  demarcation
line  at  16th  parallel  would  be.  He  said  that  there  was  no  (repeat  no)  chance  of
persuading  French  Government  to  accept  line  which  excluded  either  Hue  or
route  No.  9.  Eden  supported  Mendes-France.

Molotov  suggested  that  discussion  move  to  question  of  control  arrangements.
Mendes-France  replied  might  be  better  to  postpone  such  discussion.  He  observed
that  questions  of  elections  and  demarcation  line  had  been  discussed  together
and  might  be  linked  in  sense  that  conceivably  one  party  might  yield  on  one
question  and  another  party  on  other.

SMITH


[Document  83]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  633,  July  17,  8  p.m.

Nguyen  Huu  Chau  of  Vietnamese  delegation  handed  USDEL  copy  of  note  which
was  given  to  French  delegation  today.  He  said  French  requested  contents  be
kept  secret  for  moment,  and  that  French  not  aware  copy  given  to  this  delegation.
Following  is  unofficial  translation:

BEGIN  QUOTE

Just  as  the  French  High  Command  in  Indochina  evacuated,  without  fighting  and
in  spite  of  the  strongest  protests  by  President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  zones  vital  for
the  defense  and  the  existence  of  a  free  Vietnam,  the  delegation  of  the  Vietnamese
National  Government  learned  only  by  the  papers  and  by  the  messages  which  were
sent  to  it  yesterday,  July  16,  that  the  French  delegation  appears  already  to  have
accepted  abandoning  to  the  Viet  Minh  all  of  that  part  situated  north  of  the
eighteenth  parallel  and  that  the  delegation  of  the  Viet  Minh  might  claim  an  even
more  advantageous  demarcation  line.


Documents  561


The  National  Government  of  Vietnam  has  also  been  left  in  complete  ignorance
of  the  proposals  on  the  fate  of  Vietnam  made  by  the  French  Government  to
the  American  and  British  Governments,  particularly  at  the  meeting  in  Paris.
The  delegation  of  the  State  of  Vietnam  must  express  its  surprise  at  this  situation.
This  delegation  finds  it  hard  to  understand  that  peace  in  Vietnam  is  being  nego-
tiated without  previously  consulting  with  its  qualified  representatives.
The  de  facto  partition  which  seems  to  have  been  adopted  from  the  outset  by  the
delegations  of  France  and  of  the  Viet  Minh — at  discussions  bearing  only  on  the
materialization  of  the  partition — does  not  take  any  account  of  the  unanimous
will  for  national  unity  of  the  Vietnamese  people.

On  the  other  hand  the  regroupment  of  non-national  armed  forces  in  the  zones
resulting  from  the  partition  implies  their  consolidation  outside  of  any  danger  of
combat  and  thus  reinforces  the  threat  that  they  constitute  to  the  free  expression
of  the  will  of  the  people.

Therefore  not  only  does  such  a  cease-fire  not  lead  to  a  durable  peace,  since,  ig-
noring the  will  for  national  unity,  it  provokes  the  people  to  "unify"  the  country,
but,  by  the  consolidation  of  the  armed  forces  now  facing  each  other,  it  violates  in
advance  the  liberty  of  the  future  elections.

The  delegation  of  the  State  of  Vietnam,  which  more  than  any  other  wishes  the
return  of  peace,  is  pleased  with  the  efforts  put  forth  by  the  other  delegations  in
favor  of  this  object.  However,  it  greatly  fears  that  the  cease-fire,  such  as  it  seems
to  be  accepted  by  certain  delegations,  far  from  leading  to  peace,  makes  peace  im-
probable and  precarious.

Aware  of  these  very  grave  dangers  and  certain  that  it  is  expressing  the  profound
aspirations  of  all  true  Vietnamese,  including  most  of  the  Viet  Minh  fighters
themselves,  and  in  full  accord  with  the  Chief  and  the  Government  of  the  State
of  Vietnam,  the  Vietnamese  delegation  asks  not  only  a  cease-fire  but  the  dis-
armament of  all  the  belligerent  forces  in  Vietnam.

The  Vietnamese  delegation  asks  that  the  entire  territory  of  Vietnam  be  placed
provisionally  under  the  control  of  the  United  Nations  pending  the  complete  re-
establishment  of  security,  of  order  and  of  peace  in  their  minds  and  in  their  hearts
which  will  permit  the  Vietnamese  people  to  decide  their  destiny  by  free  elections.
His  Majesty  Bao  Dai,  Chief  of  State  of  Vietnam,  thus  shows  once  more  that  he
places  the  independence  and  the  unity  of  his  country  above  any  other  considera-
tion, and  the  National  Government  of  Vietnam  would  prefer  this  provisional  con-
trol by  the  United  Nations  over  a  truly  unified  and  independent  Vietnam  to  its
maintenance  in  power  in  a  country  dismembered  and  condemned  to  slavery.
The  Vietnamese  delegation  reserves  its  right  to  develop  its  proposal  at  a  later
time.

END  QUOTE

SMITH

ji .

[Document  84]

FROM:  Geneva
TO:  Secretary  of  State
I NO:  SECTO  639,  July  18,  1  p.m.

[ FOR  THE  SECRETARY  FROM  THE  UNDER  SECRETARY
1^  Following  despatch  given  us  in  advance  by  Topping  of  Associated  Press  appar-
ently  represents  official  Chinese  Communist  position  and  was  given  Topping  in
I order  that  we  would  become  aware  of  it.  It  begins:


562 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I
QUOTE

The  Communist  bloc  has  demanded  that  the  United  States  guarantee  the  partition
peace  plan  for  Indochina  and  join  in  an  agreement  to  neutralize  the  whole  coun-
try, a  responsible  Chinese  Communist  informant  said  today.
The  informant,  who  reflects  the  views  of  Red  China  Premier  Chou  En-lai,  said
the  Communists  are  hopeful  of  a  cease-fire  agreement  by  next  Tuesday's  deadline
if  the  Western  powers  agree  to  'bar  all  foreign  military  bases  from  Indochina  and
keep  the  three  member  states  out  of  any  military  bloc'

The  informant  said  the  Communists  are  pressing  for  the  stamp  of  American
approval  on  the  armistice  agreement — already  okayed  in  principle  by  Britain
and  France — which  would  divide  Vietnam  between  Communist  leader  Ho  Chi
Minh's  Viet  Minh  and  Bao  Dai's  pro-Western  regime.

'We  believe  that  the  US  as  a  member  of  the  conference  should  and  is  obligated
to  subscribe  to  and  guarantee  any  settlement.  Morally,  there  is  no  reason  for  the
US  to  avoid  this  obligation.'

But  the  informant  did  not  (repeat  not)  rule  out  the  chance  of  an  Indochina
cease-fire  even  if  the  US  refuses  to  okay  the  armistice  agreement.
The  Eisenhower  administration  has  told  France  and  Britain  that  they  can  go
ahead  with  their  plan  for  an  Indochina  settlement  based  on  partition  of  Vietnam.
But  Washington  has  made  it  clear  that  it  is  not  (repeat  not)  ready  to  associate
itself  formally  with  the  plan  which  would  sanction  putting  millions  of  Vietnamese
under  Red  rule.

The  Communist  informant  said  the  'crucial  issue'  now  in  the  Geneva  peace
negotiations  revolves  around  whether  the  Western  powers  will  agree  effectively
to  neutralize  Indochina.

'Refusal  to  join  in  such  a  guarantee,'  the  informant  said,  'could  seriously  deter  a
final  settlement.  On  other  important  points  in  the  negotiations  we  are  in  agree-
ment or  close  to  it.  We  are  hopeful  and  we  believe  that  there  is  time  to  reach  a
settlement  by  July  20.'

French  Premier  Pierre  Mendes-France  has  promised  to  resign  with  his  Cabinet
if  he  fails  to  end  the  bloody  eight-year-old  war  by  next  Tuesday.  Fall  of  the
French  Government  probably  would  doom  the  Geneva  negotiations.  The  in-
formant declared  that  American  efforts  to  organize  a  Southeast  Asia  Treaty
organization  (SEATO)  is  'a  threat  to  any  possible  Indochina  agreement.'
'Success  or  failure  of  the  Geneva  Conference  may  depend  on  the  attitude  of  the
American  delegation  in  this  regard,'  he  added.

END  QUOTE

The  above  seems  to  me  extremely  significant,  particularly  in  view  of  the  fact
that  in  my  discussion  with  Eden  last  night  he  expressed  pessimism,  which  he
said  was  now  shared  for  the  first  time  by  Krishna  Menon.  Latter  had  begun  to
feel,  as  I  do,  that  Molotov  wishes  to  force  Mendes-France's  resignation.  Eden
remarked  that  Molotov  had  now  become  the  most  difficult  and  intransigent  mem-
ber of  Communist  delegation.  You  will  note  obvious  intention  to  place  on  shoul-
ders of  US  responsibility  for  failure  of  Geneva  Conference  and  fall  of  French
Government  if  this  occurs.

Molotov  is  insisting  on  a  meeting  this  afternoon  which  French  and  British  are
trying  to  make  highly  restricted  as  they  are  apprehensive  of  what  may  occur.  If
such  a  meeting  is  held  and  if  demands  are  made  for  US  association  in  any  agree-
ment, I  will  simply  say  that  in  the  event  a  reasonable  settlement  is  arrived  at
which  US  could  "respect,"  US  will  probably  issue  a  unilateral  statement  of  its

i


Documents  563


own  position.  If  question  of  participation  Laos,  Cambodia  and  Vietnam  in  se-
curity pact  is  raised,  I  will  reply  that  this  depends  on  outcome  of  conference.
Eden  has  already  told  Molotov  that  security  pact  is  inevitable,  that  he  himself
favored  it  some  time  ago  and  that  he  would  not  (repeat  not)  withdraw  from
that  position,  but  he  made  the  mistake  of  saying  that  no  consideration  had  been
given  to  inclusion  of  Laos  and  Cambodia.

This  final  gambit  is  going  to  be  extremely  difficult  to  play  and  I  do  not  (repeat
not)  now  see  the  moves  clearly.  However,  my  opinion  as  expressed  to  you  before
leaving,  i.e.,  that  Molotov  will  gain  more  by  bringing  down  Mendes  Government
than  by  a  settlement,  has  grown  stronger.

SMITH


[Document  85]

July  18,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  TOSEC  565  NIACT

FROM  SECRETARY  FOR  UNDER  SECRETARY

Does  SECTO  637  fourth  paragraph  mean  that  Eden  has  given  away  position
which  Mendes-France  took  in  Paris,  namely  that  he  was  willing  to  have  Com-
munist state  on  Control  Commission  without  veto,  or  unanimity  if  no  Communist
state  a  member,  but  he  would  not  (rpt  not)  take  both  a  Communist  state  and
unanimity  rule?

Your  SECTO  639  received.  It  may  be  useful  for  you  to  bear  in  mind  that
Executive  has  no  Constitutional  power  to  give  "guarantee."  This  can  only  be
done  by  treaty,  ratification  of  which  would  surely  be  rejected.  Executive  can
only  reaffirm  in  relation  to  Indochina  its  general  undertakings  expressed  in  UN
Charter.

Am  fearful  Eden  will  try  to  push  Mendes-France  into  agreement  far  short  of
7  Points  which  will  confront  us  with  dilemma  of  either  agreeing  to  "respect"  it
or  repudiation  which  might  involve  our  responsibility  for  breakup.  This  precisely
result  which  I  apprehended  and  fully  discussed  with  Mendes-France  Paris  and
I  must  count  on  him  to  strive  to  protect  both  our  countries  against  consequences
of  this  Communist  maneuver  which  Eden  might  unwittingly  abet.

DULLES


[Document  86]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  654,  July  18,  11  p.m.

Twenty-third  Indochina  restricted  session  Sunday,  July  18,  Molotov  presiding.
A  This  session  called  at  urgent  request  Soviets;  French  and  British  had  requested
'  that  participants  be  confined  to  chiefs  of  del  plus  one  adviser.  This  latter  relaxed
j  to  permit  two  advisers.


564 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Molotov  spoke  first,  noting  that  last  meeting  of  Foreign  Ministers  held  on  June
19,  just  one  month  ago.  He  believed  that  today's  session  presented  good  oppor-
tunity to  gauge  importance  of  period  which  had  passed  since  last  meeting  and
work  performed  by  deputies.  He  believed  that  results  achieved  through  private
meetings  and  discussions  had  been  not  (repeat  not)  inconsiderable.  Of  course,
not  (repeat  not)  all  of  the  questions  had  been  resolved  nor  everything  done
which  had  to  be  done,  but  one  should  recognize  the  value  of  what  had  been
achieved.

Molotov  said  first  of  all  he  wished  to  note  that  as  far  as  the  most  complicated
problem  was  concerned,  that  of  peace  in  Indochina,  a  basis  for  reestablishment
of  peace  had  been  achieved  as  a  result  private  negotiations  which  had  opened
possibility  of  agreement  on  that  question.  He  believed  all  participants  would
attach  appropriate  significance  to  this  accomplishment.  He  felt  it  was  also  im-
portant to  recognize  the  work  done  with  reference  to  establishment  of  peace  in
Laos  and  Cambodia.  In  this  connection,  it  is  perhaps  true  that  everything  had
not  (repeat  not)  been  done  that  could  be  done  but  it  appeared  conference  was
on  way  to  agreement  concerning  Laos  and  Cambodia.

Molotov  said  that  all  this  shows  recent  private  talks  have  had  success  and  he
expressed  belief  that  such  success  would  continue.

Describing  situation  as  it  appeared  to  him,  Molotov  noted  that  drafts  for  agree-
ments on  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Vietnam  and  Laos  had  been  presented  to
conference.  Two  drafts  would  be  available  today.  The  same  was  also  true  for
Cambodia.  He  hoped  parties  concerned  would  display  goodwill  necessary  to  agree
on  unresolved  points  in  these  drafts.

Molotov  noted  also  were  two  drafts  of  Geneva  conference  declaration  dealing
with  important  political  matters.

Two  drafts  have  also  been  presented  concerning  the  question  of  international
control  pertaining  to  implementation  of  the  agreements.  Question  of  control
commission  has  long  been  discussed  and  Molotov  felt  that  final  agreement  on
this  subject  would  not  (repeat  not)  require  great  deal  of  time.
Molotov  concluded  by  saying  that  he  had  made  these  observations  in  order  to
give  general  picture  of  the  conference  at  present  and  that  his  remarks  were
naturally  not  (repeat  not)  complete.  He  believed  that  today's  meeting  could  make
progress  re  the  questions  under  discussion  and  would  contribute  to  solution  of
problems  facing  conference.

After  long  pause  Tran  Van  Do  (Vietnam)  spoke  next,  saying  he  had  learned
this  morning  that  today's  meeting  was  to  review  final  declaration  of  Geneva
conference.  In  order  to  avoid  any  misunderstanding,  he  wished  to  state  firmly
that  Vietnam  del  could  not  (repeat  not)  associate  itself  with  any  discussion  of
this  declaration.  Vietnam  position  based  on  following  points:
L  Vietnam  does  not  agree  to  conditions  advanced  for  cessation  of  hostilities.
2.  Vietnam  delegation  has  not  (repeat  not)  as  yet  advanced  proposals  on  behalf
of  Vietnam  Government  for  solution  of  problem  based  on  principles  of  peace,
independence  and  unity.

With  regard  point  number  one.  Do  referred  to  French  draft  of  July  16  of  confer-
ence declaration  (SECTO  628  repeated  Paris  74,  Saigon  46).  This  draft  spoke
of  division  of  Vietnam  into  zones.  For  example,  article  6  said  settlement  must
permit  Vietnamese  people  enjoy  fundamental  liberties  guaranteed  by  democratic
institutions  formed  following  free  elections  supervised  by  international  commis-
sion. Elections  would  take  place  when  in  opinion  of  competent  representative
authorities  in  each  zone  restoration  of  peace  in  country  has  made  sufficient
progress,  et  cetera.  Article  7  speaks  of  a  settlement  which  would  give  Vietnamese
people  right  decide  freely  as  to  zone  where  residence  desired.


Documents  565


Vietnamese  representative  next  referred  to  Soviet  draft  of  July  15  (SECTO  615,
repeated  Paris  63,  Saigon  35).  Article  8  of  Soviet  draft  speaks  of  "consultation
between  competent  representative  authorities  of  northern  and  southern  zones  of
Vietnam."  Article  10  states  that  representative  authorities  in  northern  and  south-
ern zones  of  Vietnam,  as  well  as  authorities  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,  will  not
permit  persecution  of  persons  who  have  collaborated  with  other  side.
In  view  Vietnamese  delegation,  this  indicates  that  Vietnam  will  be  divided  into
north  and  south  zones.  Everyone  is  talking  of  the  division  of  Vietnam  and  men-
tion is  even  made  of  parallels  at  which  division  will  be  accomplished.  Delegation
of  Vietnam  can  only  protest  the  idea  of  partition.  Based  on  point  number  one
cited  earlier  in  statement  of  Vietnamese  representative,  Vietnamese  delegation
flatly  rejects  both  drafts  submitted  to  conference.

Vietnamese  representative  then  stated  that  Vietnamese  delegation  has  not  had
opportunity,  on  behalf  of  new  Vietnamese  Government,  to  express  own  views.
It  reserves  its  right  to  submit  a  draft  declaration  and  to  elaborate  on  it  at  a  plenary
meeting  in  near  future.  Vietnamese  delegation  therefore  requests  a  plenary  meet-
ing for  this.  Do  noted  further  that  there  was  no  mention  of  State  of  Vietnam  in
either  French  or  Soviet  drafts.  Vietnamese  delegation  cannot  accept  declaration
or  agreement  where  Vietnam,  which  invited  to  conference  as  existing  state,  not
even  mentioned.

After  pause  following  Molotov's  request  for  other  speakers,  General  made  follow-
ing statement:

"If  no  one  else  desires  to  speak,  I  think  it  would  be  helpful  if  I  made  clear  posi-
tion of  US  in  these  last  critical  days  of  conference.  I  do  this  because  I  have
recently  seen  the  advance  drafts  submitted  to  the  conference  and  have  had  a
chance  to  review  them.

"One  position  of  the  United  States  with  respect  to  this  conference  has  consistently
been  that  it  is  willing  to  assist,  where  desired,  in  arriving  at  a  just  and  honorable
settlement  which  will  contribute  to  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  peace
in  the  area.  The  United  States  is  not  a  belligerent  in  this  conflict  and  it  has  not
and  will  not  seek  to  impose  its  views  in  any  way  upon  the  belligerents,  who  are
the  parties  primarily  interested.

"If  the  agreements  arrived  at  here  are  of  a  character  which  my  government  is
able  to  respect,  the  United  States  is  prepared  to  declare  unilaterally  that,  in
accordance  with  its  obligations  under  the  United  Nations  Charter,  and  particu-
larly Article  11(4),  it  will  refrain  from  the  threat  or  the  use  of  force  to  disturb
them,  and  would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation  of  the  agree-
ments with  grave  concern.

Since  no  other  representatives  requested  floor  following  General  Smith's  state-
ment, Molotov  suggested  intermission.  After  intermission  had  lasted  for  45  min-
utes, it  was  informally  agreed  that  meeting  should  be  adjourned  without  return-
ing to  conference  room.  No  communique  issued.

Comment:  Today's  restricted  session  strangest  performance  to  date.  Apparent
Molotov  had  not  set  stage  even  with  Communist  colleagues  for  any  particularly
important  announcement  despite  his  insistence  that  meeting  be  called.  Molotov
had  said  to  Mendes-France  just  before  meeting  that  he  thought  would  be  well
underline  progress  made  and  to  show  how  close  conference  was  to  reaching
agreement.

During  recess,  Chou  En-lai  said  he  had  no  desire  make  any  statement.  He  seemed
as  much  in  dark  as  everyone  else  as  to  why  Soviets  had  called  meeting.


SMITH


566 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


[Document  87]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  655,  July  18,  11  p.m.

At  recess  after  today's  meeting  Tran  Van  Do  and  Tran  Van  Chuong  immediately
approached  Johnson  stating  they  wished  U.S.  clearly  understand  reasons  they
felt  compelled  make  their  statement  at  today's  meeting  (SECTO  654)  and  why
they  were  asking  for  a  plenary  session.  They  said  they  desired  at  such  a  plenary
session  put  forward  position  contained  their  note  to  French  (SECTO  633)  and
asked  Johnson's  opinion  on  position.  Johnson  replied  that  did  not  feel  it  was
practicable  proposal,  to  which  they  responded  they  fully  realized  that  it  was
not  practicable  and  would  be  rejected  by  other  side,  but  they  felt  they  must  make
moral  position  their  government  clear  to  world  and  to  Vietnamese  people.  If
other  side  rejected  it,  position  of  their  government  would  have  been  improved.
Upon  rejection  by  other  side  they  would  be  prepared  accept  settlement  along  lines
now  being  discussed.

Johnson  pointed  out  that  time  was  short  and  it  was  late  for  such  proposal  to
which  they  replied  that  Mendes  could  of  course  ask  for  and  obtain  additional
time  from  French  Assembly.  Johnson  expressed  strong  doubt  and  urged  they
speak  directly  with  French.  After  repeated  strong  urgings  they  finally  approached
Mendes,  who  listened  sympathetically  and  at  length.  He  suggested  and  they
promised  to  consider  formulation  their  proposal  in  writing  and  circulation  to
other  delegations.  He  categorically  stated  he  could  not  even  if  he  so  desired  ask
Assembly  for  any  extension  time  he  has  given  self.

Johnson  told  Mendes  he  was  concerned  over  reaction  to  Vietnamese  statement
and  reminded  Mendes  of  U.S.  position  on  Vietnamese  concurrence  with  any
agreement.  Mendes  stated  he  was  very  conscious  of  [word  illegible]  and  was
asking  De  Jean  immediately  go  to  Cannes  to  see  Bao  Dai.

Chauvel  said  that  from  De  Jean's  previous  talk  with  Bao  Dai  it  appeared  Bao
Dai  had  no  knowledge  of  Do's  conversations  with  Dong  and  in  general  had
given  delegation  here  free  hand.

SMITH


[Document  88]  |

FROM:  Geneva  f
TO:  Secretary  of  State  !|
NO:  SECTO  661,  July  19,  1  p.m.  ^

t

Re  SECTO  639

Topping  has  supplied  in  confidence  following  background  information  con-
cerning his  story  on  views  of  Chinese  Communist  delegation.
He  stated  his  informant  was  Huang  Hua,  whom  he  has  known  for  many  years.


Documents  567


Interview  was  at  Huang's  initiative,  was  called  on  short  notice,  and  was  con-
ducted in  extremely  serious  manner  without  propaganda  harangues.
Topping  said  he  had  reported  Huang's  statement  fully  in  his  story  but  had
obtained  number  of  "visual  impressions"  during  interview.  When  Huang  spoke  of
possibility  American  bases  in  Indochina  or  anti-Communist  pact  in  Southeast
Asia,  he  became  very  agitated,  his  hands  shook,  and  his  usually  excellent  Eng-
lish broke  down,  forcing  him  to  work  through  interpreter.  Huang  also  spoke
seriously  and  with  apparent  sincerity  concerning  his  belief  that  I  have  returned
to  Geneva  to  prevent  settlement.  Topping  believes  Chinese  Communists  con-
vinced Americans  made  deal  with  French  during  Paris  talks  on  basis  of  which
Mendes-France  has  raised  price  of  settlement.

SMITH


[Document  89]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  666,  July  19,  7  p.m.

NIACT

FOR  THE  SECRETARY  FROM  THE  UNDERSECRETARY.

The  oudines  of  international  control  now  clearly  emerge.  Composition  will
probably  be  Poland,  India,  and  Canada  or  Belgium.  The  French  prefer  Belgium
and  so  do  I.  Both  Poland  and  Canada  or  Belgium  will  have  veto  on  important
questions.  Commission  will  have  full  freedom  of  movement  in  demilitarized
zones  which  will  separate  forces  at  each  stage  of  regrouping  and  in  all  frontier
and  seacoast  areas.

Taking  everything  into  consideration,  I  strongly  feel  this  is  satisfactory  and  much
better  than  we  were  able  to  obtain  in  Korea.  French  feel,  and  Eden  and  I  agree,
that  with  such  composition  built-in  veto  will  work  to  our  advantage.  This  setup
is  best  French  or  anybody  else  could  get,  and  I  feel  it  is  within  spirit  of  point  7.

SMITH


[Document  90]

FROM:  Geneva
TO:  Secretary  of  State
NO:  SECTO  669,  July  19,  8  p.m.

FOR  THE  SECRETARY  FROM  THE  UNDER  SECRETARY

?!  I  had  long  talk  with  Mendes-France  this  afternoon,  as  I  told  you.  He  urgently
'  asked  that  we  expand  our  proposed  unilateral  declaration  so  as  take  note  not
(repeat  not)  only  of  agreements  between  military  commands,  but  also  take


568 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

note  of  paragraphs  one  to  nine  proposed  conference  declaration.  (See  SECTOs
628  and  647).  I  made  it  clear  that  we  could  under  no  circumstances  associate
ourselves  with  conference  declaration  even  though  it  is  anticipated  it  will  be  only
conference  document  and  not  signed  agreement,  nor  could  we  note  or  otherwise
imply  any  acquiescence  in  or  approval  of  paragraph  10  which  provides  for  con-
sultation among  conference  members  on  questions  transmitted  to  them  by  inter-
national control  commissions.

Text  of  declaration  not  yet  agreed  between  French  and  Communists,  but  I  am
transmitting  immediately  by  following  telegram  French  estimate  probable  final
text.  I  am  also  transmitting  texts  of  unilateral  statements  to  which  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia have  agreed  which  are  referred  to  in  paragraph  4  draft  declaration  and
draft  French  unilateral  declaration  referred  to  in  paragraph  8.
French  position  is  this  conference  declaration  is  integral  part  of  agreements
reached  at  conference  and  they  will  be  sorely  disappointed  if  we  simply  dis-
associate ourselves  from  declaration  without  even  taking  note  in  same  manner
as  with  respect  to  cease-fire  agreements.  I  recommend  that  I  be  authorized
amend  our  proposed  declaration  (Annex  B  my  instructions)  by  inserting  a  brief
addition  taking  note  of  paragraphs  one  to  nine  of  conference  declaration  if  its
final  content  does  not  too  greatly  difi'er  from  that  which  French  have  indicated
they  prepared  to  accept.  I  would  like  some  latitude  on  this,  and  am  sure  I  know
what  would  be  acceptable  to  you.  I  will,  of  course,  have  to  state  in  conference
that  the  US  is  unable  to  join  in  a  multilateral  declaration  (since  the  one  planned
would  include  the  Communists)  but  it  is  making  a  declaration  of  its  own
position,  et  cetera.  This  may  come  to  a  head  tomorrow  afternoon  or  evening,
and  while  it  would  be  possible  to  make  our  declaration  later  it  is  infinitely  pref-
erable to  do  it  at  the  time  of  settlement.  Otherwise  we  will  have  to  disassociate
ourselves  with  a  lengthy  and  detailed  conference  declaration  without  anything
of  our  own  to  offer  except  the  very  brief  declaration  we  already  have  prepared.

SMITH


[Document  91]

July  19,  1954

SENT  TO:  Amconsul  GENEVA  TOSEC  576

FOR  UNDER  SECRETARY  FROM  SECRETARY
Your  SECTOS  666,  667,  668,  669.

As  requested  669  you  may  expand  proposed  unilateral  declaration  so  as  to  take
note  of  paragraphs  1  to  8  of  the  proposed  Conference  declaration  with  under-
standing that  US  obligations  QTE  with  regard  to  aforesaid  agreements  and
paragraphs  of  Declaration  UNQTE  are  limited  to  those  expressed  Subparagraphs
1  and  of  Annex  B  of  your  instructions.

The  foregoing  is  on  the  assumption  that  the  Declaration  in  its  final  form  does
not  materially  differ  from  SECTO  667.  As  to  nonmateriality  of  differences,
would  like  you  to  obtain  Phleger's  legal  judgment.

Have  no  objection  to  including  first  portion  of  paragraph  9  of  proposed  Con-
ference declaration  but  am  concerned  as  to  effect  of  including  second  portion  of
paragraph  9  as  this  seems  to  imply  a  multilateral  engagement  with  Communists
which  would  be  inconsistent  with  our  basic  approach  and  which  subsequently


Documents  569


might  enable  Communist  China  to  charge  us  with  alleged  violations  of  agree-
ment to  which  it  might  claim  both  governments  became  parties.

While  we  don't  want  to  take  responsibility  of  imposing  our  views  on  the
French,  I  feel  particularly  concerned  about  provisions  of  paragraph  6  which
gives  the  Control  Commission  constituted  as  per  SECTO  666  authority  also  to
control  the  general  elections.  The  ink  is  hardly  dry  on  the  Declaration  of  Presi-
dent Eisenhower  and  Prime  Minister  Churchill  of  June  29  to  the  effect  that  "In
the  case  of  nations  now  divided  against  their  will,  we  shall  continue  to  seek
to  achieve  unity  through  free  elections  supervised  by  the  UN  to  insure  that  they
are  conducted  fairly."  It  is  rather  humiliating  to  see  that  Declaration  now  so
quickly  go  down  the  drain  with  our  apparent  acquiescence.

With  reference  to  668  believe  something  like  this  is  acceptable  if  obtainable.
Believe  that  this  would  not  necessitate  these  states  dealing  only  with  or  through
France  as  suggested  your  650  and  652.  We  hope  that  this  possibility  of  direct
assistance  for  genuinely  defensive  and  internal  security  purposes  and  not  involv-
ing any  US  bases  can  be  preserved  as  it  may  very  well  be  that  as  a  result  of
surrender  in  Tonkin  Delta  French  will  become  so  highly  unpopular  that  their
effort  to  maintain  authority  in  other  areas  would  in  fact  lead  to  these  other
areas  surely  falling  under  Communist  domination.

DULLES


[Document  92]

FROM:  Geneva

TO:  Secretary  of  State

NO:  SECTO  673,  July  19,  9  p.m.

Vietnamese  DEL  handed  us  late  this  afternoon  their  new  proposal.  It  is
elaboration  of  idea  in  note  to  French  (SECTO  633)  and  conference  was  advised
of  its  preparation  in  yesterday's  restricted  session.  Unofficial  translation  follows:

QUOTE

French,  Soviet,  and  Viet  Minh  drafts  all  admit  the  principles  of  a  partition  of
Vietnam  in  two  zones,  all  of  North  Vietnam  being  abandoned  to  the  Viet
Minh.

Although  this  partition  is  only  provisional  in  theory,  it  would  not  (repeat  not)
fail  to  produce  in  Vietnam  the  same  effects  as  in  Germany,  Austria,  and  Korea.
It  would  not  (repeat  not)  bring  the  peace  which  is  sought  for,  deeply  wound-
ing the  national  sentiment  of  the  Vietnamese  people  it  would  provoke  trouble
throughout  the  country,  trouble  which  would  not  (repeat  not)  fail  to  threaten
a  peace  so  dearly  acquired.

Before  discussing  the  conditions  of  a  de  facto  partition  with  disastrous  con-
sequences for  the  people  of  Vietnam  and  for  the  peace  of  the  world,  the  DEL
of  the  state  of  Vietnam  renews  its  proposal  for  a  cease-fire  without  a  demarca-
tion line,  without  partition,  even  provisionally.
The  Vietnamese  DEL  therefore  proposes:

1.  A  cease-fire  on  present  positions

2.  Regroupment  of  troops  in  two  zones  which  would  be  as  small  possible.


570 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


3.  Disarmament  of  irregular  troops

4.  After  a  period  to  be  fixed,  disarmament  of  Viet  Minh  troops  and  simultane-
ous withdrawal  of  foreign  troops.

5.  Control  by  the  United  Nations:

A.  Of  the  cease-fire

B.  Of  the  regroupment

C.  Of  the  disarmament  and  the  withdrawal

D.  Of  the  administration  of  the  entire  country

E.  Of  the  general  elections,  when  the  United  Nations  believes  that  order  and
security  will  have  been  everywhere  truly  restored.

This  proposal  made  on  the  formal  instructions  of  His  Majesty  Bao  Dai,  and  of
the  President  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  shows  that  the  chief  of  state  of  Vietnam  once
more  places  the  independence  and  the  unity  of  his  country  above  any  other
consideration,  and  that  the  national  government  of  Vietnam  would  prefer  this
provisional  UN  control  over  a  truly  independent  and  United  Vietnam  to  its
maintenance  in  power  in  a  country  dismembered  and  condemned  to  slavery.
Vietnamese  DEL  renews  its  request  that  a  conference  session  be  devoted  to  the
study  of  its  proposal  for  a  cease-fire  without  partition.

In  adding  this  proposal  to  those  of  other  members  of  the  conference,  the  DEL
of  the  state  of  Vietnam  means  to  bring  a  positive  contribution  to  the  search  for
a  real  and  durable  peace  which  conforms  to  the  aspirations  of  the  Vietnamese
people.

Geneva,  July  19,  1954.
END  QUOTE

Comments  follow.

SMITH


[Document  93]

{This  unilateral  declaration  by  the  United  States  Government  sets  forth  its
position  with  regard  to  the  Geneva  Accords,  which  it  did  not  sign.)

STATEMENT  BY  THE  UNDER  SECRETARY  OF  STATE  i
AT  THE  CONCLUDING  PLENARY  SESSION  OF  THE
GENEVA  CONFERENCE,  JULY  21,  1954  2

As  I  stated  on  July  18,  my  Government  is  not  prepared  to  join  in  a  declaration
by  the  Conference  such  as  is  submitted.  However,  the  United  States  makes  this
unilateral  declaration  of  its  position  in  these  matters:

Declaration

The  Government  of  the  United  States  being  resolved  to  devote  its  efforts  to
the  strengthening  of  peace  in  accordance  with  the  principles  and  purposes  of  the

'  Walter  Bedell  Smith.

^  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  Aug.  2,  1954,  pp.  162-163.


Documents  571


United  Nations  takes  note  of  the  agreements  concluded  at  Geneva  on  July  20
and  21,  1954  between  (a)  the  Franco-Laotian  Command  and  the  Command  of
the  Peoples  Army  of  Viet-Nam;  (b)  the  Royal  Khmer  Army  Command  and  the
Command  of  the  Peoples  Army  of  Viet-Nam;  (c)  Franco- Vietnamese  Com-
mand and  the  Command  of  the  Peoples  Army  of  Viet-Nam  and  of  paragraphs
1  to  12  inclusive  of  the  declaration  presented  to  the  Geneva  Conference  on  July
21,  1954  declares  with  regard  to  the  aforesaid  agreements  and  paragraphs  that
(i)  it  will  refrain  from  the  threat  or  the  use  of  force  to  disturb  them,  in  accord-
ance with  Article  2(4)  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  dealing  with  the
obligation  of  members  to  refrain  in  their  international  relations  from  the  threat
or  use  of  force;  and  (ii)  it  would  view  any  renewal  of  the  aggression  in  violation
of  the  aforesaid  agreements  with  grave  concern  and  as  seriously  threatening
international  peace  and  security.

In  connection  with  the  statement  in  the  declaration  concerning  free  elections
in  Viet-Nam  my  Government  wishes  to  make  clear  its  position  which  it  has
expressed  in  a  declaration  made  in  Washington  on  June  29,  1954,  as  follows:

In  the  case  of  nations  now  divided  against  their  will,  we  shall  continue  to
seek  to  achieve  unity  through  free  elections  supervised  by  the  United  Nations
to  insure  that  they  are  conducted  fairly.

With  respect  to  the  statement  made  by  the  representative  of  the  State  of  Viet-
Nam,  the  United  States  reiterates  its  traditional  position  that  peoples  are  entitled
to  determine  their  own  future  and  that  it  will  not  join  in  an  arrangement  which
would  hinder  this.  Nothing  in  its  declaration  just  made  is  intended  to  or  does
indicate  any  departure  from  this  traditional  position.

We  share  the  hope  that  the  agreements  will  permit  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-
Nam  to  play  their  part,  in  full  independence  and  sovereignty,  in  the  peaceful
community  of  nations,  and  will  enable  the  peoples  of  that  area  to  determine  their
own  future.


[Document  94]

21  July  1954
Original:  FRENCH

GENEVA  CONFERENCE
INDO-CHINA

FINAL  DECLARATION,  dated  the  21st  July,  1954,  of  the  Geneva  Confer-
ence on  the  problem  of  restoring  peace  in  Indo-China,  in  which  the  representatives
of  Cambodia,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet-Nam,  France,  Laos,  the  People's
Republic  of  China,  the  State  of  Viet-Nam,  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Repub-
lics, the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States  of  America  took  part.

1.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  agreements  ending  hostilities  in  Cambodia,
Laos  and  Viet-Nam  and  organizing  international  control  and  the  supervision  of
the  execution  of  the  provisions  of  these  agreements.

2.  The  Conference  expresses  satisfaction  at  the  ending  of  hostilities  in  Cam-
bodia, Laos  and  Viet-Nam;  the  Conference  expresses  its  conviction  that  the
execution  of  the  provisions  set  out  in  the  present  declaration  and  in  the  agree-
ments on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  will  permit  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Viet-Nam


572 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

henceforth  to  play  their  part,  in  full  independence  and  sovereignty,  in  the  peace-
ful community  of  nations.

3.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declarations  made  by  the  Governments
of  Cambodia  and  of  Laos  of  their  intention  to  adopt  measures  permitting  all
citizens  to  take  their  place  in  the  national  community,  in  particular  by  participat-
ing in  the  next  general  elections,  which,  in  conformity  with  the  constitution  of
each  of  these  countries,  shall  take  place  in  the  course  of  the  year  1955,  by  secret
ballot  and  in  conditions  of  respect  for  fundamental  freedoms.

4.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  clauses  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation
of  hostilities  in  Viet-Nam  prohibiting  the  introduction  into  Viet-Nam  of  foreign
troops  and  military  personnel  as  well  as  of  all  kinds  of  arms  and  munitions.  The
Conference  also  takes  note  of  the  declarations  made  by  the  Governments  of
Cambodia  and  Laos  of  their  resolution  not  to  request  foreign  aid,  whether  in
war  material,  in  personnel  or  in  instructors  except  for  the  purpose  of  the  effective
defence  of  their  territory  and,  in  the  case  of  Laos,  to  the  extent  defined  by  the
agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Laos.

5.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  clauses  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation
of  hostilities  in  Viet-Nam  to  the  effect  that  no  military  base  under  the  control  of
a  foreign  State  may  be  established  in  the  regrouping  zones  of  the  two  parties,
the  latter  having  the  obligation  to  see  that  the  zones  allotted  to  them  shall  not
constitute  part  of  any  military  alliance  and  shall  not  be  utilized  for  the  resumption
of  hostilities  or  in  the  service  of  an  aggressive  policy.  The  Conference  also  takes
note  of  the  declarations  of  the  Governments  of  Cambodia  and  Laos  to  the  effect
that  they  will  not  join  in  any  agreement  with  other  States  if  this  agreement  in-
cludes the  obligation  to  participate  in  a  military  alliance  not  in  conformity  with
the  principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  or,  in  the  case  of  Laos,  with
the  principles  of  the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Laos  or,  so  long
as  their  security  is  not  threatened,  the  obligation  to  establish  bases  on  Cambodian
or  Laotian  territory  for  the  military  forces  of  foreign  Powers.

6.  The  Conference  recognizes  that  the  essential  purpose  of  the  agreement
relating  to  Viet-Nam  is  to  settle  military  questions  with  a  view  to  ending  hos-
tilities and  that  the  military  demarcation  line  is  provisional  and  should  not  in
any  way  be  interpreted  as  constituting  a  political  or  territorial  boundary.  The
Conference  expresses  its  conviction  that  the  execution  of  the  provisions  set  out
in  the  present  declaration  and  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities
creates  the  necessary  basis  for  the  achievement  in  the  near  future  of  a  political
settlement  in  Viet-Nam.

7.  The  Conference  declares  that,  so  far  as  Viet-Nam  is  concerned,  the  settle-
ment of  political  problems,  affected  on  the  basis  of  respect  for  the  principles  of
independence,  unity  and  territorial  integrity,  shall  permit  the  Viet-Namese  people
to  enjoy  the  fundamental  freedoms,  guaranteed  by  democratic  institutions  estab-
lished as  a  result  of  free  general  elections  by  secret  ballot.  In  order  to  ensure  that
sufficient  progress  in  the  restoration  of  peace  has  been  made,  and  that  all  the
necessary  conditions  obtain  for  free  expression  of  the  national  will,  general
elections  shall  be  held  in  July  1956,  under  the  supervision  of  an  international
commission  composed  of  representatives  of  the  Member  States  of  the  Inter-
national Supervisory  Commission,  referred  to  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation
of  hostilities.  Consultations  will  be  held  on  this  subject  between  the  competent
representative  authorities  of  the  two  zones  from  20  July  1955  onwards.

8.  The  provisions  of  the  agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  intended
to  ensure  the  protection  of  individuals  and  of  property  must  be  most  strictly


Documents  573


applied  and  must,  in  particular,  allow  everyone  in  Viet-Nam  to  decide  freely  in
which  zone  he  wishes  to  live.

9.  The  competent  representative  authorities  of  the  Northern  and  Southern
zones  of  Viet-Nam,  as  well  as  the  authorities  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,  must  not
permit  any  individual  or  collective  reprisals  against  persons  who  have  collabo-
rated in  any  way  with  one  of  the  parties  during  the  war,  or  against  members  of
such  persons'  families.

10.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declaration  of  the  Government  of  the
French  Republic  to  the  effect  that  it  is  ready  to  withdraw  its  troops  from  the
territory  of  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Viet-Nam,  at  the  requests  of  the  Governments
concerned  and  within  periods  which  shall  be  fixed  by  agreement  between  the
parties  except  in  the  cases  where,  by  agreement  betwoen  the  two  parties,  a  certain
number  of  French  troops  shall  remain  at  specified  points  and  for  a  specified  time.

11.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declaration  of  the  French  Government
to  the  effect  that  for  the  settlement  of  all  the  problems  connected  with  the  re-
establishment  and  consolidation  of  peace  in  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  the
French  Government  will  proceed  from  the  principle  of  respect  for  the  independ-
ence and  sovereignty,  unity,  and  territorial  integrity  of  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-
Nam.

12.  In  their  relations  with  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  each  member  of
the  Geneva  Conference  undertakes  to  respect  the  sovereignty,  the  independence,
the  unity  and  the  territorial  integrity  of  the  above-mentioned  states,  and  to  refrain
from  any  interference  in  their  internal  affairs.

13.  The  members  of  the  Conference  agree  to  consult  one  another  on  any
question  which  may  be  referred  to  them  by  the  International  Supervisory  Com-
mission, in  order  to  study  such  measures  as  may  prove  necessary  to  ensure  that
the  agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam
are  respected.


[Document  95]

Reprinted  from  New  York  Times

LANSDALE  TEAM'S  REPORT  ON  COVERT  SAIGON
MISSION  IN  1954  AND  1955

Following  are  excerpts  from  the  report  of  the  Saigon  ^  Military  Mission,  an
American  team  headed  by  Edward  G.  Lansdale,  covering  its  activities  in  the
1954-55  period.  The  report  accompanies  the  Pentagon's  study  of  the  Vietnam
war,  which  cites  it  without  identifying  the  author  or  date.  The  excerpts  appear
verbatim,  with  only  unmistakable  typographical  errors  corrected.

I.  FOREWORD

.  .  .  This  is  the  condensed  account  of  one  year  in  the  operations  of  a  "cold
war"  combat  team,  written  by  the  team  itself  in  the  field,  little  by  little  in  mo-
ments taken  as  the  members  could.  The  team  is  known  as  the  Saigon  Military
Mission.  The  field  is  Vietnam.  There  are  other  teams  in  the  field,  American,
French,  British,  Chinese,  Vietnamese,  Vietminh,  and  others.  Each  has  its  own
story  to  tell.  This  is  ours.


574 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

The  Saigon  Military  Mission  entered  Vietnam  on  1  June  1954  when  its  Chief
arrived.  However,  this  is  the  story  of  a  team,  and  it  wasn't  until  August  1954
that  sufficient  members  arrived  to  constitute  a  team.  So,  this  is  mainly  an  account
of  the  team's  first  year,  from  August  1954  to  August  1955.

It  was  often  a  frustrating  and  perplexing  year,  up  close.  The  Geneva  Agree-
ments signed  on  21  July  1954  imposed  restrictive  rules  upon  all  official  Ameri-
cans, including  the  Saigon  Military  Mission.  An  active  and  intelligent  enemy
made  full  use  of  legal  rights  to  screen  his  activities  in  establishing  his  stay-behind
organizations  south  of  the  17th  Parallel  and  in  obtaining  quick  security  north  of
that  Parallel.  The  nation's  economy  and  communications  system  were  crippled  by
eight  years  of  open  war.  The  government,  including  its  Army  and  other  security
forces,  was  in  a  painful  transition  from  colonial  to  self  rule,  making  it  a  year  of
hot-tempered  incidents.  Internal  problems  arose  quickly  to  points  where  armed
conflict  was  sought  as  the  only  solution.  The  enemy  was  frequently  forgotten  in
the  heavy  atmosphere  of  suspicion,  hatred,  and  jealousy.

The  Saigon  Military  Mission  received  some  blows  from  allies  and  the  enemy
in  this  atmosphere,  as  we  worked  to  help  stabilize  the  government  and  to  beat
the  Geneva  time-table  of  Communist  takeover  in  the  north.  However,  we  did
beat  the  time-table.  The  government  did  become  stabilized.  The  Free  Vietnamese
are  now  becoming  unified  and  learning  how  to  cope  with  the  Communist  enemy.
We  are  thankful  that  we  had  a  chance  to  help  in  this  work  in  a  critical  area  of
the  world,  to  be  positive  and  constructive  in  a  year  of  doubt.

II.  MISSION

The  Saigon  Military  Mission  (SMM)  was  born  in  a  Washington  policy  meet-
ing early  in  1954,  when  Dien  Bien  Phu  was  still  holding  out  against  the  encircling
Vietminh.  The  SMM  was  to  enter  into  Vietnam  quietly  and  assist  the  Vietnamese,
rather  than  the  French,  in  unconventional  warfare.  The  French  were  to  be  kept
as  friendly  allies  in  the  process,  as  far  as  possible.

The  broad  mission  for  the  team  was  to  undertake  paramilitary  operations
against  the  enemy  and  to  wage  political-psychological  warfare.  Later,  after
Geneva,  the  mission  was  modified  to  prepare  the  means  for  undertaking  para-
military operations  in  Communist  areas  rather  than  to  wage  unconventional  war-
fare. .  .  .


III. HIGHLIGHTS  OF  THE  YEAR
a. Early  Days

The  Saigon  Military  Mission  (SMM)  started  on  1  June  1954,  when  its  Chief,
Colonel  Edward  G.  Lansdale,  USAF,  arrived  in  Saigon  with  a  small  box
of  files  and  clothes  and  a  borrrowed  typewriter,  courtesy  of  an  SA-16  flight  set
up  for  him  by  the  13th  Air  Force  at  Clark  AFB.  Lt-General  John  O'Daniel  and
Embassy  Charge  Rob  McClintock  had  arranged  for  his  appointment  as  Assistant
Air  Attache,  since  it  was  improper  for  U.S.  officers  at  MAAG  at  that  time  to
have  advisory  conferences  with  Vietnamese  officers.  Ambassador  Heath  had  con-
curred already.  There  was  no  desk  space  for  an  office,  no  vehicle,  no  safe  for
files.  He  roomed  with  General  O'Daniel,  later  moved  to  a  small  house  rented  by
MAAG.  Secret  communications  with  Washington  were  provided  through  the
Saigon  station  of  CIA.


Documents  575


There  was  deepening  gloom  in  Vietnam.  Dien  Bien  Phu  had  fallen.  The  French
were  capitulating  to  the  Vietminh  at  Geneva.  The  first  night  in  Saigon,  Vietminh
saboteurs  blew  up  large  ammunition  dumps  at  the  airport,  rocking  Saigon
throughout  the  night.  General  O'Daniel  and  Charge  McClintock  agreed  that  it
was  time  to  start  taking  positive  action.  O'Daniel  paved  the  way  for  a  quick
first-hand  survey  of  the  situation  throughout  the  country.  McClintock  paved  the
way  for  contacts  with  Vietnamese  political  leaders.  Our  Chief's  reputation  from
the  Philippines  had  preceded  him.  Hundreds  of  Vietnamese  acquaintanceships
were  made  quickly.

Working  in  close  cooperation  with  George  Hellyer,  USIS  Chief,  a  new  psycho-
logical warfare  campaign  was  devised  for  the  Vietnamese  Army  and  for  the  gov-
ernment in  Hanoi.  Shortly  after,  a  refresher  course  in  combat  psywar  was  con-
structed and  Vietnamese  Army  personnel  were  rushed  through  it.  A  similar  course
was  initiated  for  the  Ministry  of  Information.  Rumor  campaigns  were  added  to
the  tactics  and  tried  out  in  Hanoi.  It  was  almost  too  late.

The  first  rumor  campaign  was  to  be  a  carefully  planted  story  of  a  Chinese
Communist  regiment  in  Tonkin  taking  reprisals  against  a  Vietminh  village  whose
girls  the  Chinese  had  raped,  recalling  Chinese  Nationalist  troop  behavior  in  1945
and  confirming  Vietnamese  fears  of  Chinese  occupation  under  Vietminh  rule;
the  story  was  to  be  planted  by  soldiers  of  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Psywar  Com-
pany in  Hanoi  dressed  in  civilian  clothes.  The  troops  received  their  instructions
silently,  dressed  in  civilian  clothes,  went  on  the  mission,  and  failed  to  return.
They  had  deserted  to  the  Vietminh.  Weeks  later,  Tonkinese  told  an  excited  story
of  the  misbehavior  of  the  Chinese  Divisions  in  Vietminh  territory.  Investigated,
it  turned  out  to  be  the  old  rumor  campaign,  with  Vietnamese  embellishments.

There  was  political  chaos.  Prince  Buu  Loc  no  longer  headed  the  government.
Government  ministries  all  but  closed.  The  more  volatile  leaders  of  political
groups  were  proposing  a  revolution,  which  included  armed  attacks  on  the  French.
Col.  Jean  Carbonel  of  the  French  Army  proposed  establishing  a  regime  with  Viet-
namese (Nungs  and  others)  known  to  him  close  to  the  Chinese  border  and  asked
for  our  backing.  Our  reply  was  that  this  was  a  policy  decision  to  be  made  be-
tween the  FEC  top  command  and  U.S.  authorities.

Oscar  Arellano,  Junior  Chamber  International  vice-president  for  Southeast
Asia,  stopped  by  for  a  visit  with  our  Chief;  an  idea  in  this  visit  later  grew  into
"Operation  Brotherhood."

On  1  July,  Major  Lucien  Conein  arrived,  as  the  second  member  of  the  team.
He  is  a  paramilitary  specialist,  well-known  to  the  French  for  his  help  with  French-
operated  maquis  in  Tonkin  against  the  Japanese  in  1945,  the  one  American
guerrilla  fighter  who  had  not  been  a  member  of  the  Patti  Mission.  He  was  as-
signed to  MAAG  for  cover  purposes.  Arranged  by  Lt-Col  William  Rosson,  a
meeting  was  held  with  Col  Carbonel,  Col  Nguyen  Van  Vy,  and  the  two  SMM
officers;  Vy  had  seen  his  first  combat  in  1945  under  Conein.  Carbonel  proposed
establishing  a  maquis,  to  be  kept  as  a  secret  between  the  four  officers.  SMM  re-
fused, learned  later  that  Carbonel  had  kept  the  FEC  Deuxieme  Bureau  informed.
Shortly  afterwards,  at  a  Defense  conference  with  General  O'Daniel,  our  Chief
had  a  chance  to  suggest  Vy  for  a  command  in  the  North,  making  him  a  general.
Secretary  of  State  for  Defense  Le  Ngoc  Chan  did  so,  Vy  was  grateful  and  re-
mained so.

Ngo  Dinh  Diem  arrived  on  7  July,  and  within  hours  was  in  despair  as  the
French  forces  withdrew  from  the  Catholic  provinces  of  Phat  Diem  and  Nam
Dinh  in  Tonkin.  Catholic  militia  streamed  north  to  Hanoi  and  Haiphong,  their
hearts  filled  with  anger  at  French  abandonment.  The  two  SMM  officers  stopped


576 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

a  planned  grenade  attack  by  militia  girls  against  French  troops  guarding  a  ware-
house; the  girls  stated  they  had  not  eaten  for  three  days;  arrangements  were  made
for  Chinese  merchants  in  Haiphong  to  feed  them.  Other  militia  attacks  were
stopped,  including  one  against  a  withdrawing  French  artillery  unit;  the  militia
wanted  the  guns  to  stand  and  fight  the  Vietminh.  The  Tonkinese  had  hopes  of
American  friendship  and  listened  to  the  advice  given  them.  Governor  [name
illegible]  died,  reportedly  by  poison.  Tonkin's  government  changed  as  despair
grew.  On  21  July,  the  Geneva  Agreement  was  signed.  Tonkin  was  given  to  the
Communists.  Anti-Communists  turned  to  SMM  for  help  in  establishing  a  resist-
ance movement  and  several  tentative  initial  arrangements  were  made.

Diem  himself  had  reached  a  nadir  of  frustration,  as  his  country  disintegrated
after  the  conference  of  foreigners.  With  the  approval  of  Ambassador  Heath  and
General  O'Daniel,  our  Chief  drew  up  a  plan  of  overall  governmental  action  and
presented  it  to  Diem,  with  Hellyer  as  interpreter.  It  called  for  fast  constructive
action  and  dynamic  leadership.  Although  the  plan  was  not  adopted,  it  laid  the
foundation  for  a  friendship  which  has  lasted.

Oscar  Arellano  visited  Saigon  again.  Major  Charles  T.  R.  Bohanan,  a  former
team-mate  in  Philippine  days,  was  in  town.  At  an  SMM  conference  with  these
two,  "Operation  Brotherhood"  was  born :  volunteer  medical  teams  of  Free  Asians
to  aid  the  Free  Vietnamese  who  have  few  doctors  of  their  own.  Washington
responded  warmly  to  the  idea.  President  Diem  was  visited;  he  issued  an  appeal  to
the  Free  World  for  help.  The  Junior  Chamber  International  adopted  the  idea.
SMM  would  monitor  the  operation  quietly  in  the  background.

President  Diem  had  organized  a  Committee  of  Cabinet  Ministers  to  handle
the  problem  of  refugees  from  the  Communist  North.  The  Committee  system  was
a  failure.  No  real  plans  had  been  made  by  the  French  or  the  Americans.  After
conferences  with  USOM  (FOA)  officials  and  with  General  O'Daniel,  our  Chief
suggested  to  Ambassador  Heath  that  he  call  a  U.S.  meeting  to  plan  a  single
Vietnamese  agency,  under  a  Commissioner  of  Refugees  to  be  appointed  by
President  Diem,  to  run  the  Vietnamese  refugee  program  and  to  provide  a  channel
through  which  help  could  be  given  by  the  U.S.,  France,  and  other  free  nations.
The  meeting  was  called  and  the  plan  adopted,  with  MAAG  under  General
O'Daniel  in  the  coordinating  role.  Diem  adopted  the  plan.  The  French  pitched  in
enthusiastically  to  help.  CAT  asked  SMM  for  help  in  obtaining  a  French  contract
for  the  refugee  airlift,  and  got  it.  In  return,  CAT  provided  SMM  with  the  means
for  secret  air  travel  between  the  North  and  Saigon.  .  .  .

b. August  1954

An  agreement  had  been  reached  that  the  personnel  ceiling  of  U.S.  military
personnel  with  MAAG  would  be  frozen  at  the  number  present  in  Vietnam  on  the
date  of  the  cease-fire,  under  the  terms  of  the  Geneva  Agreement.  In  South  Viet-
nam this  deadline  was  to  be  11  August.  It  meant  that  SMM  might  have  only  two
members  present,  unless  action  were  taken.  General  O'Daniel  agreed  to  the  addi-
tion of  ten  SMM  men  under  MAAG  cover,  plus  any  others  in  the  Defense  pipe-
line who  arrived  before  the  deadline.  A  call  for  help  went  out.  Ten  officers  in
Korea,  Japan,  and  Okinawa  were  selected  and  were  rushed  to  Vietnam.

SMM  had  one  small  MAAG  house.  Negotiations  were  started  for  other  hous-
ing, but  the  new  members  of  the  team  arrived  before  housing  was  ready  and
were  crammed  three  and  four  to  a  hotel  room  for  the  first  days.  Meetings  were
held  to  assess  the  new  members'  abilities.  None  had  had  political-psychological
warfare  experience.  Most  were  experienced  in  paramilitary  and  clandestine  intel-


Documents  577


ligence  operations.  Plans  were  made  quickly,  for  time  was  running  out  in  the
north;  already  the  Vietminh  had  started  taking  over  secret  control  of  Hanoi  and
other  areas  of  Tonkin  still  held  by  French  forces.

Major  Conein  was  given  responsibility  for  developing  a  paramilitary  organiza-
tion in  the  north,  to  be  in  position  when  the  Vietminh  took  over.  .  .  .  [His]
.  .  .  team  was  moved  north  immediately  as  part  of  the  MAAG  staff  working  on
the  refugee  problem.  The  team  had  headquarters  in  Hanoi,  with  a  branch  in
Haiphong.  Among  cover  duties,  this  team  supervised  the  refugee  flow  for  the
Hanoi  airlift  organized  by  the  French.  One  day,  as  a  CAT  C-46  finished  loading,
they  saw  a  small  child  standing  on  the  ground  below  the  loading  door.  They
shouted  for  the  pilot  to  wait,  picked  the  child  up  and  shoved  him  into  the  aircraft,
which  then  promptly  taxied  out  for  its  takeoff  in  the  constant  air  shuttle.  A  Viet-
namese man  and  woman  ran  up  to  the  team,  asking  what  they  had  done  with
their  small  boy,  whom  they'd  brought  out  to  say  goodbye  to  relatives.  The  cha-
grined team  explained,  finally  talked  the  parents  into  going  south  to  Free  Viet-
nam, put  them  in  the  next  aircraft  to  catch  up  with  their  son  in  Saigon.  .  .  .

A  second  paramilitary  team  was  formed  to  explore  possibilities  of  organizing
resistance  against  the  Vietminh  from  bases  in  the  south.  This  team  consisted  of
Army  Lt-Col  Raymond  Wittmayer,  Army  Major  Fred  Allen,  and  Army  Lt  Ed-
ward Williams.  The  latter  was  our  only  experienced  counter-espionage  officer  and
undertook  double  duties,  including  working  with  revolutionary  political  groups.
Major  Allen  eventually  was  able  to  mount  a  Vietnamese  paramilitary  effort  in
Tonkin  from  the  south,  barely  beating  the  Vietminh  shutdown  in  Haiphong  as
his  teams  went  in,  trained  and  equipped  for  their  assigned  missions.

Navy  Lt  Edward  Bain  and  Marine  Captain  Richard  Smith  were  assigned  as  the
support  group  for  SMM.  Actually,  support  for  an  effort  such  as  SMM  is  a  major
operation  in  itself,  running  the  gamut  from  the  usual  administrative  and  personnel
functions  to  the  intricate  business  of  clandestine  air,  maritime,  and  land  supply
of  paramilitary  materiel.  In  effect,  they  became  our  official  smugglers  as  well  as
paymasters,  housing  officers,  transportation  officers,  warehousemen,  file  clerks,
and  mess  officers.  The  work  load  was  such  that  other  team  members  frequently
pitched  in  and  helped.

c. September  1954

Highly-placed  officials  from  Washington  visited  Saigon  and,  in  private  con-
versations, indicated  that  current  estimates  led  to  the  conclusion  that  Vietnam
probably  would  have  to  be  written  off  as  a  loss.  We  admitted  that  prospects  were
gloomy,  but  were  positive  that  there  was  still  a  fighting  chance.

On  8  September,  SMM  officers  visited  Secretary  of  State  for  Defense  Chan
and  walked  into  a  tense  situation  in  his  office.  Chan  had  just  arrested  Lt-Col  Lan
(G-6  of  the  Vietnamese  Army)  and  Capt  Giai  (G-5  of  the  Army).  Armed
guards  filled  the  room.  We  were  told  what  had  happened  and  assured  that  every-
thing was  all  right  by  all  three  principals.  Later,  we  discovered  that  Chan  was
alone  and  that  the  guards  were  Lt-Col  Lan's  commandos.  Lan  was  charged  with
political  terrorism  (by  his  "action"  squads)  and  Giai  with  anti-Diem  propaganda
(using  G-5  leaflet,  rumor,  and  broadcast  facilities).

The  arrest  of  Lan  and  Giai,  who  simply  refused  to  consider  themselves  ar-
rested, and  of  Lt  Minh,  officer  in  charge  of  the  Army  radio  station  which  was
^  guarded  by  Army  troops,  brought  into  the  open  a  plot  by  the  Army  Chief  of
,  Staff,  General  Hinh,  to  overthrow  the  government.  Hinh  had  hinted  at  such  a
plot  to  his  American  friends,  using  a  silver  cigarette  box  given  him  by  Egypt's


578 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Naguib  to  carry  the  hint.  SMM  became  thoroughly  involved  in  the  tense  con-
troversy which  followed,  due  to  our  Chief's  closeness  to  both  President  Diem  and
General  Hinh.  He  had  met  the  latter  in  the  Philippines  in  1952,  was  a  friend  of
both  Hinh's  wife  and  favorite  mistress.  (The  mistress  was  a  pupil  in  a  small
English  class  conducted  for  mistresses  of  important  personages,  at  their  re-
quest. .  .  .

While  various  U.S.  officials  including  General  O'Daniel  and  Foreign  Service
Officer  Frank  [name  illegible]  participated  in  U.S.  attempts  to  heal  the  split  be-
tween the  President  and  his  Army,  Ambassador  Heath  asked  us  to  make  a  major
effort  to  end  the  controversy.  This  effort  strained  relations  with  Diem  and  never
was  successful,  but  did  dampen  Army  enthusiasm  for  the  plot.  At  one  moment,
when  there  was  likelihood  of  an  attack  by  armored  vehicles  on  the  Presidential
Palace,  SMM  told  Hinh  bluntly  that  U.S.  support  most  probably  would  stop  in
such  an  event.  At  the  same  time  a  group  from  the  Presidential  Guards  asked  for
tactical  advice  on  how  to  stop  armored  vehicles  with  the  only  weapons  available
to  the  Guards:  carbines,  rifles,  and  hand  grenades.  The  advice,  on  tank  traps  and
destruction  with  improvised  weapons,  must  have  sounded  grim.  The  following
morning,  when  the  attack  was  to  take  place,  we  visited  the  Palace;  not  a  guard
was  left  on  the  grounds;  President  Diem  was  alone  upstairs,  calmly  getting  his
work  done.

As  a  result  of  the  Hinh  trouble.  Diem  started  looking  around  for  troops  upon
whom  he  could  count.  Some  Tonkinese  militia,  refugees  from  the  north,  were  as-
sembled in  Saigon  close  to  the  Palace.  But  they  were  insufficient  for  what  he
needed.  Diem  made  an  agreement  with  General  Trinh  Minh  The,  leader  of  some
3,000  Cao  Dai  dissidents  in  the  vicinity  of  Tayninh,  to  give  General  The  some
needed  financial  support;  The  was  to  give  armed  support  to  the  government  if
necessary  and  to  provide  a  safe  haven  for  the  government  if  it  had  to  flee.  The's
guerrillas,  known  as  the  Lien  Minh,  were  strongly  nationalist  and  were  still
fighting  the  Vietminh  and  the  French.  At  Ambassador  Heath's  request,  the  U.S.
secretly  furnished  Diem  with  funds  for  The,  through  the  SMM.  Shortly  after-
wards, an  invitation  came  from  The  to  visit  him.  Ambassador  Heath  approved
the  visit.  .  .  .

The  northern  SMM  team  under  Conein  had  organized  a  paramilitary  group,
(which  we  will  disguise  by  the  Vietnamese  name  of  Binh)  through  the  Northern
Dai  Viets,  a  political  party  with  loyalties  to  Bao  Dai.  The  group  was  to  be
trained  and  supported  by  the  U.S.  as  patriotic  Vietnamese,  to  come  eventually
under  government  control  when  the  government  was  ready  for  such  activities.
Thirteen  Binhs  were  quietly  exfiltrated  through  the  port  of  Haiphong,  under  the
direction  of  Lt  Andrews,  and  taken  on  the  first  stage  of  the  journey  to  their
training  area  by  a  U.S.  Navy  ship.  This  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  helpful  actions
by  Task  Force  98,  commanded  by  Admiral  Sabin.

Another  paramilitary  group  for  Tonkin  operations  was  being  developed  in
Saigon  through  General  Nguyen  Van  Vy.  In  September  this  group  started  shap-
ing up  fast,  and  the  project  was  given  to  Major  Allen.  (We  will  give  this  group
the  Vietnamese  name  of  Hao) .  .  .  .

Towards  the  end  of  the  month,  it  was  learned  that  the  largest  printing  establish-
ment in  the  north  intended  to  remain  in  Hanoi  and  do  business  with  the  Viet-
minh. An  attempt  was  made  by  SMM  to  destroy  the  modern  presses,  but
Vietminh  security  agents  already  had  moved  into  the  plant  and  frustrated  the
attempt.  This  operation  was  under  a  Vietnamese  patriot  whom  we  shall  call
Trieu;  his  case  officer  was  Capt  Arundel.  Earlier  in  the  month  they  had  engineered
a  black  psywar  strike  in  Hanoi:  leaflets  signed  by  the  Vietminh  instructing  Ton-


Documents  579


kinese  on  how  to  behave  for  the  Vietminh  takeover  of  the  Hanoi  region  in  early
October,  including  items  about  property,  money  reform,  and  a  three-day  holiday
of  workers  upon  takeover.  The  day  following  the  distribution  of  these  leaflets,
refugee  registration  tripled.  Two  days  later  Vietminh  currency  was  worth  half  the
value  prior  to  the  leaflets.  The  Vietminh  took  to  the  radio  to  denounce  the  leaf-
lets; the  leaflets  were  so  authentic  in  appearance  that  even  most  of  the  rank  and
file  Vietminh  were  sure  that  the  radio  denunciations  were  a  French  trick.

The  Hanoi  psywar  strike  had  other  consequences.  Binh  had  enlisted  a  high
police  official  of  Hanoi  as  part  of  his  team,  to  effect  the  release  from  jail  of  any
team  members  if  arrested.  The  official  at  the  last  moment  decided  to  assist  in  the
leaflet  distribution  personally.  Police  officers  spotted  him,  chased  his  vehicle
through  the  empty  Hanoi  streets  of  early  morning,  finafly  opened  fire  on  him
and  caught  him.  He  was  the  only  member  of  the  group  caught.  He  was  held  in
prison  as  a  Vietminh  agent.

d. October  1954

Hanoi  was  evacuated  on  9  October.  The  northern  SMM  team  left  with  the
last  French  troops,  disturbed  by  what  they  had  seen  of  the  grim  eflftciency  of  the
Vietminh  in  their  takeover,  the  contrast  between  the  silent  march  of  the  victorious
Vietminh  troops  in  their  tennis  shoes  and  the  clanking  armor  of  the  well-equipped
French  whose  western  tactics  and  equipment  had  failed  against  the  Communist
military-political-economic  campaign.

The  northern  team  had  spent  the  last  days  of  Hanoi  in  contaminating  the  oil
supply  of  the  bus  company  for  a  gradual  wreckage  of  engines  in  the  buses,  in
taking  the  first  actions  for  delayed  sabotage  of  the  railroad  (which  required
teamwork  with  a  CIA  special  technical  team  in  Japan  who  performed  their  part
brilliantly),  and  in  writing  detailed  notes  of  potential  targets  for  future  para-
military operations  (U.S.  adherence  to  the  Geneva  Agreement  prevented  SMM
from  carrying  out  the  active  sabotage  it  desired  to  do  against  the  power  plant,
water  facilities,  harbor,  and  bridge).  The  team  had  a  bad  moment  when  con-
taminating the  oil.  They  had  to  work  quickly  at  night,  in  an  enclosed  storage
room.  Fumes  from  the  contaminant  came  close  to  knocking  them  out.  Dizzy
and  weak-kneed,  they  masked  their  faces  with  handkerchiefs  and  completed  the
!job.

Meanwhile,  Polish  and  Russian  ships  had  arrived  in  the  south  to  transport
southern  Vietminh  to  Tonkin  under  the  Geneva  Agreement.  This  offered  the  op-
portunity for  another  black  psywar  strike.  A  leaflet  was  developed  by  Binh  with
the  help  of  Capt  Arundel,  attributed  to  the  Vietminh  Resistance  Committee.
Among  other  items,  it  reassured  the  Vietminh  they  would  be  kept  safe  below
decks  from  imperialist  air  and  submarine  attacks,  and  requested  that  warm  cloth-
ing be  brought;  the  warm  clothing  item  would  be  coupled  with  a  verbal  rumor
campaign  that  Vietminh  were  being  sent  into  China  as  railroad  laborers.

SMM  had  been  busily  developing  G-5  of  the  Vietnamese  Army  for  such  psywar
efforts.  Under  Arundel's  direction,  the  First  Armed  Propaganda  Company  printed
the  leaflets  and  distributed  them,  by  soldiers  in  civilian  clothes  who  penetrated
into  southern  Vietminh  zones  on  foot.  (Distribution  in  Camau  was  made  while

;  columnist  Joseph  Alsop  was  on  his  visit  there  which  led  to  his  sensational,  gloomy
articles  later;  our  soldier  "Vietminh"  failed  in  an  attempt  to  get  the  leaflet  into
Alsop's  hands  in  Camau;  Alsop  was  never  told  this  story).  Intelligence  reports

^ind  other  later  reports  revealed  that  village  and  delegation  committees  com-
plained about  "deportation"  to  the  north,  after  distribution  of  the  leaflet.  .  .  .


580 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

Contention  between  Diem  and  Hinh  had  become  murderous.  .  .  .  Finally,  we
learned  that  Hinh  was  close  to  action;  he  had  selected  26  October  as  the  morning
for  an  attack  on  the  Presidential  Palace.  Hinh  was  counting  heavily  on  Lt-Col
Lan's  special  forces  and  on  Captain  Giai  who  was  running  Hinh's  secret  head-
quarters at  Hinh's  home.  We  invited  these  two  officers  to  visit  the  Philippines,  on
the  pretext  that  we  were  making  an  official  trip,  could  take  them  along  and  open
the  way  for  them  to  see  some  inner  workings  of  the  fight  against  Filipino  Com-
munists which  they  probably  would  never  see  otherwise.  Hinh  reluctantly  turned
down  his  own  invitation;  he  had  had  a  memorable  time  of  it  on  his  last  visit  to
Manila  in  1952.  Lt-Col  Lan  was  a  French  agent  and  the  temptation  to  see  be-
hind-the-scenes was  too  much.  He  and  Giai  accompanied  SMM  officers  on  the
MAAG  C-47  which  General  O'Daniel  instantly  made  available  for  the  operation.
26  October  was  spent  in  the  Philippines.  The  attack  on  the  palace  didn't  come
off.

e.  November  1954

General  Lawton  Collins  arrived  as  Ambassador  on  8  November.  .  .  .

Collins,  in  his  first  press  conference,  made  it  plain  that  the  U.S.  was  supporting
President  Diem.  The  new  Ambassador  applied  pressure  on  General  Hinh  and  on
29  November  Hinh  left  for  Paris.  His  other  key  conspirators  followed.

Part  of  the  SMM  team  became  involved  in  staff  work  to  back  up  the  energetic
campaign  to  save  Vietnam  which  Collins  pushed  forward.  Some  SMM  members
were  scattered  around  the  Pacific,  accompanying  Vietnamese  for  secret  training,
obtaining  and  shipping  supplies  to  be  smuggled  into  north  Vietnam  and  hidden
there.  In  the  Philippines,  more  support  was  being  constructed  to  help  SMM,  in
expediting  the  flow  of  supplies,  and  in  creating  Freedom  Company,  a  non-profit
Philippines  corporation  backed  by  President  Magsaysay,  which  would  supply
Filipinos  experienced  in  fighting  the  Communist  Huks  to  help  in  Vietnam  (or
elsewhere).  .  .  .

On  23  November,  twenty-one  selected  Vietnamese  agents  and  two  cooks  of  our
Hao  paramilitary  group  were  put  aboard  a  Navy  ship  in  the  Saigon  River,  in
daylight.  They  appeared  as  coolies,  joined  the  coolie  and  refugee  throng  moving
on  and  off  ship,  and  disappeared  one  by  one.  It  was  brilliantly  planned  and  ex-
ecuted, agents  being  picked  up  from  unobtrusive  assembly  points  throughout  the
metropolis.  Lt  Andrews  made  the  plans  and  carried  out  the  movement  under  the
supervision  of  Major  Allen.  The  ship  took  the  Hao  agents,  in  compartmented
groups,  to  an  overseas  point,  the  first  stage  in  a  movement  to  a  secret  training
area.

f.  December  1954

.  .  .  discussions  between  the  U.S.,  Vietnamese  and  French  had  reached  a  point
where  it  appeared  that  a  military  training  mission  using  U.S.  officers  was  in  the
immediate  offing.  General  O'Daniel  had  a  U.S.-French  planning  group  working  on
the  problem,  under  Col  Rosson.  One  paper  they  were  developing  was  a  plan
for  pacification  of  Vietminh  and  dissident  areas;  this  paper  was  passed  to  SMM
for  its  assistance  with  the  drafting.  SMM  wrote  much  of  the  paper,  changing  the
concept  from  the  old  rigid  police  controls  of  all  areas  to  some  of  our  concepts
of  winning  over  the  population  and  instituting  a  classification  of  areas  by  the
amount  of  trouble  in  each,  the  amount  of  control  required,  and  fixing  responsi-
bilities between  civil  and  military  authorities.  With  a  few  changes,  this  was  issued


Documents  581


by  President  Diem  on  31  December  as  the  National  Security  Action  (Pacifica-
tion) Directive.  .  .  .

There  was  still  much  disquiet  in  Vietnam,  particularly  among  anti-Communist
political  groups  who  were  not  included  in  the  government.  SMM  officers  were
contacted  by  a  number  of  such  groups  who  felt  that  they  "would  have  to  com-
mit suicide  in  1956"  (the  1956  plebiscite  promised  in  the  1954  Geneva  agree-
ment), when  the  Vietminh  would  surely  take  over  against  so  weak  a  government.
One  group  of  farmers  and  militia  in  the  south  was  talked  out  of  migrating  to
Madagascar  by  SMM  and  staying  on  their  farms.  A  number  of  these  groups
asked  SMM  for  help  in  training  personnel  for  eventual  guerrilla  warfare  if  the
Vietminh  won.  Persons  such  as  the  then  Minister  of  Defense  and  Trinh  Minh
The  were  among  those  loyal  to  the  government  who  also  requested  such  help.
It  was  decided  that  a  more  basic  guerrilla  training  program  might  be  undertaken
for  such  groups  than  was  available  at  the  secret  training  site  to  which  we  had
sent  the  Binh  and  Hao  groups.  Plans  were  made  with  Major  Bohanan  and  Mr.
John  C.  Wachtel  in  the  Philippines  for  a  solution  of  this  problem;  the  United
States  backed  the  development,  through  them,  of  a  small  Freedom  Company
training  camp  in  a  hidden  valley  on  the  Clark  AFB  reservation.
;  Till  and  Peg  Durdin  of  the  N.Y.  Times,  Hank  Lieberman  of  the  N.Y.  Times,
Homer  Bigart  of  the  N.Y.  Herald-Tribune,  John  Mecklin  of  Life-Time,  and  John
Roderick  of  Associated  Press,  have  been  warm  friends  of  SMM  and  worked  hard
to  penetrate  the  fabric  of  French  propaganda  and  give  the  U.S.  an  objective
account  of  events  in  Vietnam.  The  group  met  with  us  at  times  to  analyze  objec-
tives and  motives  of  propaganda  known  to  them,  meeting  at  their  own  request
as  U.S.  citizens.  These  mature  and  responsible  news  correspondents  performed  a
rvaluable  service  for  their  country.  .  .  .

g. January  1955

The  Vietmin-h  long  ago  had  adopted  the  Chinese  Communist  thought  that  the
people  are  the  water  and  the  army  is  the  fish.  Vietminh  relations  with  the  mass
of  the  population  during  the  fighting  had  been  exemplary,  with  a  few  exceptions;
in  contrast,  the  Vietnamese  National  Army  had  been  like  too  many  Asian  armies,
adept  at  cowing  a  population  into  feeding  them,  providing  them  with  girls.
SMM  had  been  working  on  this  problem  from  the  beginning.  Since  the  National
Army  was  the  only  unit  of  government  with  a  strong  organization  throughout
ithe  country  and  with  good  communications,  it  was  the  key  to  stabilizing  the  situ-
ation quickly  on  a  nation-wide  basis.  If  Army  and  people  could  be  brought  to-
gether into  a  team,  the  first  strong  weapon  against  Communism  could  be  forged.

The  Vietminh  were  aware  of  this.  We  later  learned  that  months  before  the
signing  of  the  Geneva  Agreement  they  had  been  planning  for  action  in  the  post-
Geneva  period;  the  National  Army  was  to  be  the  primary  target  for  subversion
efforts,  it  was  given  top  priority  by  the  Central  Committee  for  operations  against
;its  enemy,  and  about  100  superior  cadres  were  retrained  for  the  operations  and
placed  in  the  [words  illegible]  organization  for  the  work,  which  commenced  even
before  the  agreement  was  signed.  We  didn't  know  it  at  the  time,  but  this  was
SMM's  major  opponent,  in  a  secret  struggle  for  the  National  Army.  .  .  .
;  General  O'Daniel  was  anticipating  the  culmination  of  long  negotiations  to
■  permit  U.S.  training  of  the  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces,  against  some  resistance
i/»n  the  part  of  French  groups.  In  January,  negotiations  were  proceeding  so  well
I'hat  General  O'Daniel  informally  organized  a  combined  U.S.-French  training
nission  which  eventually  became  known  as  the  Training  Relations  &  Instruction


582 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

Mission  (TRIM)  under  his  command,  but  under  the  overall  command  of  the  top
French  commander,  General  Paul  Ely.

The  French  had  asked  for  top  command  of  half  the  divisions  in  the  TRIM
staff.  Their  first  priority  was  for  command  of  the  division  supervising  National
Security  Action  by  the  Vietnamese,  which  could  be  developed  into  a  continuation  {
of  strong  French  control  of  key  elements  of  both  Army  and  population.  In  con-
ferences with  Ambassador  Collins  and  General  O'Daniel,  it  was  decided  to  trans-
fer Colonel  Lansdale  from  the  Ambassador's  staff  to  TRIM,  to  head  the  National
Security  division.  Colonel  Lansdale  requested  authority  to  coordinate  all  U.S.  .
civil  and  military  efforts  in  this  National  Security  work.  On  11  January,  Am-  ,
bassador  Collins  announced  the  change  to  the  country  team,  and  gave  him  au-  |
thority  to  coordinate  this  work  among  all  U.S.  agencies  in  Vietnam.  ...

President  Diem  had  continued  requesting  SMM  help  with  the  guard  battalion  i
for  the  Presidential  Palace.  We  made  arrangements  with  President  Magsaysay  in  ,
the  Philippines  and  borrowed  his  senior  aide  and  military  advisor.  Col.  Napoleon  \
Valeriano,  who  had  a  fine  combat  record  against  the  Communist  Huks  and  also
had  reorganized  the  Presidential  Guard  Battalion  for  Magsaysay.  Valeriano,  with  j
three  junior  officers,  arrived  in  January  and  went  to  work  on  Diem's  guard  bat-
talion. Later,  selected  Vietnamese  officers  were  trained  with  the  Presidential
Guards  in  Manila.  An  efficient  unit  gradually  emerged.  Diem  was  warmly  grate-
ful for  this  help  by  Filipinos  who  also  continuously  taught  our  concept  of  loyalty
and  freedom.

The  patriot  we've  named  Trieu  Dinh  had  been  working  on  an  almanac  for  j
popular  sale,  particularly  in  the  northern  cities  and  towns  we  could  still  reach,  i
Noted  Vietnamese  astrologers  were  hired  to  write  predictions  about  coming  disas-  ;
ters  to  certain  Vietminh  leaders  and  undertakings,  and  to  predict  unity  in  the
south.  The  work  was  carried  out  under  the  direction  of  Lt  Phillips,  based  on  our
concept  of  the  use  of  astrology  for  psywar  in  Southeast  Asia.  Copies  of  the
almanac  were  shipped  by  air  to  Haiphong  and  then  smuggled  into  Vietminh  ter-
ritory.

Dinh  also  had  produced  a  Thomas  Paine  type  series  of  essays  on  Vietnamese
patriotism  against  the  Communist  Vietminh,  under  the  guidance  of  Capt.  Arun-  ,
del.  These  essays  were  circulated  among  influential  groups  in  Vietnam,  earned
front-page  editorials  in  the  leading  daily  newspaper  in  Saigon.  Circulation  in-
creased with  the  publication  of  these  essays.  The  publisher  is  known  to  SMM
as  The  Dragon  Lady  and  is  a  fine  Vietnamese  girl  who  has  been  the  mistress  of
an  anti- American  French  civilian.  Despite  anti-American  remarks  by  her  boy  ;
friend,  we  had  helped  her  keep  her  paper  from  being  closed  by  the  government
.  .  .  and  she  found  it  profitable  to  heed  our  advice  on  the  editorial  content  of
her  paper.

Arms  and  equipment  for  the  Binh  paramilitary  team  were  being  cached  in  the
north  in  areas  still  free  from  the  Vietminh.  Personnel  movements  were  covered
by  the  flow  of  refugees.  Haiphong  was  reminiscent  of  our  own  pioneer  days  as  it  ,
was  swamped  with  people  whom  it  couldn't  shelter.  Living  space  and  food  were
at  a  premium,  nervous  tension  grew.  It  was  a  wild  time  for  our  northern  team.

First  supplies  for  the  Hao  paramilitary  group  started  to  arrive  in  Saigon.
These  shipments  and  the  earlier  ones  for  the  Binh  group  were  part  of  an  efficient
and  effective  air  smuggling  effort  by  the  581st  [word  illegible]  Wing,  U.S.  Air
Force,  to  support  SMM,  with  help  by  CIA  and  Air  Force  personnel  in  both
Okinawa  and  the  Philippines.  SMM  officers  frequently  did  coolie  labor  in  man-
handling tons  of  cargo,  at  times  working  throughout  the  night.  .  .  .  All  .  .  .
officers  pitched  in  to  help,  as  part  of  our  "blood,  sweat  and  tears."  .  .  .


Documents  583


By  31  January,  all  operational  equipment  of  the  Binh  paramilitary  group  had
been  trans-shipped  to  Haiphong  from  Saigon,  mostly  with  the  help  of  CAT,  and
the  northern  SMM  team  had  it  cached  in  operational  sites.  Security  measures
were  tightened  at  the  Haiphong  airport  and  plans  for  bringing  in  the  Hao  equip-
ment were  changed  from  the  air  route  to  sea.  Task  Force  98,  now  98.7  under
command  of  Captain  Frank,  again  was  asked  to  give  a  helping  hand  and  did
so.  .  .  .

.  .  .  Major  Conein  had  briefed  the  members  of  the  Binh  paramilitary  team
and  started  them  infihrating  into  the  north  as  individuals.  The  infiltration  was
carried  out  in  careful  stages  over  a  30  day  period,  a  successful  operation.  The
Binhs  became  normal  citizens,  carrying  out  every  day  civil  pursuits,  on  the  sur-
face.

We  had  smuggled  into  Vietnam  about  eight  and  a  half  tons  of  supplies  for  the
Hao  paramilitary  group.  They  included  fourteen  agent  radios,  300  carbines,  90,-

000  rounds  of  carbine  ammunition,  50  pistols,  10,000  rounds  of  pistol  ammuni-
tion, and  300  pounds  of  explosives.  Two  and  a  half  tons  were  delivered  to  the
Hao  agents  in  Tonkin,  while  the  remainder  was  cached  along  the  Red  River  by
SMM,  with  the  help  of  the  Navy.  .  .  .

jj. April  1955

1  ...  the  Hao  paramilitary  team  had  finished  its  training  at  the  secret  training
Isite  and  been  flown  by  the  Air  Force  to  a  holding  site  in  the  Philippines,  where
Major  Allen  and  his  officers  briefed  the  paramilitary  team.  In  mid-April,  they
were  taken  by  the  Navy  to  Haiphong,  where  they  were  gradually  slipped  ashore.
Meanwhile,  arms  and  other  equipment  including  explosives  were  being  flown  into
Saigon  via  our  smuggling  route,  being  readied  for  shipment  north  by  the  Navy
task  force  handling  refugees.  The  White  team  office  gradually  became  an  impos-
ing munitions  depot.  Nightly  shootings  and  bombings  in  restless  Saigon  caused  us
to  give  them  dispersed  storage  behind  thick  walls  as  far  as  this  one  big  house
would  permit.  SMM  personnel  guarded  the  house  night  and  day,  for  it  also  con-
tained our  major  files  other  than  the  working  file  at  our  Command  Post.  All  files
were  fixed  for  instant  destruction,  automatic  weapons  and  hand  grenades  dis-
tributed to  all  personnel.  It  was  a  strange  scene  for  new  personnel  just  arriv-
ing. .  .  .

Haiphong  was  taken  over  by  the  Vietminh  on  16  May.  Our  Binh  and  northern
Hao  teams  were  in  place,  completely  equipped.  It  had  taken  a  tremendous  amount
of  hard  work  to  beat  the  Geneva  deadline,  to  locate,  select,  exfiltrate,  train,  in-
filtrate, equip  the  men  of  these  two  teams  and  have  them  in  place,  ready  for
actions  required  against  the  enemy.  It  would  be  a  hard  task  to  do  openly,  but  this
had  to  be  kept  secret  from  the  Vietminh,  the  International  Commission  with  its
suspicious  French  and  Poles  and  Indians,  and  even  friendly  Vietnamese.  Move-
ments of  personnel  and  supplies  had  had  to  be  over  thousands  of  miles.  .  .  .


I


584


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements


Foreword

This  portion  of  the  study  consists  of  an  examination  of  the  pubHc  statements
justifying  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam.  Only  official  statements  contained  in
either  the  U.S.  Department  of  State  Bulletins  or  the  Public  Papers  of  the  Presi-
dents were  reviewed.  Although  conclusions  are  based  primarily  on  the  statements
of  the  President,  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  state-
ments of  other  high-ranking  government  officials  were  also  studied  in  ascertain-
ing the  policy  context  of  the  quoted  material.  This  report  includes  analyses  of
the  Truman  and  Eisenhower  periods.  The  statements  are  organized  chronolog-
ically within  each  Administration,  and  are  summarized  at  the  head  of  each  sec-
tion.


TRUMAN  ADMINISTRATION


Contents

Public  Statement  1 {page  588)
Secretary  of  State  marks  the  beginning  of  U.S.  military  and  economic  assistance
to  the  Associated  States  and  France  (8  May  1950).

Public  Statement  2 {page  588)
Truman  cites  Communist  threat  in  Asia;  emphasizes  the  lessons  of  history  in
meeting  aggression  in  its  early  stages  (11  April  1951).

Public  Statement  3  {page  589)
President  cites  Communist  imperialism  as  a  threat  to  vitally  needed  raw  materials
and  manpower  of  free  Asian  nations  as  requiring  U.S.  assistance  to  these  coun-
tries (24  May  1951).

Public  Statement  4 {page  591)
Statement  by  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense  resulting  from  French-U.S.
discussions  regarding  aid  to  Indochina  (23  September  1951).

Public  Statement  5  {page  591)
Communique  acknowledging  the  primary  role  of  U.S.  in  Korea  and  its  secondary
role  of  assisting  French  in  Indochina  in  combatting  Communist  imperialism  (18
June  1952).

Public  Statement  6 {page  591)
Resolution  adopted  by  North  Atlantic  Council  of  NATO  support  for  French  role
in  Indochina  and  its  importance  to  Atlantic  Community  (17  December  1952).


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  585


B. EISENHOWER  ADMINISTRATION
Contents

Public  Statement  1 (page  591)

Eisenhower  cites  the  interrelationship  of  Southeast  Asian  nations,  their  natural
resources  and  strategic  locations  as  justifying  U.S.  concerns  (4  August  1953).

Public  Statement  2 {page  592)

Joint  Franco-American  communique  citing  agreement  whereby  U.S.  increases
its  aid  to  France  in  prosecution  of  its  efforts  against  Viet  Minh  (30  September
1953).

Public  Statement  3 {page  593)

Eisenhower  emphasizes  support  of  French  is  to  avoid  the  tragedy  of  U.S.  getting
involved  on  large  scale  in  Southeast  Asia  (10  February  1954) .

Public  Statement  4 {page  593)

Secretary  of  State  presents  a  most  revealing  assessment  of  administration's  think-
ing on  Indochina  and  the  threat  of  Red  China.  He  cites  expansion  of  commu-
nist domination,  the  increased  dangers  to  other  nearby  countries,  the  loss  of
food  supply  to  Japan  and  India,  the  strategic  location  of  Indochina  and  the  mili-
tary bases  as  paramount  concerns  (29  March  1954).

Public  Statement  5 {page  596)

Alfred  le  Sesne  Jenkins  (Officer  in  Charge,  Chinese  Political  Affairs)  discusses
Chinese  Communist  regime  and  its  relationship  to  Soviet  Union  (2  April  1954).

Public  Statement  6 {page  597)

President  states  "falling  domino"  principle  loses  people  and  strategic  resources
to  communism  and  threatens  Australia  in  comments  on  importance  of  Indochina
to  free  world.  He  responds  to  Sen.  John  Kennedy's  expressed  position  on  a  guar-
antee of  independence  needed  to  justify  U.S.  effort  (7  April  1954).

Public  Statement  7 {page  598)

Under  Secretary  Smith  indicates  vital  basic  reason  for  Indochina's  importance
is  communist  expansion,  and  reiterates  "domino"  theory  and  strategic  resources
(19  April  1954).

Public  Statement  8 {page  599)

Secretary  of  State  Dulles  reports  on  London-Paris  conversations  on  free  world
interests;  advocates  collective  defense  for  Indochina  as  U.S.  solution  to  commu-
|nist  threat  (19  April  1954).

Public  Statement  9 {page  599)

I  State  Department  comments  on  a  speech  by  Vice  President  Nixon  by  referring
I  to  stated  U.S.  policy  of  "united  action"  (17  April  1954).

Public  Statement  10 {page  600)

(Dulles  summarizes  U.S.  position  on  Indochina  in  light  of  Geneva:  communiza-


I


586 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

tion  of  the  civil  war;  U.S.  intervention;  French  armistice;  collective  security;
possibility  of  U.S.  intervention  (7  May  1954).

Public  Statement  11 {page  601)

Eisenhower  assesses  progress  at  the  Geneva  Conference;  cites  plans  for  collec-
tive security  arrangement  in  Southeast  Asia  (5  May  1954).

Public  Statement  12 (page  602)

Eisenhower  reaffirms  his  "domino"  concerns  in  response  to  press  questioning
(12  May  1954).

Public  Statement  13 (page  603)
Secretary  of  States  Dulles  analyzes  developments  to  date  in  Indochina;  he  dis-
cusses the  conditions  under  which  U.S.  would  intervene  directly  (11  June  1954).

Public  Statement  14  {page  604)  ^
Eisenhower  states  U.S.  position  on  Geneva  Accords  (21  July  1954).  3

Public  Statement  15 {page  606)
Text  of  the  declaration  (21  July  1954).

Public  Statement  16 {page  608)
U.S.-French  communique  announcing  desire  to  aid  directly  the  newly  inde-
pendent states  of  Cambodia,  Laos,  and  Vietnam  (29  September  1954).

t

Public  Statement  17 {page  609)

Eisenhower  informs  President  of  Vietnam's  Council  that  aid  will  be  conditioned
on  his  government's  giving  the  U.S.  "assurance  as  to  standard  of  performance"
(23  October  1954).

Public  Statement  18 {page  609)

Eisenhower  notes  but  questions  the  moderation  in  Soviet  policy;  refers  to  Diem's
successes  in  South  Vietnam  (21  April  1956) .

Public  Statement  19 {page  610)
Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Robertson  restates  American  policy  in  Vietnam  at
a  time  of  relative  stability  (1  June  1956).

Public  Statement  20 {page  613)

Eisenhower  emphasizes  role  of  aid  program  in  achieving  Asian  goals;  cites  sus-
ceptibility of  underdeveloped  nations  to  communist  probings  (21  May  1957).

Public  Statement  21 {page  614)
Eisenhower  justifies  foreign  aid  to  American  people  as  necessary  for  U.S.  secu-
rity; cites  its  "returns"  in  Vietnam  (21  May  1957).

Public  Statement  22 {page  616)

Eisenhower  reports  to  the  nation  on  the  Red  Chinese  shelling  of  Quemoy;  re-
lates U.S.  security  interests  to  Formosa;  cites  lesson  of  Munich  and  the  militant
statements  of  Chinese  Communists  as  requiring  a  firm  U.S.  stand  ( 1 1  September
1958).


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  587
Public  Statement  23 {page  621)

Eisenhower  attempts  at  news  conference  to  put  communist  aggression  in  per-
spective (1  October  1958).

Public  Statement  24 {page  622)

Eisenhower  in  special  message  to  Congress  discusses  communist  threat  to  de-
veloping nations  and  need  for  U.S.  aid  to  maintain  collective  defense  (13  March
1959).

Public  Statement  25 {page  624)

Eisenhower  discusses  importance  of  Vietnam  to  free  world;  he  shows  specifically
how  its  economy  complements  Japan's  (4  April  1959).

Public  Statement  26 {page  627)

Eisenhower  stresses  threat  posed  by  economic  and  military  power  of  China  and
Russia  in  defense  of  foreign  aid  (16  February  1969).

Public  Statement  27 {page  628)

Eisenhower  reminds  Diem  of  the  responsibility  that  the  Vietnamese  people  have
in  safeguarding  their  independence  (22  October  1960).

TRUMAN  ADMINISTRATION

Summary

The  statements  enclosed  are  from  the  period  1950-1952:  from  the  Secretary
of  State's  announcement  marking  the  beginning  of  the  U.S.  involvement  in  Viet-
nam to  the  NATO  resolution  supporting  the  French  fight  in  Indochina.  The
justifications  advanced  for  the  U.S.  commitment  in  Indochina  include  the  follow-
ing:

a.  The  Soviets  are  engaged  in  a  "monstrous  conspiracy  to  stamp  out  freedom
■  all  over  the  world,"  and  Soviet  imperialism,  with  Communist  China  as  its  instru-
ment, poses  a  direct  threat  to  the  independence  of  the  Associated  States  of  Indo-
china.

b.  The  defense  of  Indochina  is  an  integral  part  of  the  worldwide  resistance
by  free  nations  to  communist  aggression  and  subversion.

c.  The  raw  materials  and  agricultural  products  of  Southeast  Asia  are  "vitally
needed"  by  the  free  nations  of  the  world.

d.  The  United  States,  in  the  interest  of  preventing  a  third  world  war,  has
provided  aid  to  the  Associated  States  and  France.

EISENHOWER  ADMINISTRATION

i-

I  Summary

\  President  Eisenhower  took  office  in  the  context  of  negotiations  for  a  settlement
i  in  Korea  and  the  portending  defeat  in  France  in  Indochina.  His  Administration
I  early  faced  the  crisis  surrounding  the  Geneva  Conference  of  1954,  in  which
direct  U.S.  intervention  in  Vietnam  was  a  distinct  prospect.  Having  pressed
I  diplomatically  for  a  constructive  outcome  at  Geneva,  the  United  States  threw  its


588 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

support  behind  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  and  the  Government  of  Vietnam.  With  U.S.
support,  that  government,  despite  a  series  of  severe  tests,  succeeded  in  consolidat-
ing itself  and  making  significant  progress.  U.S.  justification  for  its  policy  toward
Vietnam  in  this  period  included  the  following:

a.  The  "domino  principle":  the  loss  of  Vietnam,  the  most  vulnerable  state  of
Southeast  Asia,  would  imperil  the  other  nations  of  the  region,  and  ultimately
lead  to  a  seriously  weakened  U.S.  strategic  position.  Vietnam  was  a  key  to  con-
tinued free  world  access  to  the  human  and  material  resources  of  Southeast  Asia.

b.  Communist  China  was  pursuing  an  expansionist  foreign  policy  relying  upon
subversive  aggression,  as  well  as  armaments.  China  thus  continued  to  reflect  the
unchanging  Soviet  objective  of  conquest  of  the  world,  and  both  had  manifest
designs  on  Southeast  Asia.

c.  The  United  States  proposed,  through  its  aid  programs,  to  help  the  small
and  weak  nations  contiguous  with  communist  powers  to  maintain  their  freedom
and  independence  lest  aggression  and  expansion  be  encouraged,  and  the  world
moved  thereby  towards  a  third  world  war.

d.  In  the  words  of  President  Eisenhower,  "We  gave  military  and  economic
assistance  to  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.  We  entered  into  a  treaty — the  Southeast
Asia  Security  Treaty — which  plainly  warned  that  an  armed  attack  against  this
area  would  endanger  our  own  peace  and  safety  and  that  we  would  act  accord-
ingly."

e.  U.S.  aid  for  Vietnam — economic  and  military — has  made  possible  not  only
its  survival,  but  also  genuine  progress  toward  a  stable  society,  a  modern  economy,
and  internal  and  external  security.

TRUMAN  ADMINISTRATION  PUBLIC  STATEMENTS

1.  Secretary  of  State  Statement  on  Extension  of  Military  and  Economic  Aid,
May  8,  1950,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  May  22,  1950,  p.  821:

*  H=  *

"The  United  States  Government,  convinced  that  neither  national  independence
nor  democratic  evolution  exist  in  any  area  dominated  by  Soviet  imperialism,  con-
siders the  situation  to  be  such  as  to  warrant  its  according  economic  aid  and
military  equipment  to  the  Associated  States  of  Indochina  and  to  France  in  order
to  assist  them  in  restoring  stability  and  permitting  these  states  to  pursue  their
peaceful  and  democratic  development."

2.  President's  Radio  Report  to  the  American  People  on  Korea  and  on  U.S.
Policy  in  the  Ear  East,  April  11,  1951,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,
p.  223.

"I  want  to  talk  to  you  plainly  tonight  about  what  we  are  doing  in  Korea  and
about  our  policy  in  the  Far  East.

"In  the  simplest  terms,  what  we  are  doing  in  Korea  is  this:  We  are  trying  to
prevent  a  third  world  war.

*  *  *

"The  Communists  in  the  Kremlin  are  engaged  in  a  monstrous  conspiracy  to
stamp  out  freedom  all  over  the  world.  If  they  were  to  succeed,  the  United  States
would  be  numbered  among  their  principal  victims.  It  must  be  clear  to  everyone


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  589

that  the  United  States  cannot — and  will  not — sit  idly  by  and  await  foreign  con-
quest. The  only  question  is:  What  is  the  best  time  to  meet  the  threat  and  how
is  the  best  way  to  meet  it?

"The  best  time  to  meet  the  threat  is  in  the  beginning.  It  is  easier  to  put  out  a
fire  in  the  beginning  when  it  is  small  than  after  it  has  become  a  roaring  blaze.
And  the  best  way  to  meet  the  threat  of  aggression  is  for  the  peace-loving  nations
to  act  together.  If  they  don't  act  together,  they  are  likely  to  be  picked  off,  one
by  one.

"If  they  had  followed  the  right  policies  in  the  1930's — if  the  free  countries  had
acted  together  to  crush  the  aggression  of  the  dictators,  and  if  they  had  acted  in
the  beginning  when  the  aggression  was  small — there  probably  would  have  been
no  World  War  II.

"If  history  has  taught  us  anything,  it  is  that  aggression  anywhere  in  the  world
is  a  threat  to  the  peace  everywhere  in  the  world.  When  that  aggression  is  sup-
ported by  the  cruel  and  selfish  rulers  of  a  powerful  nation  who  are  bent  on  con-
quest, it  becomes  a  clear  and  present  danger  to  the  security  and  independence  of
every  free  nation.

*  *  *

"I  have  another  secret  intelligence  report  here.  This  one  tells  what  another
Communist  officer  in  the  Far  East  told  his  men  several  months  before  the  invasion
of  Korea.  Here  is  what  he  said:  'In  order  to  successfully  undertake  the  long-
awaited  world  resolution,  we  must  first  unify  Asia  .  .  .  Java,  Indochina,  Malaya,
India,  Tibet,  Thailand,  Philippines,  and  Japan  are  our  ultimate  targets.  .  .  .  The
United  States  is  the  only  obstacle  on  our  road  for  the  liberation  of  all  the  coun-
tries in  southeast  Asia.  In  other  words,  we  must  unify  the  people  of  Asia  and
crush  the  United  States.'

*  *  *

]  "The  dangers  are  great.  Make  no  mistake  about  it.  Behind  the  North  Koreans
and  Chinese  Communists  in  the  front  lines  stand  additional  millions  of  Chinese
soldiers.  And  behind  the  Chinese  stand  the  tanks,  the  planes,  the  submarines,
the  soldiers,  and  the  scheming  rulers  of  the  Soviet  Union."

;3.  President  Truman's  Special  Message  to  Congress  on  Mutual  Security  Pro-
I gram,  May  24,  1951,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  p.  309:

*  *  *

i  "In  Asia,  in  a  vast  area  stretching  from  Afghanistan  to  Korea,  free  countries
'are  struggling  to  meet  communist  aggression  in  all  its  many  forms.  Some  of
these  countries  are  battling  the  communist  armies  of  Soviet  satellites;  some  are
engaged  in  bitter  civil  strife  against  communist-led  guerrillas;  all  of  them  face
the  immediate  danger  of  communist  subversion.

i  "Soviet  intentions  with  regard  to  these  countries  are  unmistakably  clear.  Using
[ithe  weapons  of  subversion,  false  propaganda  and  civil  war,  the  Kremlin  has
already  reduced  China  to  the  status  of  a  satellite.  The  Soviet  rulers  have  turned
their  satellite  armies  loose  on  the  Republic  of  Korea.  Communist  rebellion  is
.aging  in  Indochina.  In  Burma,  the  Philippines,  and  other  places,  communist-


590 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


inspired  groups  are  stirring  up  internal  disorder.  In  all  countries,  they  are  trying
to  exploit  deep-seated  economic  difficulties — poverty,  illiteracy  and  disease.

"This  campaign  threatens  to  absorb  the  manpower  and  the  vital  resources  of
the  East  into  the  Soviet  design  of  world  conquest.  It  threatens  to  deprive  the
free  nations  of  some  of  their  most  vitally  needed  raw  materials.  It  threatens  to
turn  more  of  the  peaceful  millions  of  the  East  into  armies  to  be  used  as  pawns
at  the  disposal  of  the  Kremlin.

"Aside  from  immediate  considerations  of  security,  the  continued  independence
of  these  nations  is  vital  to  the  future  of  the  free  world.  Many  of  these  nations
are  new  to  self  governments.  They  have  dedicated  themselves  to  the  ideals  of  na-
tional independence,  of  human  liberty,  and  social  progress.  Their  hundreds  of
millions  of  citizens  are  eager  for  justice  and  liberty  and  a  stake  in  the  future.

"These  countries  demonstrate  the  power  and  vitality  of  the  ideals  of  our  own
American  Revolution;  they  mark  the  sweeping  advance  across  the  world  of  the
concepts  of  freedom  and  brotherhood.  To  lose  these  countries  to  the  rulers  of
the  Kremlin  would  be  more  than  a  blow  to  our  military  security  and  our  eco-
nomic life.  It  would  be  a  terrible  defeat  for  the  ideals  of  freedom — with  grave
spiritual  consequences  for  men  everywhere  who  share  our  faith  in  freedom.

"All  these  considerations  make  it  essential  for  the  United  States  to  help  the
free  countries  of  Asia  in  their  struggle  to  make  good  their  independence  and
bring  economic  and  social  progress  to  their  people.  Where  the  governments  of
these  countries  are  striving  to  establish  free  and  stable  political  institutions,  to
build  up  their  military  defenses,  and  to  raise  the  standard  of  living  above  the
level  of  bare  subsistence,  we  can  and  should  give  them  assistance.  We  cannot
replace  their  own  strong  efforts,  but  we  can  supplement  them.

"This  Mutual  Security  Program  is  intended  to  do  that.  On  the  military  side,
it  will  supply  certain  of  the  Asian  countries  with  items  of  military  equipment
and  the  training  they  need  for  their  defense  forces.  On  the  economic  side,  it
will  provide  a  number  of  the  Asian  countries  with  the  most  urgently  needed
commodities,  machinery,  and  tools,  and  with  technical  advice  in  such  fields  as
agriculture,  industry,  health,  and  governmental  administration.

"The  assistance  I  am  recommending  for  Asian  countries,  555  million  dollars
in  military  aid  and  375  million  dollars  in  economic  aid,  is  so  planned  as  to  meet
the  most  pressing  needs  in  the  various  countries,  and  is  intended  to  provide  the
crucial  margin  of  resources  which  will  enable  them  to  move  forward.

"Military  assistance  under  this  program  will  go  to  the  Chinese  armies  on
Formosa,  to  help  keep  that  island  out  of  the  hands  of  Communist  China.  It  will
go  to  Indo-China,  where  over  100,000  French  troops  are  fighting  side-by-side
with  the  forces  of  Viet  Nam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia  against  communist-led  forces.
It  will  go  to  the  Philippines  and  to  Thailand,  to  help  build  forces  strong  enough
to  insure  internal  security  and  discourage  outside  attack.  Some  of  these  military
assistance  funds  will  also  be  available  for  allocation  to  other  countries  in  the
area  if  a  critical  need  arises.

"The  military  aid  under  this  program  will  supplement  other  military  efforts
against  communism  in  Asia.  The  countries  we  will  be  aiding,  and  a  number  of
others,  are  supporting  military  forces  with  their  own  funds.  France  is  supplying
the  largest  part  of  the  military  supplies  needed  in  Indo-China,  and  Britain  is
supplying  her  forces  which  are  fighting  guerrillas  in  the  Malay  States.  The  sub-
stantial military  aid  we  are  giving  to  the  forces  of  the  Republic  of  Korea  is
included  in  the  budget  for  our  military  services.

"The  struggle  for  security  and  peace  in  Asia  is  far  more  than  a  military  matter.


I  Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  591

'  In  many  of  the  Asian  countries,  including  all  the  countries  which  need  military
:  aid,  economic  assistance  is  also  required."

14.  The  Military  Aid  Program:  Statement  by  the  Departments  of  State  and
Defense,  September  23,  1951,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  October  8,  1951,
p.  570:

"The  participants  were  in  complete  agreement  that  the  successful  defense  of
!  Indochina  is  of  great  importance  to  the  defense  of  all  Southeast  Asia.  .  .  ."

1  * *  *

;  5. The  Defense  of  Indochina:  Communique  Regarding  Discussions  Between
j Representatives  of  the  United  States,  France,  Viet-Nam,  and  Cambodia,
June  18,  1952,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  June  30,  1952,  p.  1010:

"The  principle  which  governed  this  frank  and  detailed  exchange  of  views  and
information  was  the  common  recognition  that  the  struggle  in  which  the  forces
of  the  French  Union  and  the  Associated  States  are  engaged  against  the  forces

I  of  communist  aggression  in  Indochina  is  an  integral  part  of  the  world-wide

I  resistance  by  the  Free  Nations  to  Communist  attempts  at  conquest  and  sub-

I  version.  .  .  ."

i

'  * *  *

I

'  6.  Support  by  NATO  of  the  French  Union  Defense  Efforts  in  Indochina:
Resolution  Adopted  by  the  North  Atlantic  Council,  December  17,  1952,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  January  5,  1953,  p.  4:

"The  North  Atlantic  Council
''Recognizes  that  resistance  to  direct  or  indirect  aggression  in  any  part  of  the
world  is  an  essential  contribution  to  the  common  security  of  the  free  world;

''Having  Been  Informed  at  its  meeting  in  Paris  on  the  16th  December  of  the
latest  developments  in  the  military  and  political  situation  in  Indo-China;

"Expresses  its  wholehearted  admiration  for  the  valiant  and  long  continued
struggle  by  the  French  forces  and  the  armies  of  the  Associated  States  against
Communist  aggression;  and

"Acknowledges  that  the  resistance  of  the  free  nations  in  South  East  Asia  as  in
Korea  is  in  fullest  harmony  with  the  aims  and  ideals  of  the  Atlantic  Community;

"And  therefore  agrees  that  the  campaign  waged  by  the  French  Union  forces
in  Indo-China  deserves  continuing  support  from  the  NATO  governments."

EISENHOWER  ADMINISTRATION  PUBLIC  STATEMENTS

1. President  Eisenhower  s  Remarks  at  Governors'  Conference,  August  4,  1953,
Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  1953,  p.  540:

"I  could  go  on  enumerating  every  kind  of  problem  that  comes  before  us  daily.
Let  us  take,  though,  for  example,  one  simple  problem  in  the  foreign  field.  You


592 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I  '

have  seen  the  war  in  Indochina  described  variously  as  an  outgrowth  of  French
colonialism  and  its  French  refusal  to  treat  indigenous  populations  decently.  You
find  it  again  described  as  a  war  between  the  communists  and  the  other  elements  !
in  southeast  Asia.  But  you  have  a  confused  idea  of  where  it  is  located — Laos,'
or  Cambodia,  or  Siam,  or  any  of  the  other  countries  that  are  involved.  You
don't  know,  really,  why  we  are  so  concerned  with  the  far-off  southeast  corner  of
Asia.

"Why  is  it?  Now,  first  of  all,  the  last  great  population  remaining  in  Asia  that
has  not  become  dominated  by  the  Kremlin,  of  course,  is  the  sub-continent  of
India,  including  the  Pakistan  government.  Here  are  350  million  people  still  free.
Now  let  us  assume  that  we  lose  Indochina.  If  Indochina  goes,  several  things  hap-
pen right  away.  The  Malayan  peninsula,  the  last  little  bit  of  the  end  hanging  on
down  there,  would  be  scarcely  defensible — and  tin  and  tungsten  that  we  so
greatly  value  from  that  area  would  cease  coming.  But  all  India  would  be  out-
flanked. Burma  would  certainly,  in  its  weakened  condition,  be  no  defense.  Now,
India  is  surrounded  on  that  side  by  the  Communist  empire.  Iran  on  its  left  is  in
a  weakened  condition.  I  believe  I  read  in  the  paper  this  morning  that  Mossadegh's
move  toward  getting  rid  of  his  parliament  has  been  supported  and  of  course  he
was  in  that  move  supported  by  the  Tudeh,  which  is  the  Communist  Party  of  Iran.
All  of  that  weakening  position  around  there  is  very  ominous  for  the  United
States,  because  finally  if  we  lost  all  that,  how  would  the  free  world  hold  the  rich
empire  of  Indonesia?  So  you  see,  somewhere  along  the  line,  this  must  be  blocked.
It  must  be  blocked  now.  That  is  what  the  French  are  doing.

"So,  when  the  United  States  votes  $400  million  to  help  that  war,  we  are  not
voting  for  a  giveaway  program.  We  are  voting  for  the  cheapest  way  that  we
can  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  something  that  would  be  of  the  most  terrible
significance  for  the  United  States  of  America — our  security,  our  power  and
ability  to  get  certain  things  we  need  from  the  riches  of  the  Indonesian  territory,
and  from  southeast  Asia."

*  *  *

2.  Joint  Franco-American  Communique,  Additional  United  States  Aid  for
France  and  Indochina,  September  30,  1953,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,
October  12,  1953,  p.  486:  ^

"The  forces  of  France  and  the  Associated  States  in  Indochina  have  for  8  years
been  engaged  in  a  bitter  struggle  to  prevent  the  engulfment  of  Southeast  Asia  by
the  forces  of  international  communism.  The  heroic  efforts  and  sacrifices  of
these  French  Union  allies  in  assuring  the  liberty  of  the  new  and  independent
states  of  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Vietnam  has  earned  the  admiration  and  support  of
the  free  world.  In  recognition  of  the  French  Union  effort  the  United  States
Government  has  in  the  past  furnished  aid  of  various  kinds  to  the  Governments
of  France  and  the  Associated  States  to  assist  in  bringing  the  long  struggle  to  an
early  and  victorious  conclusion.

"The  French  Government  is  firmly  resolved  to  carry  out  in  full  its  declaration
of  July  3,  1953,  by  which  is  announced  its  intention  of  perfecting  the  independ-
ence of  the  three  Associated  States  in  Indochina,  through  negotiations  with  the
Associated  States.

"The  Governments  of  France  and  the  United  States  have  now  agreed  that,
in  support  of  plans  of  the  French  Government  for  the  intensified  prosecution  of
the  war  against  the  Viet  Minh,  the  United  States  will  make  available  to  the

!


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  593

French  Government  prior  to  December  31,  1954  additional  financial  resources
not  to  exceed  $385  million.  This  aid  is  in  addition  to  funds  already  earmarked
by  the  United  States  for  aid  to  France  and  the  Associated  States.

"The  French  Government  is  determined  to  make  every  effort  to  break  up  and
destroy  the  regular  enemy  forces  in  Indochina.  Toward  this  end  the  government
intends  to  carry  through,  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Cambodian,  Laotian,  and
Vietnamese  Governments,  the  plans  for  increasing  the  Associated  States  forces
while  increasing  temporarily  French  forces  to  levels  considered  necessary  to
assure  the  success  of  existing  military  plans.  The  additional  United  States  aid  is
designed  to  help  make  it  possible  to  achieve  these  objectives  with  maximum
speed  and  effectiveness.

"The  increased  French  effort  in  Indochina  will  not  entail  any  basic  or  per-
manent alteration  of  the  French  Government's  plans  and  programs  for  its  NATO
forces."

3.  President  Eisenhower's  News  Conference,  February  10,  1954,  Public  Papers
of  the  Presidents,  1954,  p.  253:

* *  *

i  Q.  Daniel  Shorr,  CBS  Radio:  "Mr.  President,  should  your  remarks  on  Indo-
'china  be  construed  as  meaning  that  you  are  determined  not  to  become  involved
or,  perhaps,  more  deeply  involved  in  the  war  in  Indochina,  regardless  of  how
that  war  may  go?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  I  am  not  going  to  try  to  predict  the  drift  of  world
events  now  and  the  course  of  world  events  over  the  next  months.  I  say  that  I
cannot  conceive  of  a  greater  tragedy  for  America  than  to  get  heavily  involved
now  in  an  all-out  war  in  any  of  those  regions,  particularly  with  large  units.

"So  what  we  are  doing  is  supporting  the  Vietnamese  and  the  French  in  their
conduct  of  that  war;  because,  as  we  see  it,  it  is  a  case  of  independent  and  free
nations  operating  against  the  encroachment  of  communism."

4.  Address  by  Secretary  Dulles  before  the  Overseas  Press  Club  of  America  at
New  York  City  on  March  29,  1954,  The  Threat  of  a  Red  Asia.  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  April  12,  1954,  p.  539:

'  "This  provides  a  timely  occasion  for  outlining  the  administration's  thinking
about  two  related  matters — Indochina  and  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.
!  "Indochina  is  important  for  many  reasons.  First,  and  always  first,  are  the
human  values.  About  30  million  people  are  seeking  for  themselves  the  dignity
of  self-government.  Until  a  few  years  ago,  they  formed  merely  a  French  de-
pendency. Now,  their  three  political  units — Viet-Nam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia — are
exercising  a  considerable  measure  of  independent  political  authority  within  the
French  Union.  Each  of  the  three  is  now  recognized  by  the  United  States  and  by
more  than  30  other  nations.  They  signed  the  Japanese  peace  treaty  with  us.
Their  independence  is  not  yet  complete.  But  the  French  Government  last  July
declared  its  intention  to  complete  that  independence,  and  negotiations  to  con-
isummate  that  pledge  are  actively  under  way.

I  "The  United  States  is  watching  this  development  with  close  attention  and
great  sympathy.  We  do  not  forget  that  we  were  a  colony  that  won  its  freedom.
We  have  sponsored  in  the  Philippines  a  conspicuously  successful  development
jf  political  independence.  We  feel  a  sense  of  kinship  with  those  everywhere  who
yearn  for  freedom.


f

594 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"The  Communists  are  attempting  to  prevent  the  orderly  development  of  inde-
pendence and  to  confuse  the  issue  before  the  world.  The  Communists  have,  in
these  matters,  a  regular  line  which  Stalin  laid  down  in  1924,

"The  scheme  is  to  whip  up  the  spirit  of  nationalism  so  that  it  becomes  violent.
That  is  done  by  professional  agitators.  Then  the  violence  is  enlarged  by  Com-
munist miUtary  and  technical  leadership  and  the  provision  of  military  supplies.
In  these  ways,  international  communism  gets  a  stranglehold  on  the  people  and  it
uses  that  power  to  'amalgamate'  the  peoples  into  the  Soviet  orbit.

"  'Amalgamation'  is  Lenin's  and  Stalin's  word  to  describe  their  process.

"  'Amalgamation'  is  now  being  attempted  in  Indochina  under  the  ostensible
leadership  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.  He  was  indoctrinated  in  Moscow.  He  became  an
associate  of  the  Russian,  Borodin,  when  the  latter  was  organizing  the  Chinese
Communist  Party  which  was  to  bring  China  into  the  Soviet  orbit.  Then  Ho
transferred  his  activities  to  Indochina.

"Those  fighting  under  the  banner  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  have  largely  been  trained
and  equipped  in  Communist  China.  They  are  supplied  with  artillery  and  ammuni-
tion through  the  Soviet-Chinese  Communist  bloc.  Captured  materiel  shows  that
much  of  it  was  fabricated  by  the  Skoda  Munition  Works  in  Czechoslovakia  and
transported  across  Russia  and  Siberia  and  then  sent  through  China  into  Viet-
Nam.  Military  supplies  for  the  Communist  armies  have  been  pouring  into  Viet-
Nam  at  a  steadily  increasing  rate.

"Military  and  technical  guidance  is  supplied  by  an  estimated  2,000  Communist
Chinese.  They  function  with  the  forces  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  in  key  positions — in  staff
sections  of  the  High  Command,  at  the  division  level,  and  in  specialized  units
such  as  signal,  engineer,  artillery,  and  transportation.

"In  the  present  stage,  the  Communists  in  Indochina  use  nationalistic  anti-
French  slogans  to  win  local  support.  But  if  they  achieved  military  or  political
success,  it  is  certain  that  they  would  subject  the  people  to  a  cruel  Communist
dictatorship  taking  its  orders  from  Peiping  and  Moscow.

"The  tragedy  would  not  stop  there.  If  the  Communist  forces  won  uncontested
control  over  Indochina  or  any  substantial  part  thereof,  they  would  surely  resume
the  same  pattern  of  aggression  against  other  free  peoples  in  the  area.

"The  propagandists  of  Red  China  and  Russia  make  it  apparent  that  the  pur-
pose is  to  dominate  all  of  Southeast  Asia.

"Southeast  Asia  is  the  so-called  'rice  bowl'  which  helps  to  feed  the  densely
populated  region  that  extends  from  India  to  Japan.  It  is  rich  in  many  raw
materials,  such  as  tin,  oil,  rubber,  and  iron  ore.  It  offers  industrial  Japan  poten-
tially important  markets  and  sources  of  raw  materials.

"The  area  has  great  strategic  value.  Southeast  Asia  is  astride  the  most  direct
and  best-developed  sea  and  air  routes  between  the  Pacific  and  South  Asia.  It  has
major  naval  and  air  bases.  Communist  control  of  Southeast  Asia  would  carry  a
grave  threat  to  the  Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  with  whom  we  have
treaties  of  mutual  assistance.  The  entire  Western  Pacific  area,  including  the  so-
called  'offshore  island  chain,'  would  be  strategically  endangered.

"President  Eisenhower  appraised  the  situation  last  Wednesday  (March  24)
when  he  said  that  the  area  is  of  'transcendent  importance.'

"The  United  States  has  shown  in  many  ways  its  sympathy  for  the  gallant
struggle  being  waged  in  Indochina  by  French  forces  and  those  of  the  Associated
States.  Congress  has  enabled  us  to  provide  material  aid  to  the  established  gov-
ernments and  their  peoples.  Also,  our  diplomacy  has  sought  to  deter  Communist
China  from  open  aggression  in  that  area.

"President  Eisenhower,  in  his  address  of  April  16,  1953,  explained  that  a


j  Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  595

;  Korean  armistice  would  be  a  fraud  if  it  merely  released  aggressive  armies  for
attack  elsewhere.  I  said  last  September  that  if  Red  China  sent  its  own  army  into
Indochina,  that  would  result  in  grave  consequences  which  might  not  be  confined

I  to  Indochina.

I  "Recent  statements  have  been  designed  to  impress  upon  potential  aggressors
,  that  aggression  might  lead  to  action  at  places  and  by  means  of  free-world  choos-
;  ing,  so  that  aggression  would  cost  more  than  it  could  gain.

,  "The  Chinese  Communists  have,  in  fact,  avoided  the  direct  use  of  their  own
iRed  armies  in  open  aggression  against  Indochina.  They  have,  however,  largely

stepped  up  their  support  of  the  aggression  in  that  area.  Indeed,  they  promote

that  aggression  by  all  means  short  of  open  invasion.

;  "Under  all  the  circumstances  it  seems  desirable  to  clarify  further  the  United
States  position.

"Under  the  conditions  of  today,  the  imposition  on  Southeast  Asia  of  the
political  system  of  Communist  Russia  and  its  Chinese  Communist  ally,  by  what-
ever means,  would  be  a  grave  threat  to  the  whole  free  community.  The  United
States  feels  that  that  possibility  should  not  be  passively  accepted  but  should  be
met  by  united  action.  This  might  involve  serious  risks.  But  these  risks  are  far
less  than  those  that  will  face  us  a  few  years  from  now  if  we  dare  not  be  resolute
,  today.

"The  free  nations  want  peace.  However,  peace  is  not  had  merely  by  wanting
it.  Peace  has  to  be  worked  for  and  planned  for.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary  to  take
risks  to  win  peace  just  as  it  is  necessary  in  war  to  take  risks  to  win  victory.  The
chances  for  peace  are  usually  bettered  by  letting  a  potential  aggressor  know  in
advance  where  his  aggression  could  lead  him.

"I  hope  that  these  statements  which  I  make  here  tonight  will  serve  the  cause
,  of  peace.

"Let  me  now  discuss  our  political  relations  with  Red  China,  taking  first  the
matter  of  recognition.

"The  United  States  does  not  recognize  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.  That
is  well  known.  But  the  reasons  seem  not  so  well  known.  Some  think  that  there
are  no  reasons  and  that  we  are  actuated  purely  by  emotion.  Your  Government
believes  that  its  position  is  soberly  rational.

"Let  me  first  recall  that  diplomatic  recognition  is  a  voluntary  act.  One  country
has  no  right  to  demand  recognition  by  another.  Generally,  it  is  useful  that  there
should  be  diplomatic  intercourse  between  those  who  exercise  de  facto  govern-
mental authority,  and  it  is  well  established  that  recognition  does  not  imply  moral
approval.

"President  Monroe,  in  his  famous  message  to  Congress,  denounced  the  expan-
sionist and  despotic  system  of  Czarist  Russia  and  its  allies.  But  he  said  that  it
would  nevertheless  be  our  policy  'to  consider  the  government  de  facto  as  the
legitimate  government  for  us.'  That  has  indeed  been  the  general  United  States
policy,  and  I  believe  that  it  is  a  sound  general  policy.  However,  where  it  does
not  serve  our  interests,  we  are  free  to  vary  from  it.

"In  relation  to  Communist  China,  we  are  forced  to  take  account  of  the  fact
that  the  Chinese  Communist  regime  has  been  consistently  and  viciously  hostile
;  to  the  United  States.

I "A  typical  Chinese  Communist  pamphlet  reads:  'We  Must  Hate  America,  be-
,  cause  She  is  the  Chinese  People's  Implacable  Enemy.'  'We  Must  Despise  America
because  it  is  a  Corrupt  Imperialist  Nation,  the  World  Center  of  Reaction  and
Decadency.'  'We  Must  Look  down  upon  America  because  She  is  a  Paper  Tiger
and  Entirely  Vulnerable  to  Defeat.'


596 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"By  print,  by  radio,  by  drama,  by  pictures,  with  all  the  propaganda  skills  which
communism  has  devised,  such  themes  are  propagated  by  the  Red  rulers.  They
vent  their  hatred  by  barbarous  acts,  such  as  seizures  and  imprisonments  of
Americans.

"Those  responsible  for  United  States  policy  must  ask  and  answer  'Will  it  help
our  country  if,  by  recognition,  we  give  increased  prestige  and  influence  to  a
regime  that  actively  attacks  our  vital  interests?'  I  can  find  only  the  answer:  'No.'  "

* *  *


5. Address  by  Alfred  le  Sesne  Jenkins,  Officer  in  Charge,  Chinese  Political  \
Affairs,  before  the  American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Present  United  States  Policy  Toward  China,  April  2,  1954,  i

Department  of  State  Bulletin,  April  26,  1954,  p.  624:  \

"In  recent  years  we  have  often  heard  it  said  that  more  heat  than  light  has  been
cast  on  the  China  question.  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  heat,  nor  do  I  object  to  it,
provided  there  is  also  sufficient  light.  The  fate  of  one-fourth  of  the  world's  popu-  ;
lation  is  not  a  matter  which  can  be  taken  lightly,  and  the  addition  of  China's  vast
material  and  manpower  resources  to  the  Soviet  bloc  is  a  matter  involving  not  ;
only  the  security  interests  of  the  United  States  but  those  of  the  entire  free  world.  ,
I  do  not  see  how  one  can  help  feeling  strongly  about  these  matters.  We  need  not  ;
apologize  that  our  thinking  about  China  is  charged  with  feeling.  National  policies
are  an  expression  of  national  interests  concerning  which  there  is  naturally  much  ,
feeling,  and  our  policies  are  an  expression  both  of  what  we  are  and  of  what  we
want.  We  are  a  nation  of  free  peoples.  We  want  to  remain  free  to  pursue  in  peace
our  proper  national  destiny,  and  we  want  the  same  freedom  and  rights  for  others.

"We  do  not  believe  that  the  Chinese  Communist  regime  represents  the  will  of
the  people  it  controls.  First  capitalizing  on  the  natural  desire  of  the  Chinese
people  to  enjoy  full  recognition  and  respect  for  their  importance  in  the  world
community,  the  regime  then  proceeded  by  its  'lean-to-one-side'  policy  to  betray
the  powerful  Chinese  longings  to  stand  up  straight.  It  has  followed  slavishly  the  '
leadership  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  attempted  to  emulate  it  in  all  its  ways.  With
the  aid  of  thousands  of  Soviet  advisers  it  has  set  about  methodically  to  change
the  entire  fabric  of  traditional  Chinese  culture,  substituting  communism's  ma-
terialistic, atheistic  doctrines  wherein  the  state  is  the  be-all  and  end-all  and  the
individual  its  pawn.  ,

"The  regime  at  first  attracted  considerable  support,  principally  through  its
sponsorship  of  a  land  redistribution  program,  but  is  now,  after  establishment  of  :
the  prerequisite  police-state  controls,  taking  the  land  away  from  the  owners  in  ,
the  same  collectivization  process  which  is  familiar  in  other  Communist  countries
and  which  invariably  has  brought  suffering  in  its  wake.  China's  much  advertised
'New  Democracy'  is  of  course  in  reality  'old  communism.'  i

"From  its  inception  the  regime  has  proclaimed  a  'lean-to-one-side'  policy  in
foreign  affairs,  and  has  left  no  doubt  about  its  dedication  to  the  proposition  of  \
world  Communist  revolution  under  the  leadership  of  the  Union  of  Soviet  Social-  ;
ist  Republics.  While  its  'leaning-to-one-side'  has  not  brought  it  to  the  position  of  :
complete  'prostration-to-one-side'  characteristic  of  the  Eastern  European  Soviet
satellites,  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  that  this  indicates  any  separatist
tendencies.  The  difference  in  status  of  Peiping  in  its  relationship  with  Moscow
(as  distinguished  from  that  of  the  Eastern  European  satellites)  is  rather  due


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  597

chiefly  to  its  having  come  to  power  without  benefit,  except  in  Manchuria,  of
Soviet  Army  occupation;  to  the  prestige  of  Mao  Tse-tung,  arising  from  his  long
history  of  leadership  of  Chinese  communism  and  his  literary  contributions  to
theoretical  communism;  to  China's  assumption  of  the  role  of  leadership.  .  .  ."

*  *  *

6. President  Eisenhower's  News  Conference,  April  7,  1954,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  1954,  p.  382:

*  *  *

Q.  Robert  Richards,  Copley  Press:  "Mr.  President,  would  you  mind  com-
menting on  the  strategic  importance  of  Indochina  to  the  free  world?  I  think
there  has  been,  across  the  country,  some  lack  of  understanding  on  just  what  it
means  to  us."

THE  PRESIDENT:  "You  have,  of  course,  both  the  specific  and  the  general
when  you  talk  about  such  things.

"First  of  all,  you  have  the  specific  value  of  a  locality  in  its  production  of
materials  that  the  world  needs.

"Then  you  have  the  possibility  that  many  human  beings  pass  under  a  dictator-
ship that  is  inimical  to  the  free  world.

"Finally,  you  have  broader  considerations  that  might  follow  what  you  would
call  the  'falling  domino'  principle.  You  have  a  row  of  dominoes  set  up,  you  knock
over  the  first  one,  and  what  will  happen  to  the  last  one  is  the  certainty  that  it
will  go  over  very  quickly.  So  you  could  have  a  beginning  of  a  disintegration  that
would  have  the  most  profound  influences.

"Now,  with  respect  to  the  first  one,  two  of  the  items  from  this  particular  area
that  the  world  uses  are  tin  and  tungsten.  They  are  very  important.  There  are
i others,  of  course,  the  rubber  plantations  and  so  on.

:  "Then  with  respect  to  more  people  passing  under  this  domination,  Asia,  after
'all,  has  already  lost  some  450  million  of  its  peoples  to  the  Communist  dictator-
|ship,  and  we  simply  can't  afford  greater  losses.

I  "But  when  we  come  to  the  possible  sequence  of  events,  the  loss  of  Indochina,
of  Burma,  of  Thailand,  of  the  Peninsula,  and  Indonesia  following,  now  you  begin
to  talk  about  areas  that  not  only  multiply  the  disadvantages  that  you  would  suffer
through  loss  of  materials,  sources  of  materials,  but  now  you  are  talking  really
about  millions  and  millions  and  millions  of  people.

,  "Finally,  the  geographical  position  achieved  thereby  does  many  things.  It  turns
the  so-called  island  defensive  chain  of  Japan,  Formosa,  of  the  Philippines  and  to
the  southward;  it  moves  in  to  threaten  Australia  and  New  Zealand.

"It  takes  away,  in  its  economic  aspects,  that  region  that  Japan  must  have  as
I  a  trading  area  or  Japan,  in  turn,  will  have  only  one  place  in  the  world  to  go —
[that  is,  toward  the  Communist  areas  in  order  to  live.

"So,  the  possible  consequences  of  the  loss  are  just  incalculable  to  the  free
world."

,|  * *  *

!  Q.  Robert  G.  Spivack,  New  York  Post:  "Mr.  President,  do  you  agree  with
; Senator  Kennedy  that  independence  must  be  guaranteed  the  people  of  Indochina
m  order  to  justify  an  all-out  effort  there?"


598 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  I  don't  know,  of  course,  exactly  in  what  way  a
Senator  was  talking  about  this  thing.

"I  will  say  this:  for  many  years,  in  talking  to  different  countries,  different
governments,  I  have  tried  to  insist  on  this  principle:  no  outside  country  can  come
in  and  be  really  helpful  unless  it  is  doing  something  that  the  local  people  want.

"Now,  let  me  call  your  attention  to  this  independence  theory.  Senator  Lodge,
on  my  instructions,  stood  up  in  the  United  Nations  and  offered  one  country
independence  if  they  would  just  simply  pass  a  resolution  saying  they  wanted  it,
or  at  least  said,  'I  would  work  for  it.'  They  didn't  accept  it.  So  I  can't  say  that
the  associated  states  want  independence  in  the  sense  that  the  United  States  is
independent.  I  do  not  know  what  they  want.

"I  do  say  this:  the  aspirations  of  those  people  must  be  met,  otherwise  there  is
in  the  long  run  no  final  answer  to  the  problem."

Q,  Joseph  Dear,  Capital  Times:  "Do  you  favor  bringing  this  Indochina  situa-
tion before  the  United  Nations?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "I  really  can't  say.  I  wouldn't  want  to  comment  at  too
great  a  length  at  this  moment,  but  I  do  believe  this:  this  is  the  kind  of  thing  that
must  not  be  handled  by  one  nation  trying  to  act  alone."

* * *  i


7.  Remarks  Made  by  Under  Secretary  Smith  in  Answer  to  Questions  Prepared
for  Use  on  "The  American  Week"  over  the  CBS  Television  Network,  April
11,  1954,  on  the  Importance  of  Indochina,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,
April  19,  1954,  p.  589:

Q. "Why  is  Indochina  important  to  Americans?"

MR.  SMITH:  "For  one  vital  basic  and  two  special  additional  reasons.  In  the
first  place,  the  vital  basic  question  is:  Shall  we  or  can  the  free  world  allow  its
position  anywhere  and  particularly  in  Asia  to  be  eroded  piece  by  piece?  Can  we
allow,  dare  we  permit,  expansion  of  Communist  Chinese  control  further  into
Asia?  Propagandists  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  of  Communist  China  have  made  it
clear  that  their  purpose  is  to  dominate  all  of  Southeast  Asia.  Remember  that  this
region  helps  to  feed  an  immense  population.  It  stretches  all  the  way  from  India
to  Japan.  It's  a  region  that  is  rich  in  raw  materials,  full  of  tin,  oil,  rubber,  iron  ore.

"Now,  from  the  strategic  point  of  view,  it  lies  across  the  most  direct  sea  and
air  route  between  the  Pacific  and  South  Asia.  There  are  major  naval  and  air
bases  located  in  the  area.  Communist  control  of  Southeast  Asia  would  threaten
the  Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand  directly,  would  threaten  Malaya;  it
would  have  a  very  profound  effect  upon  the  economy  of  other  countries  in  the
area,  even  as  far  as  Japan."

Q.  "The  President,  at  his  news  conference  on  April  7,  described  the  process
of  Communist  conquest  as  the  'falling  domino'  principle.  Is  that  a  good  descrip-
tion of  the  threat  in  Southeast  Asia?"

MR.  SMITH:  "Yes,  it  is.  If  Indochina  is  lost  to  the  Communists,  Burma  is
threatened,  Thailand  is  threatened,  the  Malay  Peninsula  is  exposed,  Indonesia  is
subject  to  the  gravest  danger,  and,  in  addition  to  these  countries  and  their  pos-
sible loss,  there  is  the  possible  loss  of  food  source.  I  have  already  mentioned  the
strategic  raw  materials,  the  bases  in  the  area;  and,  while  they  are  of  enormous
importance,  the  most  important  thing  of  all  is  the  possible  loss  of  millions  and
millions  of  people  who  would  disappear  behind  the  Iron  Curtain.  There  are
enough  millions  behind  the  Iron  Curtain  now.  So  what's  at  stake  in  Indochina?


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  599

It  is  the  human  freedom  of  the  masses  of  people  for  all  that  enormous  area  of
the  world."

* *  *


8.  Statement  by  Secretary  Dulles  Made  at  Augusta,  Georgia,  April  19,  1954,
on  Conversations  in  London  and  Paris  Concerning  Indochina,  Department
of  State  Bulletin,  May  3,  1954,  p.  668:

"I  have  reported  to  President  Eisenhower  on  my  recent  trip  to  London  and
Paris,  where  I  discussed  the  position  in  Indochina.

"I  found  in  both  Capitals  recognition  that  the  armed  Communist  threat  en-
dangered vital  free  world  interest  and  made  it  appropriate  that  the  free  nations
most  immediately  concerned  should  explore  the  possibility  of  establishing  a  col-
lective defense.  This  same  recognition  had  already  been  expressed  by  other  nations
of  the  Southeast  Asian  area.

"The  Communists  in  Viet-Nam,  spurred  on  by  Red  China,  have  acted  on  the
assumption  that  a  quick,  easy  victory  at  Dien-Bien-Phu  would  open  the  door  to
a  rapid  Communist  advance  to  domination  of  the  entire  Southeast  Asian  area.
They  concluded  they  were  justified  in  recklessly  squandering  the  lives  of  their
subjects  to  conquer  this  strongpoint  so  as  to  confront  the  Geneva  Conference
with  what  could  be  portrayed  as  both  a  military  and  political  victory  for  com-
munism.

"The  gallant  defenders  of  Dien-Bien-Phu  have  done  their  part  to  assure  a
frustration  of  the  Communist  strategy.  They  have  taken  a  toll  such  that,  from  a
military  standpoint,  the  attackers  already  lost  more  than  they  could  win.  From  a
political  standpoint,  the  defenders  of  Dien-Bien-Phu  have  dramatized  the  struggle
for  freedom  so  that  the  free  world  sees  more  clearly  than  ever  before  the  issues
that  are  at  stake  and  once  again  is  drawing  closer  together  in  unity  of  purpose.
:  "The  Communist  rulers  are  learning  again  that  the  will  of  the  free  is  not  broken
I  by  violence  or  intimidation.

I  "The  brutal  Soviet  conquest  of  Czechoslovakia  did  not  disintegrate  the  will  of
Ithe  West.  It  led  to  the  formation  of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  alliance.

"The  violent  conquest  of  the  China  mainland  followed  by  the  Korean  aggres-
sion did  not  paralyze  the  will  of  the  free  nations.  It  led  to  a  series  of  Pacific
mutual  security  pacts  and  to  the  creation  under  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  of  a
powerful  defensive  force-in-being.

i  "The  violent  battles  now  being  waged  in  Viet-Nam  and  the  aggressions  against
Laos  and  Cambodia  are  not  creating  any  spirit  of  defeatism.  On  the  contrary,
they  are  rousing  the  free  nations  to  measures  which  we  hope  will  be  sufficiently
:imely  and  vigorous  to  preserve  these  vital  areas  from  Communist  domination.

"In  this  course  lies  the  best  hope  of  achieving  at  Geneva  the  restoration  of
Deace  with  freedom  and  justice."

* *  *

Statement  by  Jameson  Parker,  Department  Press  Officer,  read  to  Corre-
spondents April  17,  1954,  on  U.S.  Policy  Toward  Indochina,  Department  of
State  Bulletin,  April  26,  1954,  p.  623:

I  "Certain  remarks  with  regard  to  United  States  policy  toward  Indochina  have
Jeen  attributed  to  a  high  Government  official  [Vice  President  Nixon].  The  con-


I


600 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


tents  of  the  speech  referred  to  and  questions  and  answers  which  followed  were
off  the  record,  but  a  complete  report  of  the  speech  has  been  made  available  to
the  State  Department.

"The  speech  enunciated  no  new  United  States  policy  with  regard  to  Indochina.
It  expressed  full  agreement  with  and  support  for  the  policy  with  respect  to
Indochina  previously  enunciated  by  the  President  and  the  Secretary  of  State.

"That  policy  was  authoritatively  set  forth  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  his
speech  of  March  29,  1954,  in  which  he  said:

"  'Under  the  conditions  of  today,  the  imposition  on  Southeast  Asia  of  the  politi-
cal system  of  Communist  Russia  and  its  Chinese  Communist  ally,  by  whatever
means,  would  be  a  grave  threat  to  the  whole  free  community.  The  United  States
feels  that  that  possibility  should  not  be  passively  accepted  but  should  be  met  by
united  action.  This  might  involve  serious  risks.  But  these  risks  are  far  less  than
those  that  will  face  us  a  few  years  from  now  if  we  dare  not  be  resolute  today.'

"In  regard  to  a  hypothetical  question  as  to  whether  United  States  forces
should  be  sent  to  Indochina  in  the  event  of  French  withdrawal,  the  high  Govern-
ment official  categorically  rejected  the  premise  of  possible  French  withdrawal.
Insofar  as  the  use  of  United  States  forces  in  Indochina  was  concerned,  he  was
stating  a  course  of  possible  action  which  he  was  personally  prepared  to  support
under  a  highly  unlikely  hypothesis.

"The  answer  to  the  question  correctly  emphasized  the  fact  that  the  interests  of
the  United  States  and  other  free  nations  are  vitally  involved  with  the  interests  of
France  and  the  Associated  States  in  resisting  Communist  domination  of  Indo-
china."

10.  Address  by  Secretary  Dulles  Delivered  to  the  Nation  over  Radio  and  Tele-
vision, May  7,  1954,  The  Issues  at  Geneva,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,
May  17,  1954,  p.  740  and  p.  744:

"Let  me  turn  now  to  the  problem  of  Southeast  Asia.  In  that  great  peninsula
and  the  islands  to  the  south  live  nearly  200  million  people  in  7  states — Burma;
the  three  states  of  Indochina — Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Viet-Nam;  Thailand;  Ma-
laya; and  Indonesia.  Communist  conquest  of  this  area  would  seriously  imperil
the  free  world  position  in  the  Western  Pacific.  It  would,  among  other  things,  en-
danger the  Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  with  all  of  which  the  United
States  has  mutual-security  treaties.  It  would  deprive  Japan  of  important  foreign
markets  and  sources  of  food  and  raw  materials.

"In  Viet-Nam,  one  of  the  three  Indochinese  states,  war  has  been  going  on  since
1946.  When  it  began,  Indochina  was  a  French  colony  just  liberated  from  Japanese
occupation.  The  war  started  primarily  as  a  war  for  independence.  What  started
as  a  civil  war  has  now  been  taken  over  by  international  communism  for  its  own
purposes.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  the  Communist  leader  in  Viet-Nam,  was  trained  in
Moscow  and  got  his  first  revolutionary  experience  in  China."

* *  *

"In  Indochina,  the  situation  is  far  more  complex.  The  present  conditions  there
do  not  provide  a  suitable  basis  for  the  United  States  to  participate  with  its  armed
forces.

"The  situation  may  perhaps  be  clarified  as  a  result  of  the  Geneva  Conference.
The  French  have  stated  their  desire  for  an  armistice  on  honorable  terms  and


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  601

under  proper  safeguards.  If  they  can  conclude  a  settlement  on  terms  which  do
not  endanger  the  freedom  of  the  peoples  of  Viet-Nam,  this  would  be  a  real  con-
tribution to  the  cause  of  peace  in  Southeast  Asia.  But  we  would  be  gravely
concerned  if  an  armistic  or  cease-fire  were  reached  at  Geneva  which  would  pro-
vide a  road  to  a  Communist  takeover  and  further  aggression.  If  this  occurs,  or
if  hostilities  continue,  then  the  need  will  be  even  more  urgent  to  create  the
conditions  for  united  action  in  defense  of  the  area.

"In  making  commitments  which  might  involve  the  use  of  armed  force,  the
Congress  is  a  full  partner.  Only  the  Congress  can  declare  war.  President  Eisen-
hower has  repeatedly  emphasized  that  he  would  not  take  military  action  in  Indo-
china without  the  support  of  Congress.  Furthermore,  he  has  made  clear  that  he
would  not  seek  that  unless,  in  his  opinion,  there  would  be  an  adequate  collective
effort  based  on  genuine  mutuality  of  purpose  in  defending  vital  interests.

"A  great  effort  is  being  made  by  Communist  propaganda  to  portray  it  as  some-
thing evil  if  Asia  joins  with  the  nations  of  the  Americas  and  Europe  to  get
assistance  which  will  help  the  peoples  of  Asia  to  secure  their  liberty.  These
Communist  nations  have,  in  this  connection,  adopted  the  slogan  'Asia  for  the
Asians.'

"The  Japanese  war  lords  adopted  a  similar  slogan  when  they  sought  to  subject
Asia  to  their  despotic  rule.  The  similar  theme  of  'Europe  for  the  Europeans'  was
adopted  by  Mr.  Molotov  at  the  Berlin  Conference  when  he  proposed  that  the
Europeans  should  seek  security  by  arrangements  which  would  send  the  United
States  back  home.

"Great  despotic  powers  have  always  known  that  they  could  impose  their  will
and  gain  their  conquests  if  the  free  nations  stand  apart  and  none  helps  the  other.

"It  should  be  observed  that  the  Soviet  Communist  aggression  in  Europe  took
place  only  against  countries  which  had  no  collective  security  arrangements.  Since
the  organization  of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty,  there  has  been  no  successful
aggression  in  Europe.

"Of  course,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  United  States  participation
in  creating  collective  security  in  Asia  should  be  on  a  basis  which  recognizes  fully
the  aspirations  and  cultures  of  the  Asian  peoples.  We  have  a  material  and  in-
dustrial strength  which  they  lack  and  which  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  security.
Also  they  have  cultural  and  spiritual  values  of  their  own  which  make  them  our
equals  by  every  moral  standard.

"The  United  States,  as  the  first  colony  of  modern  history  to  win  independence
for  itself,  instinctively  shares  the  aspirations  for  liberty  of  all  dependent  and
colonial  peoples.  We  want  to  help,  not  hinder  the  spread  of  liberty.

"We  do  not  seek  to  perpetuate  Western  colonialism  and  we  find  even  more
intolerable  the  new  imperialist  colonialism  of  communism.

"That  is  the  spirit  that  animates  us.  If  we  remain  true  to  that  spirit,  we  can
face  the  future  with  confidence  that  we  shall  be  in  harmony  with  those  moral
forces  which  ultimately  prevail."

11. President  Eisenhower's  News  Conference,  May  5,  1954,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  1954,  p.  451:

"United  States  foreign  policy  has  consistently  supported  the  principles  on
i  which  was  founded  the  United  Nations.  The  basic  expression  of  this  policy  was
I  the  Vandenberg  resolution  in  1948.  The  United  States  believes  in  assuring  the

I  ■


602 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

peace  and  integrity  of  nations  through  collective  action  and,  in  pursuance  of  the
United  Nations  principle,  has  entered  into  regional  security  agreements  with
other  nations.  Examples  are  the  Inter-American  Agreement,  the  NATO  Agree-
ment, and  numerous  pacts  in  the  Pacific.  These  arrangements  are  invariably  to
assure  the  peaceful  security  of  the  contracting  nations  and  to  prevent  likelihood
of  attack;  they  are  not  arrangements  designed  primarily  for  waging  war.

"The  Geneva  conference,  now  9  days  old,  has  produced  no  surprises.  The
expressed  fears  of  some  have  proved  unfounded.

"It  has  not  been  a  'Five-Power'  conference  as  the  Soviet  Union  tried  to  make  it.

"It  has  not  involved  establishing  express  or  implied  diplomatic  recognition  by
the  United  States  of  the  Chinese  Communist  aggressors.

"The  Korean  phase  of  the  conference  has  been  organized.  Here  the  Commu-
nists came  up  with  a  scheme  for  Korean  unification  which  was  a  Chinese  copy  of
the  Soviet  scheme  for  the  unification  of  Germany.  Under  their  proposal  no  elec-
tion measures  could  be  taken  without  Communist  consent,  and  there  could  be  no
impartial  supervision  of  the  election  conditions  or  of  the  voting.

"This  scheme  was  rejected  for  Germany.  Secretary  Dulles  tells  me  that  is
equally  unacceptable  to  the  Republic  of  Korea  and  to  the  United  Nations  mem-
bers which  took  part  in  the  Korean  war  under  the  United  Nations  Command
now  represented  at  Geneva.

"The  Indochina  phase  of  the  conference  is  in  process  of  being  organized  and
the  issues  have  not  yet  been  clarified.  In  this  matter  a  large  measure  of  initiative
rests  with  the  governments  of  France,  Viet-Nam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia,  which
are  the  countries  most  directly  concerned.

"Meanwhile,  plans  are  proceeding  for  the  realization  of  a  Southeast  Asia
security  arrangement.  This  was  publicly  suggested  by  Secretary  Dulles  in  his
address  of  March  29.  Of  course,  our  principal  allies  were  advised  in  advance.
This  proposal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  a  new  one;  it  was  merely  re-
affirmation of  the  principles  that  have  consistently  guided  our  post-war  foreign
policy  and  a  reminder  to  interested  Asian  friends  that  the  United  States  was  pre-
pared to  join  with  others  in  the  application  of  these  principles  to  the  threatened
area.  Most  of  the  free  nations  of  the  area  and  others  directly  concerned  have
shown  affirmative  interest,  and  the  conversations  are  actively  proceeding.

"Obviously,  it  was  never  expected  that  this  collective  security  arrangement
would  spring  into  existence  overnight.  There  are  too  many  important  problems
to  be  resolved.  But  there  is  a  general  sense  of  urgency.  The  fact  that  such  an
organization  is  in  the  process  of  formation  could  have  an  important  bearing  upon
what  happens  at  Geneva  during  the  Indochina  phase  of  the  conference.

"The  countries  of  the  area  are  now  thinking  in  constructive  terms,  which
include  the  indispensable  concept  of  collective  security.  Progress  in  this  matter
has  been  considerable,  and  I  am  convinced  that  further  progress  will  continue  to
be  made."

*  *  *

12. President  Eisenhower's  News  Conference,  May  12,  1954,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  1954,  p.  473:

*  *  *

Q.  George  Herman,  CBS  Radio:  "Mr.  President,  since  we  seem  to  be  going
into  the  past,  a  few  weeks  ago  you  told  us  of  your  theory  of  dominoes  about
Indochina,  the  neck  of  the  bottle — "


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  603
THE  PRESIDENT:  "Yes."

Q.  Mr.  Herman:  "Since  the  fall  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,  there  has  been  a  certain
amount  of  talk  of  doing  without  Indochina.  Would  you  tell  us  your  administra-
tion's position;  is  it  still  indispensable  to  the  defense  of  southeast  Asia?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Again  I  forget  whether  it  was  before  this  body  I  talked
about  the  cork  and  the  bottle.  Well,  it  is  very  important,  and  the  great  idea  of
setting  up  an  organism  is  so  as  to  defeat  the  domino  result.  When,  each  standing
alone,  one  falls,  it  has  the  effect  on  the  next,  and  finally  the  whole  row  is  down.
You  are  trying,  through  a  unifying  influence,  to  build  that  row  of  dominoes  so
they  can  stand  the  fall  of  one,  if  necessary.

"Now,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  don't  think  the  free  world  ought  to  write
off  Indochina.  I  think  we  ought  to  all  look  at  this  thing  with  some  optimism  and
some  determination.  I  repeat  that  long  faces  and  defeatism  don't  win  battles."

* *  *

13.  Address  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  June  II,  1954  (Excerpt),  The  Threat  of
Direct  Chinese  Communist  Intervention  in  Indochina,  Department  of  State
Bulletin,  June  28,  1954,  p.  971:

"At  the  moment,  Indochina  is  the  area  where  international  communism  most
vigorously  seeks  expansion  under  the  leadership  of  Ho  Chi  Minh.  Last  year
President  Eisenhower,  in  his  great  'Chance  for  Peace'  address,  said  that  'aggres-
sion in  Korea  and  Southeast  Asia  are  threats  to  the  whole  free  community  to  be
met  by  united  action.'  But  the  French  were  then  opposed  to  what  they  called  'in-
ternationalizing' the  war.  They  preferred  to  treat  it  as  a  civil  war  of  rebellion.
However,  on  July  3,  1953,  the  French  Government  made  a  public  declaration  of
independence  for  the  three  Associated  States,  and  in  September  it  adopted  the
so-called  Navarre  plan,  which  contemplated  a  rapid  buildup  of  national  native
forces.  The  United  States  then  agreed  to  underwrite  the  costs  of  this  plan.

"But  last  winter  the  fighting  was  intensified  and  the  long  strain  began  to  tell
in  terms  of  the  attitude  of  the  French  people  toward  a  war  then  in  its  eighth  year.
Last  March,  after  the  siege  of  Dien-Bien-Phu  had  begun,  I  renewed  President
Eisenhower's  proposal  that  we  seek  conditions  which  would  permit  a  united
i  defense  for  the  area.  I  went  to  Europe  on  this  mission,  and  it  seemed  that  there
i  was  agreement  on  our  proposal.  But  when  we  moved  to  translate  that  proposal
I  into  reality,  some  of  the  parties  held  back  because  they  had  concluded  that  any
steps  to  create  a  united  defense  should  await  the  results  of  the  Geneva  Conference.

"Meanwhile,  the  burdens  of  a  collective  defense  in  Indochina  have  mounted.
The  Communists  have  practiced  dilatory  negotiating  at  Geneva,  while  intensify-
ing their  fighting  in  Indochina.  The  French  and  national  forces  feel  the  strain  of
mounting  enemy  power  on  their  front  and  of  political  uncertainty  at  their  rear.
I  told  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  last  week  that  the  situation  is
grave  but  by  no  means  hopeless.  The  future  depends  largely  on  decisions  awaited
^  at  Paris,  London,  and  Geneva.

I  "The  situation  in  Indochina  is  not  that  of  open  military  aggression  by  the
Chinese  Communist  regime.  Thus,  in  Indochina,  the  problem  is  one  of  restoring

;  tranquillity  in  an  area  where  disturbances  are  fomented  from  Communist  China,

,  but  where  there  is  no  open  invasion  by  Communist  China.  This  task  of  pacifica-
tion, in  our  opinion,  cannot  be  successfully  met  merely  by  unilateral  armed  inter-
vention. Some  other  conditions  need  to  be  established.  Throughout  these  Indo-

'  china  developments,  the  United  States  has  held  to  a  stable  and  consistent  course


604 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

and  has  made  clear  the  conditions  which,  in  its  opinion,  might  justify  intervention.
These  conditions  were  and  are  ( 1 )  an  invitation  from  the  present  lawful  authori-
ties; (2)  clear  assurance  of  complete  independence  to  Laos,  Cambodia,  and  Viet-
Nam;  (3)  evidence  of  concern  by  the  United  Nations;  (4)  a  joining  in  the  col-
lective effort  of  some  of  the  other  nations  of  the  area;  and  (5)  assurance  that
France  will  not  itself  withdraw  from  the  battle  until  it  is  won.

"Only  if  these  conditions  were  realized  could  the  President  and  the  Congress
be  justified  in  asking  the  American  people  to  make  the  sacrifices  incident  to
committing  our  Nation,  with  others,  to  using  force  to  help  to  restore  peace  in  the
area.

"Another  problem  might,  however,  arise.  If  the  Chinese  Communist  regime
were  to  show  in  Indochina  or  elsewhere  that  it  is  determined  to  pursue  the  path
of  overt  military  aggression,  then  the  situation  would  be  different  and  another
issue  would  emerge.  That  contingency  has  already  been  referred  to  publicly  by
the  President  and  myself.  The  President,  in  his  April  16,  1953,  address,  and  I
myself,  in  an  address  of  September  2,  1953,  made  clear  that  the  United  States
would  take  a  grave  view  of  any  future  overt  military  Chinese  Communist  aggres-
sion in  relation  to  the  Pacific  or  Southeast  Asia  area.  Such  an  aggression  would
threaten  island  and  peninsular  positions  which  secure  the  United  States  and  its
allies.

"If  such  overt  military  aggression  occurred,  that  would  be  a  deliberate  threat
to  the  United  States  itself.  The  United  States  would  of  course  invoke  the  processes
of  the  United  Nations  and  consult  with  its  allies.  But  we  could  not  escape  ulti-
mate responsibility  for  decisions  closely  touching  our  own  security  and  self-
defense.

"There  are  some,  particularly  abroad,  who  seem  to  assume  that  the  attitude  of
the  United  States  flows  from  a  desire  for  a  general  war  with  Communist  China.
That  is  clearly  false.  If  we  had  wanted  such  a  war,  it  could  easily  have  been  based
on  the  presence  of  Chinese  aggressors  in  Korea.  But  last  July,  in  spite  of  difficul-
ties which  at  times  seemed  insuperable,  we  concluded  a  Korean  armistice  with
Communist  China.  How  could  it  be  more  surely  demonstrated  that  we  have  both
the  will  to  make  peace  and  the  competence  to  make  peace?

"Your  Government  wants  peace,  and  the  American  people  want  peace.  But
should  there  ever  be  openly  launched  an  attack  that  the  American  people  would
clearly  recognize  as  a  threat  to  our  own  security,  then  the  right  of  self-preserva-
tion would  demand  that  we — regardless  of  any  other  country — meet  the  issue
squarely.

"It  is  the  task  of  statesmanship  to  seek  peace  and  deter  war,  while  at  the  same
time  preserving  vital  national  interests.  Under  present  conditions  that  dual  result
is  not  easy  to  achieve,  and  it  cannot  be  achieved  at  all  unless  your  Government
is  backed  by  a  people  who  are  willing,  if  need  be,  to  sacrifice  to  preserve  their
vital  interests.

"At  the  Geneva  Conference  I  said:  'Peace  is  always  easy  to  achieve — by  sur-
render.' Your  Government  does  not  propose  to  buy  peace  at  that  price.  We  do
not  believe  that  the  American  people  want  peace  at  that  price.  So  long  as  that
is  our  national  will,  and  so  long  as  that  will  be  backed  by  a  capacity  for  effec-
tive action,  our  Nation  can  face  the  future  with  that  calm  confidence  which  is
the  due  of  those  who,  in  a  troubled  world,  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."

14. President  Eisenhower's  News  Conference,  July  21,  1954,  Public  Papers  of
the  Presidents,  1954,  p.  642:


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  605

"[Reading]  I  am  glad,  for  course,  that  agreement  has  been  reached  at  Geneva
to  stop  the  bloodshed  in  Indochina.  The  United  States  has  not  been  a  belligerent
in  the  war  in  which  thousands  of  brave  men,  while  defending  freedom,  have  died
during  the  past  7  years.

"The  primary  responsibility  for  the  settlement  in  Indochina  rested  with  those
nations  which  participated  in  the  fighting.

"Our  role  at  Geneva  has  been  at  all  times  to  try  to  be  helpful  where  desired,
and  to  aid  France  and  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  to  obtain  a  just  and
honorable  settlement  which  will  take  into  account  the  needs  of  the  interested
people.

"Accordingly,  the  United  States  has  not  itself  been  a  party  to  or  bound  by  the
decisions  taken  by  the  conference,  but  it  is  our  hope  that  it  will  lead  to  the  estab-
lishment of  peace  consistent  with  the  rights  and  needs  of  the  countries  con-
cerned. The  agreement  contains  features  which  we  do  not  like,  but  a  great  deal
depends  on  how  they  work  in  practice.

"The  United  States  is  issuing  at  Geneva  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  it  is  not
prepared  to  join  in  the  conference  declaration  but,  as  loyal  members  of  the
United  Nations,  we  also  say  that  in  compliance  with  the  obligations  and  princi-
ples contained  in  article  II  of  the  United  Nations  Charter,  the  United  States
will  not  use  force  to  disturb  the  settlement.  We  also  say  that  any  renewal  of
Communist  aggression  would  be  viewed  by  us  as  a  matter  of  grave  concern.

"As  evidence  of  our  resolve  to  assist  Cambodia  and  Laos  to  play  their  parts
in  full  independence  and  sovereignty,  in  the  peaceful  community  of  free  nations,
we  are  requesting  the  agreement  of  the  governments  of  Cambodia  and  Laos  to
our  appointment  of  an  ambassador  or  minister  to  be  resident  at  their  respective
capitals.  We  already  have  a  Chief  of  Mission  at  Saigon,  the  capital  of  Viet-Nam,
and  this  embassy  will,  of  course,  be  maintained.

"The  United  States  is  actively  pursuing  discussions  with  other  free  nations
with  a  view  to  the  rapid  organization  of  a  collective  defense  in  southeast  Asia  in
order  to  prevent  further  direct  or  indirect  Communist  aggression  in  that  general
area.  [Ends  reading]"

* *  *

Q.  Mrs.  May  Craig,  Maine  Papers:  "Mr.  President,  President  Rhee  of  Korea
will  be  here  soon.  Do  you  regard  the  partition  of  Korea  as  permanent,  short  of
war,  and  are  you  including,  planning  to  include,  Korea  and  Free  China  in  any
kind  of  a  southeast  Asia  pact?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  of  course,  Korea  is  not  in  southeast  Asia.

"Already  we  have,  you  know,  a  treaty  of  mutual  defense  with  Korea.  It  has
been  enacted,  it  has  been  approved,  by  the  Senate.

"Now,  as  I  understand  it,  when  the  Korean  war  started,  the  purpose  of  the
United  Nations  was  to  prevent  any  advance  by  force  into  South  Korea;  they  did
do  that.

"I  know  of  no  one  that  has  ever  proposed  that  we  go  to  war  to  free  North
Korea.

"As  it  is,  it  is  an  unsatisfactory  situation,  exactly  as  exists  in  Germany,  and
now  apparently  is  going  to  exist  in  part  of  Indochina,

"These  are  very  unsatisfactory  situations  and,  to  my  mind,  will  always  give
reason  for  aggravating  situations  that  are  difficult,  at  best.  But  there  is  no  thought
1^  on  the  part  of  any  of  us  to  start  an  aggressive  move  for  the  freeing  of  that  coun-
i  try."


606 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I


"I  have  never  felt  that,  except  through  these  satellite  excursions,  that  the  Com-
munist world  wants  any  war  at  this  time;  in  other  words,  I  don't  believe  they
would  deliberately  challenge  us,  challenge  the  free  world,  to  a  war  of  exhaustion.

"So  the  problem,  no  matter  whether  you  happen  to  be  fighting  in  one  of  these
areas,  remains  the  same.  The  loss  of  great  areas  through  propaganda  and  deceit
and  subversion  and  coup  d'etat,  and  every  means  available  to  a  secret,  well-
financed  conspiracy,  they  are  all  there.  I  personally  think  that  if  there  is  one  good
that  can  come  out  of  this  whole  southeast  Asian  experience,  it  is  this:  to  get  the
free  world  to  looking  facts  in  the  face,  and  to  seeing  what  we  must  do,  what  we
should  do,  what  sacrifices  we  are  ready  to  make,  in  order  to  preserve  the  essen-
tials of  our  system.

"I  think  that  when  the  freedom  of  a  man  in  Viet-Nam  or  in  China  is  taken
away  from  him,  I  think  our  freedom  has  lost  a  little.  I  just  don't  believe  that  we
can  continue  to  exist  in  the  world,  geographically  isolated  as  we  are,  if  we  just
don't  find  a  concerted,  positive  plan  of  keeping  these  free  nations  so  tightly
bound  together  that  none  of  them  will  give  up;  and  if  they  are  not  weakened  in-
ternally by  these  other  methods,  I  just  don't  believe  they  will  give  up.  I  believe
we  can  hold  them."

Q.  Robert  E.  Clark,  International  News  Service:  "Mr.  President,  along  that
line,  a  number  of  Congressmen  today  are  branding  the  Geneva  settlement  as
appeasement.  Do  you  think  there  are  any  elements  of  appeasement  in  the  cease-
fire agreement?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  I  hesitate,  Mr.  Clark,  to  use  such  words,  as  I  have
told  you  so  often.  I  find  that  so  many  words  mean  so  many  different  things  to
different  people.  I  would  say  this,  as  I  said  in  my  statement:  this  agreement,  in
certain  of  its  features,  is  not  satisfactory  to  us.  It  is  not  what  we  would  have
liked  to  have  had.

"But  I  don't  know,  when  I  am  put  up  against  it  at  this  moment,  to  find  an  al-
ternative, to  say  what  we  would  or  could  do.  Then  if  I  have  no  better  plan,  I  am
not  going  to  criticize  what  they  have  done."

* *  *

15. Final  Declaration  of  Geneva  Conference,  July  21,  1954,  IC/43  Rev.  2,
July  21, 1954,  Original:  French:

"Final  declaration,  dated  July  21,  1954,  of  the  Geneva  Conference  on  the  prob-
lem of  restoring  peace  in  Indo-China,  in  which  the  representatives  of  Cambodia,
the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet-Nam,  France,  Laos,  the  People's  Republic  of
China,  the  State  of  Viet-Nam,  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics,  the  United
Kingdom,  and  the  United  States  of  America  took  part.

"1.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  agreements  ending  hostilities  in  Cam-
bodia, Laos  and  Viet-Nam  and  organizing  international  control  and  the  super-
vision of  the  execution  of  the  provisions  of  these  agreements.

"2.  The  Conference  expresses  satisfaction  at  the  ending  of  hostilities  in  Cam-
bodia, Laos  and  Viet-Nam;  the  Conference  expresses  its  conviction  that  the  exe-
cution of  the  provisions  set  out  in  the  present  declaration  and  in  the  agreements
on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  will  permit  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam  hence-
forth to  play  their  part,  in  full  independence  and  sovereignty,  in  the  peaceful  com-
munity of  nations.

"3.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declarations  made  by  the  Governments
of  Cambodia  and  of  Laos  of  their  intention  to  adopt  measures  permitting  all


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  607

citizens  to  take  their  place  in  the  national  community,  in  particular  by  partici-
pating in  the  next  general  elections,  which,  in  conformity  with  the  constitution  of
each  of  these  countries,  shall  take  place  in  the  course  of  the  year  1955,  by  secret
ballot  and  in  conditions  of  respect  for  fundamental  freedoms.

"4.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  clauses  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation
of  hostilities  in  Viet-Nam  prohibiting  the  introduction  into  Viet-Nam  of  foreign
troops  and  military  personnel  as  well  as  of  all  kinds  of  arms  and  munitions.  The
Conference  also  takes  note  of  the  declarations  made  by  the  Governments  of
Cambodia  and  Laos  of  their  resolution  not  to  request  foreign  aid,  whether  in  war
material,  in  personnel  or  in  instructors  except  for  the  purpose  of  the  effective
defence  of  their  territory  and,  in  the  case  of  Laos,  to  the  extent  defined  by  the
agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Laos.

"5.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  clauses  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessa-
tion of  hostilities  in  Viet-Nam  to  the  effect  that  no  military  base  under  the  con-
trol of  a  foreign  State  may  be  established  in  the  regrouping  zones  of  the  two
parties,  the  latter  having  the  obligation  to  see  that  the  zones  allotted  to  them  shall
not  constitute  part  of  any  military  alliance  and  shall  not  be  utilized  for  the  re-
sumption of  hostilities  or  in  the  service  of  an  aggressive  policy.  The  Conference
also  takes  note  of  the  declarations  of  the  Governments  of  Cambodia  and  Laos  to
the  effect  that  they  will  not  join  in  any  agreement  with  other  States  if  this
agreement  includes  the  obligation  to  participate  in  a  military  alliance  not  in  con-
formity with  the  principles  of  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  or,  in  the  case  of
Laos,  with  the  principles  of  the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Laos
or,  so  long  as  their  security  is  not  threatened,  the  obligation  to  establish  bases  on
Cambodian  or  Laotian  territory  for  the  military  forces  of  foreign  Powers.

"6.  The  Conference  recognizes  that  the  essential  purpose  of  the  agreement
relating  to  Viet-Nam  is  to  settle  military  questions  with  a  view  to  ending  hostili-
ties and  that  the  military  demarcation  line  is  provisional  and  should  not  in  any
way  be  interpreted  as  constituting  a  political  or  territorial  boundary.  The  Confer-
ence expresses  its  conviction  that  the  execution  of  the  provisions  set  out  in  the
present  declaration  and  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  creates  the
necessary  basis  for  the  achievement  in  the  near  future  of  a  political  settlement  in
Viet-Nam.

"7.  The  Conference  declares  that,  so  far  as  Viet-Nam  is  concerned,  the  settle-
ment of  political  problems,  effected  on  the  basis  of  respect  for  the  principles  of
independence,  unity  and  territorial  integrity,  shall  permit  the  Viet-Namese  peo-
ple to  enjoy  the  fundamental  freedoms,  guaranteed  by  democratic  institutions
established  as  a  result  of  free  general  elections  by  secret  ballot.  In  order  to  ensure
tl  ,  sufficient  progress  in  the  restoration  of  peace  has  been  made,  and  that  all
the  necessary  conditions  obtain  for  free  expression  of  the  national  will,  general
elections  shall  be  held  in  July  1956,  under  the  supervision  of  an  international
commission  composed  of  representatives  of  the  Member  States  of  the  Interna-
tional Supervisory  Commission,  referred  to  in  the  agreement  on  the  cessation  of
hostilities.  Consultations  will  be  held  on  this  subject  between  the  competent
representative  authorities  of  the  two  zones  from  20  July  1955  onwards.

"8.  The  provisions  of  the  agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  intended
to  ensure  the  protection  of  individuals  and  of  property  must  be  most  strictly
.  applied  and  must,  in  particular,  allow  everyone  in  Viet-Nam  to  decide  freely  in
which  zone  he  wishes  to  live.

"9.  The  competent  representative  authorities  of  the  Northern  and  Southern
zones  of  Viet-Nam,  as  well  as  the  authorities  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,  must  not
permit  any  individual  or  collective  reprisals  against  persons  who  have  col-


608 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

laborated  in  any  way  with  one  of  the  parties  during  the  war,  or  against  members
of  such  persons'  families.

"10.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declaration  of  the  Government  of  the
French  Republic  to  the  effect  that  it  is  ready  to  withdraw  its  troops  from  the
territory  of  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  at  the  request  of  the  governments
concerned  and  within  periods  which  shall  be  fixed  by  agreement  between  the
parties  except  in  the  cases  where,  by  agreement  between  the  two  parties,  a  certain
number  of  French  troops  shall  remain  at  specified  points  and  for  a  specified
time.

"11.  The  Conference  takes  note  of  the  declaration  of  the  French  Government
to  the  effect  that  for  the  settlement  of  all  the  problems  connected  with  the  re-
establishment  and  consolidation  of  peace  in  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  the
French  Government  will  proceed  from  the  principle  of  respect  for  the  independ-
ence and  sovereignty,  unity  and  territorial  integrity  of  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-
Nam.

"12.  In  their  relations  with  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam,  each  member  of
the  Geneva  Conference  undertakes  to  respect  the  sovereignty,  the  independence,
the  unity  and  the  territorial  integrity  of  the  above-mentioned  states,  and  to  refrain
from  any  interference  in  their  internal  affairs.

"13.  The  members  of  the  Conference  agree  to  consult  one  another  on  any
question  which  may  be  referred  to  them  by  the  International  Supervisory  Com-
mission in  order  to  study  such  measures  as  may  prove  necessary  to  ensure  that
the  agreements  on  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam
are  respected."

16.  Direct  Aid  to  the  Associated  States:  Communique  Regarding  Franco-
American  Conversations,  September  29,  1954,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,
October  11,  1954,  p.  534:

"Representatives  of  the  two  Governments  have  had  very  frank  and  useful  talks
which  have  shown  the  community  of  their  views,  and  are  in  full  agreement  on  the
objectives  to  be  attained.

"The  conclusion  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Collective  Defense  Treaty  in  Manila  on
September  8,  1954,  has  provided  a  firmer  basis  than  heretofore  to  assist  the  free
nations  of  Asia  in  developing  and  maintaining  their  independence  and  security.
The  representatives  of  France  and  the  United  States  wish  to  reaffirm  the  support
of  their  Governments  for  the  principles  of  self-government,  independence,  justice
and  liberty  proclaimed  by  the  Pacific  Charter  in  Manila  on  September  8,  1954.

"The  representatives  of  France  and  the  United  States  reaffirm  the  intention  of
their  governments  to  support  the  complete  independence  of  Cambodia,  Laos,  and
Viet-Nam.  Both  France  and  the  United  States  will  continue  to  assist  Cambodia,
Laos,  and  Viet-Nam  in  their  efforts  to  safeguard  their  freedom  and  independence
and  to  advance  the  welfare  of  their  peoples.  In  this  spirit  France  and  the  United
States  are  assisting  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  in  the  resettlement  of  the  Viet-
namese who  have  of  their  own  free  will  moved  to  free  Viet-Nam  and  who  already
number  some  300,000.

"In  order  to  contribute  to  the  security  of  the  area  pending  the  further  develop-
ment of  national  forces  for  this  purpose,  the  representatives  of  France  indicated
that  France  is  prepared  to  retain  forces  of  its  Expeditionary  Corps,  in  agree-
ment with  the  government  concerned,  within  the  limits  permitted  under  the
Geneva  agreements  and  to  an  extent  to  be  determined.  The  United  States  will
consider  the  question  of  financial  assistance  for  the  Expeditionary  Corps  in  these


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  609

circumstances  in  addition  to  support  for  the  forces  of  each  of  the  three  Asso-
ciated States.  These  questions  vitally  affect  each  of  the  three  Associated  States
and  are  being  fully  discussed  with  them.

"The  channel  for  French  and  United  States  economic  aid,  budgetary  support,
and  other  assistance  to  each  of  the  Associated  States  will  be  direct  to  that  state.
The  United  States  representatives  will  begin  discussions  soon  with  the  respective
governments  of  the  Associated  States  regarding  direct  aid.  The  methods  for  effi-
cient coordination  of  French  and  United  States  aid  programs  to  each  of  the
three  Associated  States  are  under  consideration  and  will  be  developed  in  dis-
cussions with  each  of  these  states.

"After  the  bilateral  talks,  the  chiefs  of  diplomatic  missions  in  Washington  of
Cambodia,  Laos  and  Viet  Nam  were  invited  to  a  final  meeting  to  have  an  ex-
change of  views  and  information  on  these  matters.  The  representatives  of  all
five  countries  are  in  complete  agreement  on  the  objectives  of  peace  and  freedom
to  be  achieved  in  Indochina."

17.  Aid  to  the  State  of  Viet-Nam:  Message  from  the  President  of  the  United
States  to  the  President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  Viet-Nam,  October
23,  1954,  Department  of  State  Bulletin,  November  15,  1954,  pp.  735-736:

"Dear  Mr.  President:  I  have  been  following  with  great  interest  the  course  of
developments  in  Viet-Nam,  particularly  since  the  conclusion  of  the  conference
at  Geneva.  The  implications  of  the  agreement  concerning  Viet-Nam  have  caused
grave  concern  regarding  the  future  of  a  country  temporarily  divided  by  an  arti-
ficial military  grouping,  weakened  by  a  long  and  exhausting  war  and  faced  with
enemies  without  and  by  their  subversive  collaborators  within.

"Your  recent  requests  for  aid  to  assist  in  the  formidable  project  of  the  move-
ment of  several  hundred  thousand  loyal  Vietnamese  citizens  away  from  areas
which  are  passing  under  a  de  facto  rule  and  political  ideology  which  they  abhor,
are  being  fulfilled.  I  am  glad  that  the  United  States  is  able  to  assist  in  this  hu-
manitarian effort.

"We  have  been  exploring  ways  and  means  to  permit  our  aid  to  Viet-Nam  to
be  more  effective  and  to  make  a  greater  contribution  to  the  welfare  and  stability
of  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam.  I  am,  accordingly,  instructing  the  American
Ambassador  to  Viet-Nam  to  examine  with  you  in  your  capacity  as  Chief  of
Government,  how  an  intelligent  program  of  American  aid  given  directly  to  your
Government  can  serve  to  assist  Viet-Nam  in  its  present  hour  of  trial,  provided
that  your  Government  is  prepared  to  give  assurances  as  to  the  standards  of  per-
formance it  would  be  able  to  maintain  in  the  event  such  aid  were  supplied.

"The  purpose  of  this  offer  is  to  assist  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  in  de-
veloping and  maintaining  a  strong,  viable  state,  capable  of  resisting  attempted
subversion  or  aggression  through  military  means."

*  *  *

18.  Address  by  President  Eisenhower  before  the  American  Society  of  News-
paper Editors,  April  21,  1956,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  1956,  p.
417  and  p.  423:

*  *  *

^ "The  ideas  of  freedom  are  at  work,  even  where  they  are  officially  rejected.
lAs  we  know,  Lenin  and  his  successors,  true  to  Communist  doctrine,  based  the
Soviet  State  on  the  denial  of  these  ideas.  Yet  the  new  Soviet  rulers  who  took


610 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/VoL  I

over  three  years  ago  have  had  to  reckon  with  the  force  of  these  ideas,  both  at
home  and  abroad.

"The  situation  the  new  regime  inherited  from  the  dead  Stalin  apparently
caused  it  to  reappraise  many  of  his  mistakes.

"Having  lived  under  his  one-man  rule,  they  have  espoused  the  concept  of
'collective'  dictatorship.  But  dictatorship  it  still  remains.  They  have  denounced
Stalin  for  some  of  the  more  flagrant  excesses  of  his  brutal  rule.  But  the  individ-
ual citizen  still  lacks  the  most  elementary  safeguards  of  a  free  society.  The
desire  for  a  better  life  is  still  being  sacrificed  to  the  insatiable  demands  of  the
state.

"In  foreign  affairs,  the  new  regime  has  seemingly  moderated  the  policy  of
violence  and  hostility  which  has  caused  the  free  nations  to  band  together  to
defend  their  independence  and  liberties.  For  the  present,  at  least,  it  relies  more
on  political  and  economic  means  to  spread  its  influence  abroad.  In  the  last  year,
it  has  embarked  upon  a  campaign  of  lending  and  trade  agreements  directed
especially  toward  the  newly-developing  countries.

"It  is  still  too  early  to  assess  in  any  final  way  whether  the  Soviet  regime  wishes
to  provide  a  real  basis  for  stable  and  enduring  relations."

He  *  *

"For  example,  why  was  there  such  a  sudden  change  in  the  Soviet  policy?
Their  basic  air  is  to  conquer  the  world,  through  world  revolution  if  possible,
but  in  any  way.  Anyone  that  has  read  any  of  their  books  knows  that  their  doc-
trine is  lies,  deceit,  subversion,  war  if  necessary,  but  in  any  way:  conquer  the
world.  And  that  has  not  changed.

"But  they  changed  their  policies  very  markedly.  They  were  depending  on
force  and  the  threat  of  force  only.  And  suddenly  they  have  gone  into  an  entirely
different  attitude.  They  are  going  into  the  economic  and  political  fields  and  are
really  wearing  smiles  around  the  world  instead  of  some  of  the  bitter  faces  to
which  we  have  become  accustomed.

"Now  any  time  a  policy  is  winning  and  the  people  are  completely  satisfied
with  it,  you  don't  change.  You  change  policies  that  markedly,  you  destroy  old
idols  as  they  have  been  busy  doing,  only  when  you  think  a  great  change  is
necessary.  So  I  think  we  can  take  some  comfort;  at  least  we  can  give  careful
consideration  to  the  very  fact  they  had  to  change  their  policies.

"And  I  think  the  whole  free  world  is  trying  to  test  and  determine  the  sin-
cerity of  that  plan,  in  order  that  the  free  nations  themselves,  in  pursuing  their
own  policies,  will  make  certain  that  they  are  not  surprised  in  any  place.

"We  look  at  some  of  the  advances  we  think  they  have  made,  but  let  us  re-
member: they  did  not  conquer  Korea,  which  they  announced  they  were  going
to  do.  They  were  stopped  finally  in  the  northern  part  of  Vietnam;  and  Diem,
the  leader  of  the  Southern  Vietnamese,  is  doing  splendidly  and  a  much  better
figure  in  that  field  than  anyone  even  dared  to  hope.

"The  Iranian  situation  which  only  a  few  short  years  ago  looked  so  desperate
that  each  morning  we  thought  we  would  wake  up  and  read  in  our  newspapers
that  Mossadegh  had  let  them  under  the  Iron  Curtain,  has  not  become  satisfac-
tory, but  that  crisis  has  passed  and  it  is  much  better."

* *  *

19. United  States  Policy  with  Respect  to  Viet-Nam:  Address  by  the  Assistant
Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs  (this  address  by  Assistant  Sec-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  611

retary  of  State  Robertson  restated  American  policy  and  was  delivered  at
a  time  of  relative  stability  in  South  Viet-Nam) ,  Washington,  June  1,  1956,
Department  of  State  Bulletin,  June  11,  1956,  pp.  972-974:

"This  past  March,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  accompanying  the  Secretary  of  State
on  his  visit  to  Saigon  where  we  conversed  with  President  Diem  on  the  present
and  future  problems  of  Viet-Nam.  I  was  struck,  as  so  many  other  recent  ob-
servers have  been,  at  the  progress  Free  Viet-Nam  has  made  in  a  few  short
months  toward  stability,  security,  and  strength.  President  Diem  seemed  to  reflect
this  progress  in  his  own  person.  On  the  occasion  of  our  earlier  visit  some  15
months  ago,  he  seemed  tense  and  gravely  concerned  about  the  problems  facing
Viet-Nam.  This  time  he  was  reposed,  poised,  and  appeared  confident  of  the  fu-
ture of  his  country.

"Among  the  factors  that  explain  the  remarkable  rise  of  Free  Viet-Nam  from
the  shambles  created  by  8  years  of  murderous  civil  and  international  war,  the
division  of  the  country  at  Geneva  and  the  continuing  menace  of  predatory  com-
munism, there  is  in  the  first  place  the  dedication,  courage,  and  resourcefulness
of  President  Diem  himself.  In  him,  his  country  has  found  a  truly  worthy  leader
whose  integrity  and  devotion  to  his  country's  welfare  have  become  generally
recognized  among  his  people.  Asia  has  given  us  in  President  Diem  another
great  figure;  and  the  entire  free  world  has  become  the  richer  for  his  example  of
determination  and  moral  fortitude.  There  is  no  more  dramatic  example  of  this
fortitude  than  President  Diem's  decisions  during  the  tense  and  vital  days  of  the
battle  against  the  parasitic  politico-religious  sects  in  the  city  of  Saigon  in  the
spring  of  1955.  These  decisions  were  to  resist  the  multiple  pressures  to  com-
promise that  were  building  up  around  him,  and  to  struggle  to  the  victorious  end
for  the  sake  of  a  just  cause.  The  free  world  owes  him  a  debt  of  gratitude  for  his
determined  stand  at  that  fateful  hour.

"Consider  Viet-Nam  at  three  stages  in  its  recent  history:

"First,  in  mid- 1954,  partitioned  by  fiat  of  the  great  powers  against  the  will  of
the  Vietnamese  people,  devoid  of  governmental  machinery  or  military  strength,
drifting  without  leadership  and  without  hope  in  the  backwash  of  the  defeat  ad-
ministered by  the  combined  weight  of  Communist-impressed  infantry  and  of
Chinese  and  Russian  arms.

"Secondly,  in  early  1955,  faced  with  the  military  and  subversive  threat  of  the
Communists  north  of  the  17th  parallel,  confronted  with  internal  strife,  its  gov-
ernment challenged  by  the  armed,  self-seeking  politico-religious  sects,  its  army
barely  reformed  and  of  uncertain  loyalty,  assailed  from  within  by  the  most  diffi-
cult problems,  including  that  of  having  to  absorb  the  sudden  influx  of  three-
quarters  of  a  million  refugees  who  would  rather  leave  their  ancestral  lands  and
homes  than  suffer  life  under  Communist  tyranny:

"And  finally  Viet-Nam  today,  in  mid- 1956,  progressing  rapidly  to  the  estab-
lishment of  democratic  institutions  by  elective  processes,  its  people  resuming
peaceful  pursuits,  its  army  growing  in  effectiveness,  sense  of  mission,  and  morale,
the  puppet  Vietnamese  politicians  discredited,  the  refugees  well  on  the  way  to
permanent  resettlement,  the  countryside  generally  orderly  and  calm,  the  preda-
tory sects  eliminated  and  their  venal  leaders  exiled  or  destroyed.

"Perhaps  no  more  eloquent  testimony  to  the  new  state  of  affairs  in  Viet-Nam
could  be  cited  than  the  voice  of  the  people  themselves  as  expressed  in  their  free
election  of  last  March.  At  that  time  the  last  possible  question  as  to  the  feeling
of  the  people  was  erased  by  an  overwhelming  majority  for  President  Diem's
leadership.  The  fact  that  the  Viet  Minh  was  unable  to  carry  out  its  open  threats


612 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

to  sabotage  these  elections  is  impressive  evidence  of  the  stability  and  prestige  of
the  government.

"The  United  States  is  proud  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  effort  of  the  Vietnamese
people  under  President  Diem  to  establish  freedom,  peace,  and  the  good  life.  The
United  States  wishes  to  continue  to  assist  and  to  be  a  loyal  and  trusted  friend  of
Viet-Nam.

"Our  policies  in  Viet-Nam  may  be  simply  stated  as  follows:

"To  support  a  friendly  non-Communist  government  in  Viet-Nam  and  to  help
it  diminish  and  eventually  eradicate  Communist  subversion  and  influence.

"To  help  the  Government  of  Viet-Nam  establish  the,  forces  necessary  for  inter-
nal security.

"To  encourage  support  for  Free  Viet-Nam  by  the  non-Communist  world.

"To  aid  in  the  rehabilitation  and  reconstruction  of  a  country  and  people
ravaged  by  8  ruinous  years  of  civil  and  international  war.

"Our  efforts  are  directed  first  of  all  toward  helping  to  sustain  the  internal
security  forces  consisting  of  a  regular  army  of  about  150,000  men,  a  mobile
civil  guard  of  some  45,000,  and  local  defense  units  which  are  being  formed  to
give  protection  against  subversion  on  the  village  level.  We  are  providing  budg-
etary support  and  equipment  for  these  forces  and  have  a  mission  assisting  the
training  of  the  army.  We  are  also  helping  to  organize,  train,  and  equip  the  Viet-
namese police  force.  The  refugees  who  have  fled  to  South  Viet-Nam  to  escape
the  Viet  Minh  are  being  resettled  on  productive  lands  with  the  assistance  of
funds  made  available  by  our  aid  program.  In  various  ways  our  aid  program  also
provides  assistance  to  the  Vietnamese  Government  designed  to  strengthen  the
economy  and  provide  a  better  future  for  the  common  people  of  the  country.
The  Vietnamese  are  increasingly  giving  attention  to  the  basic  development  of
the  Vietnamese  economy  and  to  projects  that  may  contribute  directly  to  that
goal.  We  give  our  aid  and  counsel  to  this  program  only  as  freely  invited.

"I  do  not  wish  to  minimize  the  magnitude  of  the  task  that  still  remains  and
of  the  problems  that  still  confront  this  staunch  and  valiant  member  of  the  free
world  fighting  for  its  independence  on  the  threshold  of  the  Communist  heart-
land of  Asia.

"The  Communist  conspiracy  continues  to  threaten  Free  Viet-Nam.  With  mon-
strous effrontery,  the  Communist  conspirators  at  Hanoi  accuse  Free  Viet-Nam
and  its  friends  of  violating  the  armistice  provisions  which  the  Vietnamese  and
their  friends,  including  ourselves,  have  scrupulously  respected  despite  the  fact
that  neither  the  Vietnamese  nor  ourselves  signed  the  Geneva  Accords  while  they,
the  Communists  who  have  solemnly  undertaken  to  be  bound  by  these  provisions,
have  violated  them  in  the  most  blatant  fashion.

"The  facts  are  that  while  on  the  one  hand  the  military  potential  of  Free  Viet-
Nam  has  been  drastically  reduced  by  the  withdrawal  of  nearly  200,000  members
of  the  French  Expeditionary  Corps  and  by  the  reduction  of  the  Vietnamese
Army  by  more  than  50,000  from  the  time  of  the  armistice  to  the  present  as
well  as  by  the  outshipment  from  Viet-Nam  since  the  cessation  of  hostilities  of
over  $200  million  worth  of  war  equipment,  we  have  on  the  other  hand  reports
of  steady  constant  growth  of  the  warmaking  potential  of  the  Communists  north
of  the  17th  parallel.

"Our  reports  reveal  that  in  complete  disregard  of  its  obligations,  the  Viet  Minh
have  imported  voluminous  quantities  of  arms  across  the  Sino-Viet  Minh  border
and  have  imported  a  constant  stream  of  Chinese  Communist  military  personnel
to  work  on  railroads,  to  rebuild  roads,  to  establish  airports,  and  to  work  on  other


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  613

projects  contributing  to  the  growth  of  the  military  potential  of  the  zone  under
Communist  occupation,

"As  so  eloquently  stated  by  the  British  Government  in  a  diplomatic  note  re-
leased to  the  press  and  sent  to  Moscow  in  April  of  this  year,  and  I  quote:

"  'The  Viet  Minh  army  has  been  so  greatly  strengthened  by  the  embodiment  and
re-equipment  of  irregular  forces  that  instead  of  the  7  Viet  Minh  divisions  in  ex-
istence in  July  1954  there  are  now  no  less  than  20.  This  striking  contrast  between
massive  military  expansion  in  the  North  and  the  withdrawal  and  reduction  of
: military  forces  in  the  South  speaks  for  itself.'

"By  lies,  propaganda,  force,  and  deceit,  the  Communists  in  Hanoi  would  un-
dermine Free  Viet-Nam,  whose  fall  they  have  been  unable  to  secure  by  their
maneuverings  on  the  diplomatic  front.  These  people,  whose  crimes  against  suf-
fering humanity  are  so  vividly  described  in  the  book  by  Lt.  Dooley  who  addressed
: you  this  morning,  have  sold  their  country  to  Peiping.  They  have  shamelessly
: followed  all  the  devious  zigzags  of  the  Communist-bloc  line  so  that  their  al-
j liance  with  Communist  China  and  the  Soviet  Union  is  firmly  consolidated.  These
j are  the  people  who  are  now  inviting  President  Diem  to  join  them  in  a  coalition
I government  to  be  set  up  through  so-called  'free  elections.'

I  "President  Diem  and  the  Government  of  Free  Viet-Nam  reaffirmed  on  April
j  6  of  this  year  and  on  other  occasions  their  desire  to  seek  the  reunification  of
I  Viet-Nam  by  peaceful  means.  In  this  goal,  we  support  them  fully.  We  hope  and
I  pray  that  the  partition  of  Viet-Nam,  imposed  against  the  will  of  the  Vietnamese
I  people,  wiil  speedily  come  to  an  end.  For  our  part  we  believe  in  free  elections,
i  and  we  support  President  Diem  fully  in  his  position  that  if  elections  are  to  be
I  held,  there  first  must  be  conditions  which  preclude  intimidation  or  coercion  of
the  electorate.  Unless  such  conditions  exist  there  can  be  no  free  choice,

"May  those  leaders  of  the  north  in  whom  the  spirit  of  true  patriotism  still
j  survives  realize  the  futility  of  the  Communist  efforts  to  subvert  Free  Viet-Nam
!  by  force  or  guile.  May  they  force  the  abandonment  of  these  efforts  and  bring
i  about  the  peaceful  demobilization  of  the  large  standing  armies  of  the  Viet  Minh.
I  May  they,  above  all,  return  to  the  just  cause  of  all  those  who  want  to  reunify
;  their  country  in  peace  and  independence  and  for  the  good  of  all  the  people  of
i  Viet-Nam."

I

I  20. Special  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the  Mutual  Security  Programs,  May
21,  1957,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents — Eisenhower,  1957,  p.  373.

*  *  *

"First  is  defense  assistance — our  and  other  free  nation's  common  effort  to
counter  the  Soviet-Chinese  military  power  and  the  drive  to  dominate  the  world.
I  That  power  continues  to  grow — in  armaments,  in  nuclear  capability,  in  its  eco-
nomic base.  The  Communist  goal  of  conquering  the  world  has  never  changed,
i  "For  our  nation  alone  to  undertake  to  withstand  and  turn  back  Communist
imperialism  would  impose  colossal  defense  spending  on  our  people.  It  would
ultimately  cost  us  our  freedom.

"For  other  free  nations  to  attempt  individually  to  counter  this  menace  would
be  impossible.

"We  in  our  own  interest,  and  other  free  nations  in  their  own  interest,  have
^  therefore  joined  in  the  building  and  maintenance  of  a  system  of  collective  se-
'  curity  in  which  the  effort  of  each  nation  strengthens  all.  Today  that  system  has


614 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

become  the  keystone  of  our  own  and  their  security  in  a  tense  and  uncertain
world."

*  *  *

"The  second  major  element  of  our  mutual  security  programs  is  economic
development  assistance  and  technical  cooperation.

"This  part  of  the  programs  helps  less  developed  countries  make  the  social  and
political  progress  needed  to  preserve  their  independence.  Unless  these  peoples
can  hope  for  reasonable  economic  advance,  the  danger  will  be  acute  that  their
governments  will  be  subverted  by  Communism.

"To  millions  of  people  close  to  the  Soviet  and  Chinese  Communist  borders
political  freedom  is  still  new.  To  many  it  must  still  prove  its  worth.  To  survive
it  must  show  the  way  to  another  and  equally  essential  freedom — freedom  from
the  poverty  and  hopelessness  in  which  these  peoples  have  lived  for  centuries.
With  their  new  freedom  their  desire  and  their  determination  to  develop  their
economies  are  intense.  They  are  fixed  upon  raising  their  standards  of  living.  Yet
they  lack  sufficient  resources.  Their  need  for  help  is  desperate — both  for  tech-
nical know-how  and  capital.

"Lacking  outside  help  these  new  nations  cannot  advance  economically  as
they  must  to  maintain  their  independence.  Their  moderate  leaders  must  be  able
to  obtain  sufficient  help  from  the  free  world  to  offer  convincing  hope  of  progress.
Otherwise  their  peoples  will  surely  turn  elsewhere.  Extremist  elements  would
then  seize  power,  whip  up  national  hatreds  and  incite  civil  dissension  and  strife.
The  danger  would  be  grave  that  these  free  governments  would  disappear.  In-
stability and  threats  to  peace  would  result.  In  our  closely-knit  world,  such  events
would  deeply  concern  and  potentially  endanger  our  own  people.

"The  help  toward  economic  development  that  we  provide  these  countries  is
a  means  to  forestall  such  crises.  Our  assistance  is  thus  insurance  against  rising
tensions  and  increased  dangers  of  war,  and  against  defense  costs  that  would
skyrocket  here  at  home  should  tragedy  befall  these  struggling  peoples.

"These  revolutionary  developments  in  distant  parts  of  the  world  are  borne  on
the  crest  of  the  wave  sent  out  a  century  and  a  half  ago  by  the  example  of  our
own  successful  struggle  for  freedom.  The  determination  of  the  people  of  these
nations  to  better  their  lot  and  to  preserve  their  newly  gained  liberty  awakens
memories  of  our  own  noblest  traditions.  Our  helping  hand  in  their  struggle  is
dictated  by  more  than  our  own  self-interest.  It  is  also  a  mirror  of  the  character
and  highest  ideals  of  the  people  who  have  built  and  preserved  this  nation."

*  *  *

"In  the  many  unstable  regions  of  the  world,  Communist  power  is  today
probing  constantly.  Every  weakness  of  free  nations  is  being  exploited  in  every
possible  way.  It  is  inevitable  that  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  such  critical  situa-
tions in  the  future.  In  America's  own  interest,  we  must  stand  ready  to  furnish
special  assistance  when  threatened  disaster  abroad  foretells  danger  to  our  own
vital  concerns."

*  *  *

21.  Radio  and  Television  address  to  the  American  People  on  the  Need  for
Mutual  Security  in  Waging  the  Peace,  May  21,  1957,  Public  Papers  of  the
President — Eisenhower,  1957,  p.  386.

*  *  *


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  615

"The  common  label  of  'foreign  aid'  is  gravely  misleading — for  it  inspires  a
picture  of  bounty  for  foreign  countries  at  the  expense  of  our  own.  No  miscon-
ception could  be  further  from  reality.  These  programs  serve  our  own  basic  na-
tional and  personal  interests.

"They  do  this  both  immediately  and  lastingly.

"In  the  long  term,  the  ending  or  the  weakening  of  these  programs  would
i vastly  increase  the  risk  of  future  war.

"And — in  the  immediate  sense — it  would  impose  upon  us  additional  defense
j  expenditures  many  times  greater  than  the  cost  of  mutual  security  today.
I "This  evening  it  is  my  purpose  to  give  you  incontestable  proof  of  these  as-
sertions.

"We  have,  during  this  century,  twice  spent  our  blood  and  our  treasure  fighting
in  Europe — and  twice  in  Asia.  We  fought  because  we  saw — too  late  to  prevent
war — that  our  own  peace  and  security  were  imperilled,  by  the  urgent  danger —
or  the  ruthless  conquest — of  other  lands.
I  "We  have  gained  wisdom  from  that  suffering.  We  know,  and  the  world  knows,
that  the  American  people  will  fight  hostile  and  aggressive  despotisms  when  their
force  is  thrown  against  the  barriers  of  freedom,  when  they  seek  to  gain  the
J  high  ground  of  power  from  which  to  destroy  us.  But  we  also  know  that  to  fight
is  the  most  costly  way  to  keep  America  secure  and  free.  Even  an  America
victorious  in  atomic  war  could  scarcely  escape  disastrous  destruction  of  her
cities  and  a  fearful  loss  of  life.  Victory  itself  could  be  agony.

"Plainly,  we  must  seek  less  tragic,  less  costly  ways  to  defend  ourselves.  We
I must  recognize  that  whenever  any  country  falls  under  the  domination  of  Com-
i munism,  the  strength  of  the  Free  World — and  of  America — is  by  that  amount
weakened  and  Communism  strengthened.  If  this  process,  through  our  neglect
or  indifference,  should  proceed  unchecked,  our  continent  would  be  gradually  en-
' circled.  Our  safety  depends  upon  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  Communist
design  for  such  encirclement  must  be  stopped  before  it  gains  momentum — be-
fore it  is  again  too  late  to  save  the  peace.
I "This  recognition  dictates  two  tasks.  We  must  maintain  a  common  world-
j wide  defense  against  the  menace  of  International  Communism.  And  we  must
I demonstrate  and  spread  the  blessings  of  liberty — to  be  cherished  by  those  who

!'  enjoy  these  blessings,  to  be  sought  by  those  now  denied  them.
"This  is  not  a  new  policy  nor  a  partisan  policy.
"This  is  a  policy  for  America  that  began  ten  years  ago  when  a  Democratic
\  President  and  a  Republican  Congress  united  in  an  historic  declaration.  They
I  then  declared  that  the  independence  and  survival  of  two  countries  menaced  by
Communist  aggression — Greece  and  Turkey — were  so  important  to  the  security
of  America  that  we  would  give  them  military  and  economic  aid.

"That  policy  saved  those  nations.  And  it  did  so  without  the  cost  of  American
I  lives.

I "That  policy  has  since  been  extended  to  all  critical  areas  of  the  world.  It  rec-
ognizes that  America  cannot  exist  as  an  island  of  freedom  in  a  surrounding  sea

!  of  Communism.  It  is  expressed  concretely  by  mutual  security  treaties  embracing
42  other  nations.  And  these  treaties  reflect  a  solemn  finding  by  the  President

j  and  by  the  Senate  that  our  own  peace  would  be  endangered  if  any  of  these  coun-
tries were  conquered  by  International  Communism.

"The  lesson  of  the  defense  of  Greece  and  Turkey  ten  years  ago  has  since  been
repeated  in  the  saving  of  other  lands  and  peoples.  A  recent  example  is  the  South-

,  east  Asian  country  of  Viet-Nam,  whose  President  has  just  visited  us  as  our
honored  guest.


616 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"Two  years  ago  it  appeared  that  all  Southeast  Asia  might  be  overrun  by  the
forces  of  International  Communism.  The  freedom  and  security  of  nations  for
which  we  had  fought  throughout  World  War  II  and  the  Korean  War  again  stood
in  danger.  The  people  of  Viet-Nam  responded  bravely — under  steadfast  leader-
ship.

"But  bravery  alone  could  not  have  prevailed.

"We  gave  military  and  economic  assistance  to  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam.  We
entered  into  a  treaty — the  Southeast  Asia  Security  Treaty — which  plainly  warned
that  an  armed  attack  against  this  area  would  endanger  our  own  peace  and  safety,
and  that  we  would  act  accordingly.  Thus  Viet-Nam  has  been  saved  for  freedom.

"This  is  one  of  the  nations  where  we  have  been  spending  the  largest  amounts
of  so-called  'foreign  aid.'  What  could  be  plainer  than  the  fact  that  this  aid  has
served  not  only  the  safety  of  another  nation — but  also  the  security  of  our  own.

"The  issue,  then,  is  solemn  and  serious  and  clear.

"When  our  young  men  were  dying  in  the  Argonne  in  1918  and  on  the  beaches
of  Normandy  and  in  the  Western  Pacific  in  1944  and  at  Pusan  in  1950 — and
when  the  battlefields  of  Europe  and  Africa  and  Asia  were  strewn  with  billions  of
dollars  worth  of  American  military  equipment,  representing  the  toil  and  the  skills
of  millions  of  workers — no  one  for  an  instant  doubted  the  need  and  the  rightness
of  this  sacrifice  of  blood  and  labor  and  treasure.

"Precisely  the  same  needs  and  purposes  are  served  by  our  Mutual  Security
programs  today — whether  these  operate  on  a  military  or  an  economic  front.  For
on  both  fronts  they  are  truly  defense  programs."

* *  *


22.  Radio  and  Television  Report  to  the  American  People  Regarding  the  Situa-
tion in  the  Formosa  Straits,  September  11,  1958,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents — Eisenhower,  1958,  p.  694.

"My  Friends:

"Tonight  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  the  situation,  dangerous  to  peace,  which
has  developed  in  the  Formosa  Straits,  in  the  Far  East.  My  purpose  is  to  give  you
its  basic  facts  and  then  my  conclusions  as  to  our  nation's  proper  course  of  action.

"To  begin,  let  us  remember  that  traditionally  this  country  and  its  government
have  always  been  passionately  devoted  to  peace  with  honor,  as  they  are  now.
We  shall  never  resort  to  force  in  settlement  of  differences  except  when  com-
pelled to  do  so  to  defense  against  aggression  and  to  protect  our  vital  interests.

"This  means  that,  in  our  view,  negotiations  and  conciliation  should  never  be
abandoned  in  favor  of  force  and  strife.  While  we  shall  never  timidly  retreat  be-
fore the  threat  of  armed  aggression,  we  would  welcome  in  the  present  circum-
stances negotiations  that  could  have  a  fruitful  result  in  preserving  the  peace  of
the  Formosa  area  and  reaching  a  solution  that  could  be  acceptable  to  all  parties
concerned  including,  of  course,  our  ally,  the  Republic  of  China.


"On  the  morning  of  August  23rd  the  Chinese  Communists  opened  a  severe
bombardment  of  Quemoy,  an  island  in  the  Formosa  Straits  off  the  China  Coast.
Another  island  in  the  same  area,  Matsu,  was  also  attacked.  These  two  islands
have  always  been  a  part  of  Free  China — never  under  Communist  control.

"This  bombardment  of  Quemoy  has  been  going  on  almost  continuously  ever
since.  Also  Chinese  Communists  have  been  using  their  naval  craft  to  try  to  break


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  617

up  the  supplying  of  Quemoy,  with  its  125,000  people.  Their  normal  source  of
supply  is  by  sea  from  Formosa,  where  the  government  of  Free  China  is  now
located.

"Chinese  Communists  say  that  they  will  capture  Quemoy.  So  far  they  have  not
actually  attempted  a  landing,  but  their  bombardment  has  caused  great  damage.
Over  1,000  people  have  been  killed  or  wounded.  In  large  part  these  are  civilians.

"This  is  a  tragic  affair.  It  is  shocking  that  in  this  day  and  age  naked  force
should  be  used  for  such  aggressive  purposes.

"But  this  is  not  the  first  time  that  the  Chinese  Communists  have  acted  in  this
way.

"In  1950  they  attacked  and  tried  to  conquer  the  Republic  of  Korea.  At  that
time  President  Truman  announced  the  intention  of  protecting  Formosa,  the
principal  area  still  held  by  Free  China,  because  of  the  belief  that  Formosa's  safety
was  vital  to  the  security  of  the  United  States  and  the  free  world.  Our  government
has  adhered  firmly  ever  since  1950  to  that  policy.

"In  1953  and  1954  the  Chinese  Communists  took  an  active  part  in  the  war
in  Indo-China  against  Viet  Nam.

"In  the  fall  of  1954  they  attacked  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  the  same  two  islands
they  are  attacking  now.  They  broke  ofi;  that  attack  when,  in  January  1955,  the
Congress  and  I  agreed  that  we  should  firmly  support  Free  China.

"Since  then,  for  about  four  years,  Chinese  Communists  have  not  used  force
for  aggressive  purposes.  We  have  achieved  an  armistice  in  Korea  which  stopped
the  fighting  there  in  1953.  There  is  a  1954  armistice  in  Viet  Nam;  and  since
1955  there  has  been  quiet  in  the  Formosa  Straits  area.  We  had  hoped  that  the
Chinese  Communists  were  becoming  peaceful — but  it  seems  not.

"So  the  world  is  again  faced  with  the  problem  of  armed  aggression.  Powerful
dictatorships  are  attacking  an  exposed,  but  free,  area.

"What  should  we  do?

"Shall  we  take  the  position  that,  submitting  to  threat,  it  is  better  to  surrender
pieces  of  free  territory  in  the  hope  that  this  will  satisfy  the  appetite  of  the  ag-
gressor and  we  shall  have  peace?

"Do  we  not  still  remember  that  the  name  of  'Munich'  symbolizes  a  vain  hope
of  appeasing  dictators?

"At  that  time,  the  policy  of  appeasement  was  tried  and  it  failed.  Prior  to  the
second  World  War,  Mussolini  seized  Ethiopia.  In  the  Far  East,  Japanese  war-
lords were  grabbing  Manchuria  by  force.  Hitler  sent  his  armed  forces  into  the
Rhineland  in  violation  of  the  Versailles  Treaty.  Then  he  annexed  little  Austria.
When  he  got  away  with  that,  he  next  turned  to  Czechoslovakia  and  began  taking
it,  bit  by  bit.

"In  the  face  of  all  these  attacks  on  freedom  by  the  dictators,  the  powerful
democracies  stood  aside.  It  seemed  that  Ethiopia  and  Manchuria  were  too  far
away  and  too  unimportant  to  fight  about.  In  Europe,  appeasement  was  looked
upon  as  the  way  to  peace.  The  democracies  felt  that  if  they  tried  to  stop  what
was  going  on,  that  would  mean  war.  But  because  of  these  repeated  retreats,  war
came  just  the  same.

"If  the  democracies  had  stood  firm  at  the  beginning,  almost  surely  there  would
have  been  no  World  War.  Instead  they  gave  such  an  appearance  of  weakness  and
timidity  that  aggressive  rulers  were  encouraged  to  overrun  one  country  after
another.  In  the  end  the  democracies  saw  that  their  very  survival  was  at  stake.
They  had  no  alternative  but  to  turn  and  fight  in  what  proved  to  be  the  most
terrible  war  that  the  world  has  ever  known.

"I  know  something  about  that  war,  and  I  never  want  to  see  that  history  re-


618 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

peated.  But,  my  fellow  Americans,  it  certainly  can  be  repeated  if  the  peace-
loving  democratic  nations  again  fearfully  practice  a  policy  of  standing  idly  by
while  big  aggressors  use  armed  force  to  conquer  the  small  and  weak.

"Let  us  suppose  that  the  Chinese  Communists  conquer  Quemoy.  Would  that
be  the  end  of  the  story?  We  know  that  it  would  not  be  the  end  of  the  story.
History  teaches  that  when  powerful  despots  can  gain  something  through  aggres-
sion, they  try,  by  the  same  methods,  to  gain  more  and  more  and  more.

"Also,  we  have  more  to  guide  us  than  the  teachings  of  history.  We  have  the
statements,  the  boastings,  of  the  Chinese  Communists  themselves.  They  frankly
say  that  their  present  military  effort  is  part  of  a  program  to  conquer  Formosa.

"It  is  as  certain  as  can  be  that  the  shooting  which  the  Chinese  Communists
started  on  August  23rd  had  as  its  purpose  not  just  the  taking  of  the  island  of
Quemoy.  It  is  part  of  what  is  indeed  an  ambitious  plan  of  armed  conquest.

"This  plan  would  liquidate  all  of  the  free  world  positions  in  the  Western
Pacific  area  and  bring  them  under  captive  governments  which  would  be  hostile
to  the  United  States  and  the  free  world.  Thus  the  Chinese  and  Russian  Com-
munists would  come  to  dominate  at  least  the  Western  half  of  the  now  friendly
Pacific  Ocean.

"So,  aggression  by  ruthless  despots  again  imposes  a  clear  danger  to  the
United  States  and  to  the  free  world.

"In  this  effort  the  Chinese  Communists  and  the  Soviet  Union  appear  to  be
working  hand  in  hand.  Last  Monday  I  received  a  long  letter  on  this  subject
from  Prime  Minister  Khrushchev.  He  warned  the  United  States  against  helping
its  allies  in  the  Western  Pacific.  He  said  that  we  should  not  support  the  Republic
of  China  and  the  Republic  of  Korea.  He  contended  that  we  should  desert
them,  return  all  of  our  naval  forces  to  our  home  bases,  and  leave  our  friends  in
the  Far  East  to  face,  alone,  the  combined  military  power  of  the  Soviet  Union
and  Communist  China.

"Does  Mr.  Khrushchev  think  that  we  have  so  soon  forgotten  Korea?

"I  must  say  to  you  very  frankly  and  soberly,  my  friends,  the  United  States
cannot  accept  the  result  that  the  Communists  seek.  Neither  can  we  show,  now,
a  weakness  of  purpose — a  timidity — which  would  surely  lead  them  to  move
more  aggressively  against  us  and  our  friends  in  the  Western  Pacific  area.

"If  the  Chinese  Communists  have  decided  to  risk  a  war,  it  is  not  because
Quemoy  itself  is  so  valuable  to  them.  They  have  been  getting  along  without
Quemoy  ever  since  they  seized  the  China  mainland  nine  years  ago.

"If  they  have  now  decided  to  risk  a  war,  it  can  only  be  because  they,  and
their  Soviet  allies,  have  decided  to  find  out  whether  threatening  war  is  a  policy
from  which  they  can  make  big  gains.

"If  that  is  their  decision,  then  a  Western  Pacific  Munich  would  not  buy  us
peace  or  security.  It  would  encourage  the  aggressors.  It  would  dismay  our
friends  and  allies  there.  If  history  teaches  anything,  appeasement  would  make  it
more  likely  that  we  would  have  to  fight  a  major  war.


"Congress  has  made  clear  its  recognition  that  the  security  of  the  Western
Pacific  is  vital  to  the  security  of  the  United  States  and  that  we  should  be  firm.
The  Senate  has  ratified,  by  overwhelming  vote,  security  treaties  with  the  Re-
public of  China  covering  Formosa  and  the  Pescadores,  and  also  the  Republic
of  Korea.  We  have  a  mutual  security  treaty  with  the  Republic  of  the  Philippines,
which  could  be  next  in  line  for  conquest  if  Formosa  fell  into  hostile  hands.
These  treaties  commit  the  United  States  to  the  defense  of  the  treaty  areas.  In


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  619

addition,  there  is  a  Joint  Resolution  which  the  Congress  passed  in  January  1955
dealing  specifically  with  Formosa  and  the  offshore  islands  of  Free  China  in  the
Formosa  Straits.

"At  that  time  the  situation  was  similar  to  what  it  is  today.

"Congress  then  voted  the  President  authority  to  employ  the  armed  forces  of
the  United  States  for  the  defense  not  only  of  Formosa  but  of  related  positions
such  as  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  if  I  believed  their  defense  to  be  appropriate  in
assuring  the  defense  of  Formosa.

"I  might  add  that  the  mandate  from  the  Congress  was  given  by  an  almost
unanimous  bipartisan  vote.

"Today,  the  Chinese  Communists  announce,  repeatedly  and  officially,  that
their  military  operations  against  Quemoy  are  preliminary  to  attack  on  Formosa.
So  it  is  clear  that  the  Formosa  Straits  Resolution  of  1955  applies  to  the  present
situation.

"If  the  present  bombardment  and  harassment  of  Quemoy  should  be  converted
into  a  major  assault,  with  which  the  local  defenders  could  not  cope,  then  we
would  be  compelled  to  face  precisely  the  situation  that  Congress  visualized  in
1955.

"I  have  repeatedly  sought  to  make  clear  our  position  in  this  matter  so  that
there  would  not  be  danger  of  Communist  miscalculation.  The  Secretary  of
State  on  September  fourth  made  a  statement  to  the  same  end.  This  statement
could  not,  of  course,  cover  every  contingency.  Indeed,  I  interpret  the  Joint
Resolution  as  requiring  me  not  to  make  absolute  advance  commitments,  but  to
use  my  judgment  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  time.  But  the  statement
did  carry  a  clear  meaning  to  the  Chinese  Communists  and  to  the  Soviet  Union.
There  will  be  no  retreat  in  the  face  of  armed  aggression,  which  is  part  and
parcel  of  a  continuing  program  of  using  armed  force  to  conquer  new  regions.

"I  do  not  believe  that  the  United  States  can  be  either  lured  or  frightened
into  appeasement.  I  believe  that  in  taking  the  position  of  opposing  aggression  by
force,  I  am  taking  the  only  position  which  is  consistent  with  the  vital  interests  of
the  United  States,  and,  indeed  with  the  peace  of  the  world.

"Some  misguided  persons  have  said  that  Quemoy  is  nothing  to  become  excited
about.  They  said  the  same  about  South  Korea — about  Viet  Nam,  about  Lebanon.

"Now  I  assure  you  that  no  American  boy  will  be  asked  by  me  to  fight  just  for
Quemoy.  But  those  who  make  up  our  armed  forces — and  I  believe  the  American
people  as  a  whole — do  stand  ready  to  defend  the  principle  that  armed  force
shall  not  be  used  for  aggressive  purposes.

"Upon  observance  of  that  principle  depends  a  lasting  and  just  peace.  It  is
that  same  principle  that  protects  the  Western  Pacific  free  world  positions  as
well  as  the  security  of  our  homeland.  If  we  are  not  ready  to  defend  this  prin-
ciple, then  indeed  tragedy  after  tragedy  would  befall  us.


"But  there  is  a  far  better  way  than  resort  to  force  to  settle  these  differences,
and  there  is  some  hope  that  such  a  better  way  may  be  followed.
"That  is  the  way  of  negotiation.

"That  way  is  open  and  prepared  because  in  1955  arrangements  were  made
between  the  United  States  and  the  Chinese  Communists  that  an  Ambassador
on  each  side  would  be  authorized  to  discuss  at  Geneva  certain  problems  of
common  concern.  These  included  the  matter  of  release  of  American  civilians
imprisoned  in  Communist  China,  and  such  questions  as  the  renunciation  of
force  in  the  Formosa  area.  There  have  been  73  meetings  since  August  1955.


620 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

"When  our  Ambassador,  who  was  conducting  these  negotiations,  was  recently
transferred  to  another  post,  we  named  as  successor  Mr.  Beam,  our  Ambassador
to  Poland.  The  Chinese  Communists  were  notified  accordingly  the  latter  part  of
July,  but  there  was  no  response.

"The  Secretary  of  State,  in  his  September  fourth  statement,  referred  to  these
Geneva  negotiations.  Two  days  later,  Mr.  Chou  En-lai,  the  Premier  of  the
Peoples'  Republic  of  China,  proposed  that  these  talks  should  be  resumed  'in  the
interests  of  peace.'  This  was  followed  up  on  September  eighth  by  Mr.  Mao
Tse-tung,  the  Chairman  of  the  Peoples'  Republic  of  China.  We  promptly  wel-
colmed  this  prospect  and  instructed  our  Ambassador  at  Warsaw  to  be  ready
immediately  to  resume  these  talks.  We  expect  that  the  talks  will  begin  upon  the
return  to  Warsaw  of  the  Chinese  Communist  Ambassador  who  has  been  in
Peiping.

"Perhaps  our  suggestion  may  be  bearing  fruit.  We  devoutly  hope  so.

"Naturally,  the  United  States  will  adhere  to  the  position  it  first  took  in  1955,
that  we  will  not  in  these  talks  be  a  party  to  any  arrangements  which  would
prejudice  rights  of  our  ally,  the  Republic  of  China.

"We  know  by  hard  experiences  that  the  Chinese  Communist  leaders  are  in-
deed militant  and  aggressive.  But  we  cannot  believe  that  they  would  now  persist
in  a  course  of  military  aggression  which  would  threaten  world  peace,  with  all
that  would  be  involved.  We  believe  that  diplomacy  can  and  should  find  a  way
out.  There  are  measures  that  can  be  taken  to  assure  that  these  offshore  islands
will  not  be  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  peace.  We  believe  that  arrangements  are
urgently  required  to  stop  gun  fire  and  to  pave  the  way  to  a  peaceful  solution.

"If  the  bilateral  talks  between  Ambassadors  do  not  fully  succeed,  there  is
still  the  hope  that  the  United  Nations  could  exert  a  peaceful  influence  on  the
situation.

"In  1955  the  hostilities  of  the  Chinese  Communists  in  the  Formosa  area
were  brought  before  the  United  Nations  Security  Council.  But  the  Chinese
Communists  rejected  its  jurisdiction.  They  said  that  they  were  entitled  to
Formosa  and  the  offshore  islands  and  that  if  they  used  armed  forces  to  get
them,  that  was  purely  a  'civil  war,'  and  that  the  United  Nations  had  no  right
to  concern  itself.

"They  claimed  also  that  the  attack  by  the  Communist  North  Koreans  on
South  Korea  was  'civil  war,'  and  that  the  United  Nations,  and  the  United
States  were  'aggressors"  because  they  helped  South  Korea.  They  said  the  same
about  their  attack  on  Viet  Nam.

"I  feel  sure  that  these  pretexts  will  never  deceive  or  control  world  opinion.
The  fact  is  that  Communist  Chinese  hostilities  in  the  Formosa  Straits  area  do
endanger  world  peace.  I  do  not  believe  that  any  rulers,  however  aggressive
they  may  be,  will  flout  efforts  to  find  a  peaceful  and  honorable  solution,  whether
it  be  by  direct  negotiations  or  through  the  United  Nations.

"My  friends,  we  are  confronted  with  a  serious  situation.  But  it  is  typical  of
the  security  problems  of  the  world  today.  Powerful  and  aggressive  forces  are
constantly  probing,  now  here,  now  there,  to  see  whether  the  free  world  is
weakening.  In  the  face  of  this,  there  are  no  easy  choices  available.  It  is  mis-
leading for  anyone  to  imply  that  there  are.

"However,  the  present  situation,  though  serious,  is  by  no  means  desperate
or  hopeless.

"There  is  not  going  to  be  any  appeasement.

"I  believe  that  there  is  not  going  to  be  any  war.

"But  there  must  be  sober  realization  by  the  American  people  that  our


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  621

legitimate  purposes  are  again  being  tested  by  those  who  threaten  peace  and
freedom  everywhere.

"This  has  not  been  the  first  test  for  us  and  for  the  free  world.  Probably  it
will  not  be  the  last.  But  as  we  meet  each  test  with  courage  and  unity,  we  con-
tribute to  the  safety  and  the  honor  of  our  beloved  land — and  to  the  cause  of  a
just  and  lasting  peace."

23. The  President's  News  Conference  of  October  1,  1958,  Public  Papers  of  the
Presidents — Eisenhower,  1958,  p.  715.

* *  *

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  sir,  all  I  can  tell  you  about  that  is  that  I  conceive
of  no  possible  solution  that  we  haven't  studied,  pondered,  discussed  with  others
in  the  very  great  hope  that  a  peaceful  solution  can  come  about.

"As  you  well  know,  the  basic  issue,  as  we  see  it,  is  to  avoid  retreat  in  the  face
of  force,  not  to  resort  to  force  to  resolve  these  questions  in  the  international
j world.  And  we  believe  if  we  are  not  faithful  to  that  principle  in  the  long  run  we
I are  going  to  suffer.

"Now,  Mr.  Dulles,  who  had  a  very  long  conference  yesterday  morning  and
almost  solely  on  this  subject,  did  one  thing  that  I  would  commend  to  all  of
you:  he  quoted  paragraphs,  two  paragraphs  I  think,  from  Mr.  Spaak's  speech
I recently  in  the  United  Nations,  where  Mr.  Spaak  said:  'The  whole  free  world
must  realize  that  it  is  not  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus  that  we  are  talking  about,
1 we  are  talking  about  the  Communists'  constant,  unrelenting  pressure  against  the
I free  world,  against  all  of  it.'

I  "As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  magazine  just,  I  guess,  out  last  evening,  U.S.  News
!  and  World  Report,  gives  quite  a  detailed  and  documented  story  of  Communist
j aggression  and  activities  in  72  countries.

I "I  commend  that  to  your  reading,  because  we  are  very  apt,  by  focusing  our
I  eyes  on  some  geographical  point,  to  neglect  the  great  principles  for  which  a
j  country  such  as  ours  has  stood,  for  all  these  years,  and  for  which  Western
civilization  has  largely  stood.

"So,  I  should  say,  we  want  to  get  these  things  in  perspective.
"Now,  you  mentioned  the  question  of  it  would  be  foolish  for  them  keeping
large  forces  there  for  a  long  time.

"I  believe,  as  a  soldier,  that  was  not  a  good  thing  to  do,  to  have  all  these
troops  there.  But,  remember,  we  have  differences  with  our  allies  all  over  the
world.  They  are  family  differences,  and  sometimes  they  are  acute;  but,  by  and
'  large,  the  reason  we  call  it  'free  world'  is  because  each  nation  in  it  wants  to
remain  independent  under  its  own  government  and  not  under  some  dictatorial
:  form  of  government.  So,  to  the  basic  ideals,  all  of  us  must  subscribe."

Q.  Peter  Lisagor,  Chicago  Daily  News:  "In  the  light  of  Mr.  Spaak's  state-
ment, can  you  tell  us  what  your  view  is  of  why  so  many  of  our  allies  fail  to  see
this  point  you  have  just  made?"

THE  PRESIDENT:  "Well,  it's  a  very  difficult  thing,  and  of  course  an  answer
is  speculative.  But  when  we  go  back  to  the  Manchurian  incident  of  1931,  when
we  go  back  to  Hitler's  marching  into  the  Rhineland,  when  we  take  his  taking
over  the  Sudetenland  and  the  Anschluss  with  Austria  by  force,  when  finally  he
took  over  all  of  Czechoslovakia,  where  was  the  point  to  stop  this  thing  before
^  it  got  into  a  great  major  war?

"Why  did  not  public  opinion  see  this  thing  happening?

"Now,  in  hindsight,  most  of  us  have  condemned  these  failures  very  bitterly,


622 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers /Vol.  I


going  right  back  to  1931  in  Manchuria.  I  don't  know  why  the  human  is  so  con-
structed that  he  believes  that  possibly  there  is  an  easier  solution — that  you  can
by  feeding  aggression  a  little  bit,  a  teaspoonful  of  something,  that  he  won't
see  that  they  are  going  to  demand  the  whole  quart.

"I  don't  know  any  real  answer  to  that  thing;  it  is  puzzling.  And,  of  course,
for  those  who  have  to  carry  responsibility,  it  is  a  very  heavy  weight  on  their
spirits  and  minds;  there  is  no  question  about  that.  But  there  it  is."

* *  *

24. Special  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the  Mutual  Security  Program,  March
13,  1959,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents — Eisenhower,  1959,  p.  256.

"I  believe  that  these  events  of  the  past  year  and  the  stern,  indeed  harsh,
realities  of  the  world  of  today  and  the  years  ahead  demonstrate  the  importance
of  the  Mutual  Security  Program  to  the  security  of  the  United  States.  I  think
four  such  realities  stand  out.

"First,  the  United  States  and  the  entire  free  world  are  confronted  by  the
military  might  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Communist  China,  and  their  satellites.
These  nations  of  the  Communist  Bloc  now  maintain  well-equipped  standing
armies  totaling  more  than  6,500,000  men  formed  in  some  400  divisions.  They
are  deployed  along  the  borders  of  our  allies  and  friends  from  the  northern
shores  of  Europe  to  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  around  through  the  Middle  East
and  Far  East  to  Korea.  These  forces  are  backed  by  an  air  fleet  of  25,000  planes
in  operational  units,  and  many  more  not  in  such  units.  They,  in  turn,  are
supported  by  nuclear  weapons  and  missiles.  On  the  seas  around  this  land  mass
is  a  large  navy  with  several  hundred  submarines.

"Second,  the  world  is  in  a  great  epoch  of  seething  change.  Within  little  more
than  a  decade  a  world-wide  political  revolution  has  swept  whole  nations — 21
of  them — with  three-quarters  of  a  billion  people,  a  fourth  of  the  world's  popula-
tion, from  colonial  status  to  independence — and  others  are  pressing  just  be-
hind. The  industrial  revolution,  with  its  sharp  rise  in  living  standards,  was  ac-
companied by  much  turmoil  in  the  Western  world.  A  similar  movement  is  now
beginning  to  sweep  Africa,  Asia,  and  South  America.  A  newer  and  even  more
striking  revolution  in  medicine,  nutrition,  and  sanitation  is  increasing  the
energies  and  lengthening  the  lives  of  people  in  the  most  remote  areas.  As  a
result  of  lowered  infant  mortality,  longer  lives,  and  the  accelerating  conquest  of
famine,  there  is  underway  a  population  explosion  so  incredibly  great  that  in
little  more  than  another  generation  the  population  of  the  world  is  expected  to
double.  Asia  alone  is  expected  to  have  one  billion  more  people  than  the  entire
world  has  today.  Throughout  vast  areas  there  is  a  surging  social  upheaval  in
which,  overnight,  the  responsibilities  of  self-government  are  being  undertaken
by  hundreds  of  millions,  women  are  assuming  new  places  in  public  life,  old
family  patterns  are  being  destroyed  and  new  ones  uneasily  established.  In  the
early  years  of  independence,  the  people  of  the  new  nations  are  fired  with  a
zealous  nationalism  which,  unless  channelled  toward  productive  purposes,  could
lead  to  harmful  developments.  Transcending  all  this  there  is  the  accompanying
universal  determination  to  achieve  a  better  life.

"Third,  there  is  loose  in  the  world  a  fanatic  conspiracy.  International  Com-
munism, whose  leaders  have  in  two  score  years  seized  control  of  all  or  parts
of  17  countries,  with  nearly  one  billion  people,  over  a  third  of  the  total  popula-


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  623

tion  of  the  earth.  The  center  of  this  conspiracy,  Soviet  Russia,  has  by  the
grimmest  determination  and  harshest  of  means  raised  itself  to  be  the  second
military  and  economic  power  in  the  world  today.  Its  leaders  never  lose  the  op-
portunity to  declare  their  determination  to  become  the  first  with  all  possible
speed.

"The  other  great  Communist  power.  Red  China,  is  now  in  the  early  stages  of
its  social  and  economic  revolution.  Its  leaders  are  showing  the  same  ruthless
drive  for  power  and  to  this  end  are  striving  for  ever  increasing  economic
output.  They  seem  not  to  care  that  the  results — which  thus  far  have  been
considerable  in  materialistic  terms — are  built  upon  the  crushed  spirits  and  the
broken  bodies  of  their  people.

"The  fact  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  just  come  through  a  great  revolutionary
process  to  a  position  of  enormous  power  and  that  the  world's  most  populous
nation,  China,  is  in  the  course  of  tremendous  change  at  the  very  time  when  so
large  a  part  of  the  free  world  is  in  the  flux  of  revolutionary  movements,  pro-
vides Communism  with  what  it  sees  as  its  golden  opportunity.  By  the  same
token  freedom  is  faced  with  difficulties  of  unprecedented  scope  and  severity —
and  opportunity  as  well.

"Communism  exploits  the  opportunity  to  intensify  world  unrest  by  every
possible  means.  At  the  same  time  Communism  masquerades  as  the  pattern  of
progress,  as  the  path  to  economic  equality,  as  the  way  to  freedom  from  what
I it  calls  'Western  imperialism,'  as  the  wave  of  the  future.

I  "For  the  free  world  there  is  the  challenge  to  convince  a  billion  people  in
the  less  developed  areas  that  there  is  a  way  of  life  by  which  they  can  have
bread  and  the  ballot,  a  better  livelihood  and  the  right  to  choose  the  means  of

I their  livelihood,  social  change  and  social  justice — in  short,  progress  and  liberty.

! The  dignity  of  man  is  at  stake.

"Communism  is  determined  to  win  this  contest — freedom  must  be  just  as
dedicated  or  the  struggle  could  finally  go  against  us.  Though  no  shot  would
have  been  fired,  freedom  and  democracy  would  have  lost.

"This  battle  is  now  joined.  The  next  decade  will  forecast  its  outcome.
"The  fourth  reality  is  that  the  military  position  and  economic  prosperity  of
the  United  States  are  interdependent  with  those  of  the  rest  of  the  free  world.

i "As  I  shall  outline  more  fully  below,  our  military  strategy  is  part  of  a  com-

!  mon  defense  effort  involving  many  nations.  The  defense  of  the  free  world  is
strengthened  and  progress  toward  a  more  stable  peace  is  advanced  by  the  fact
that  powerful  free  world  forces  are  established  on  territory  adjoining  the  areas
of  Communist  power.  The  deterrent  power  of  our  air  and  naval  forces  and  our
intermediate  range  missile  is  materially  increased  by  the  availability  of  bases  in

j friendly  countries  abroad.

!j  "Moreover  the  military  strength  of  our  country  and  the  needs  of  our  industry
cannot  be  supplied  from  our  own  resources.  Such  basic  necessities  as  iron  ore,
bauxite  for  aluminum,  manganese,  natural  rubber,  tin,  and  many  other  ma-

1  terials  acutely  important  to  our  military  and  industrial  strength  are  either  not
produced  in  our  own  country  or  are  not  produced  in  sufficient  quantities  to

!  meet  our  needs.  This  is  an  additional  reason  why  we  must  help  to  remain  free
the  nations  which  supply  these  resources."

1  * *  *

^  "Two  fundamental  purposes  of  our  collective  defense  effort  are  to  prevent
,  general  war  and  to  deter  Communist  local  aggression.

"We  know  the  enormous  and  growing  Communist  potential  to  launch  a  war


624 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

of  nuclear  destruction  and  their  willingness  to  use  this  power  as  a  threat  to  the
free  world.  We  know  also  that  even  local  aggressions,  unless  checked,  could
absorb  nation  after  nation  into  the  Communist  orbit — or  could  flame  into
world  war.

"The  protection  of  the  free  world  against  the  threat  or  the  reality  of  Soviet
nuclear  aggression  or  local  attack  rests  on  the  common  defense  effort  established
under  our  collective  security  agreements.  The  protective  power  of  our  Strategic
Air  Command  and  our  naval  air  units  is  assured  even  greater  strength  not  only
by  the  availability  of  bases  abroad  but  also  by  the  early  warning  facilities,  the
defensive  installations,  and  the  logistic  support  installations  maintained  on  the
soil  of  these  and  other  allies  and  friends  for  our  common  protection.

"The  strategy  of  general  defense  is  made  stronger  and  of  local  defense  is
made  possible  by  the  powerful  defensive  forces  which  our  allies  in  Europe,  in
the  Middle  East,  and  the  Far  East  have  raised  and  maintain  on  the  soil  of  their
homelands,  on  the  borders  of  the  Communist  world."

*  *  *

25.  Address  at  the  Gettysburg  College  Convocation:  The  Importance  of  Un-
derstanding, April  4,  1959,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents — Eisenhower,
1959,  p.  310.

*  *  *

"I  shall  not  attempt  to  talk  to  you  about  education,  but  I  shall  speak  of
one  vital  purpose  of  education — the  development  of  understanding — under-
standing, so  that  we  may  use  with  some  measure  of  wisdom  the  knowledge  we
may  have  acquired,  whether  in  school  or  out.

"For  no  matter  how  much  intellectual  luggage  we  carry  around  in  our  heads,
it  becomes  valuable  only  if  we  know  how  to  use  the  information — only  if  we
are  able  to  relate  one  fact  of  a  problem  to  the  others  do  we  truly  understand
them.

"This  is  my  subject  today — the  need  for  greater  individual  and  collective  un-
derstanding of  some  of  the  international  facts  of  today's  life.  We  need  to  under-
stand our  country's  purpose  and  role  in  strengthening  the  world's  free  nations
which,  with  us,  see  our  concepts  of  freedom  and  human  dignity  threatened  by
atheistic  dictatorship.

"If  through  education — no  matter  how  acquired — people  develop  under-
standing of  basic  issues,  and  so  can  distinguish  between  the  common,  long-term
good  of  all,  on  the  one  hand,  and  convenient  but  shortsighted  expediency  on  the
other,  they  will  support  policies  under  which  the  nation  will  prosper.  And  if
people  should  ever  lack  the  discernment  to  understand,  or  the  character  to
rise  above  their  own  selfish  short-term  interests,  free  government  would  become
well  nigh  impossible  to  sustain.  Such  a  government  would  be  reduced  to  nothing
more  than  a  device  which  seeks  merely  to  accommodate  itself  and  the  country's
good  to  the  bitter  tugs-of-war  of  conflicting  pressure  groups.  Disaster  could
eventually  result.

"Though  the  subject  I  have  assigned  myself  is  neither  abstruse  nor  partic-
ularly difficult  to  comprehend,  its  importance  to  our  national  and  individual
lives  is  such  that  failure  to  marshal,  to  organize,  and  to  analyze  the  facts  per-
taining to  it  could  have  for  all  of  us  consequences  of  the  most  serious  character.
We  must  study,  think,  and  decide  on  the  governmental  program  that  we  term
'Mutual  Security.'


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  625

"The  true  need  and  value  of  this  program  will  be  recognized  by  our  people
only  if  they  can  answer  this  question:  'Why  should  America,  at  heavy  and  im-
mediate sacrifice  to  herself,  assist  many  other  nations,  particularly  the  less
developed  ones,  in  achieving  greater  moral,  economic,  and  military  strength?'

"What  are  the  facts?

"The  first  and  most  important  fact  is  the  implacable  and  frequently  expressed
purpose  of  imperialistic  communism  to  promote  world  revolution,  destroy
freedom,  and  communize  the  world.

"Its  methods  are  all-inclusive,  ranging  through  the  use  of  propaganda,  po-
litical subversion,  economic  penetration,  and  the  use  or  the  threat  of  force.

"The  second  fact  is  that  our  country  is  today  spending  an  aggregate  of  about
47  billion  dollars  annually  for  the  single  purpose  of  preserving  the  nation's
position  and  security  in  the  world.  This  includes  the  costs  of  the  Defense  De-
partment, the  production  of  nuclear  weapons,  and  mutual  security.  All  three  are
mutually  supporting  and  are  blended  into  one  program  for  our  safety.  The  size
of  this  cost  conveys  something  of  the  entire  program's  importance — to  the  world
and,  indeed,  to  each  of  us.

"And  when  I  think  of  this  importance  to  us,  think  of  it  in  this  one  material
figure,  this  cost  annually  for  every  single  man,  woman,  and  child  of  the  entire
nation  is  about  275  dollars  a  year.

"The  next  fact  we  note  is  that  since  the  Communist  target  is  the  world,  every
nation  is  comprehended  in  their  campaign  for  domination.  The  weak  and  the
most  exposed  stand  in  the  most  immediate  danger.

"Another  fact,  that  we  ignore  to  our  peril,  is  that  if  aggression  or  subversion
against  the  weaker  of  the  free  nations  should  achieve  successive  victories,  com-
munism would  step-by-step  overcome  once  free  areas.  The  danger,  even  to  the
strongest,  would  become  increasingly  menacing.

"Clearly,  the  self-interest  of  each  free  nation  impels  it  to  resist  the  loss  to
imperialistic  communism  of  the  freedom  and  independence  of  any  other  nation.

"Freedom  is  truly  indivisible.

"To  apply  some  of  these  truths  to  a  particular  case,  let  us  consider,  briefly,
the  country  of  Viet-Nam,  and  the  importance  to  us  of  the  security  and  progress
of  that  country.

"It  is  located,  as  you  know,  in  the  southeastern  corner  of  Asia,  exactly  half-
way round  the  world  from  Gettysburg  College.

"Viet-Nam  is  a  country  divided  into  two  parts — like  Korea  and  Germany.
The  southern  half,  with  its  twelve  million  people,  is  free,  but  poor.  It  is  an
under-developed  country — its  economy  is  weak — average  individual  income
being  less  than  $200  a  year.  The  northern  half  has  been  turned  over  to  com-
munism. A  line  of  demarcation  running  along  the  17th  parallel  separates  the
two.  To  the  north  of  this  line  stand  several  Communist  divisions.  These  facts
pose  to  South  Viet-Nam  two  great  tasks:  self-defense  and  economic  growth.

"Understandably,  the  people  of  Viet-Nam  want  to  make  their  country  a
thriving,  self-sufficient  member  of  the  family  of  nations.  This  means  economic
expansion.

"For  Viet-Nam's  economic  growth,  the  acquisition  of  capital  is  vitally  nec-
essary. Now,  the  nation  could  create  the  capital  needed  for  growth  by  stealing
from  the  already  meager  rice  bowls  of  its  people  and  regimenting  them  into
work  battalions.  This  enslavement  is  the  commune  system — adopted  by  the  new
overlords  of  Red  China.  It  would  mean,  of  course,  the  loss  of  freedom  within
the  country  without  any  hostile  outside  action  whatsoever.

"Another  way  for  Viet-Nam  to  get  the  necessary  capital  is  through  private


626 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

investments  from  the  outside,  and  through  governmental  loans  and,  where
necessary,  grants  from  other  and  more  fortunately  situated  nations.

"In  either  of  these  ways  the  economic  problem  of  Viet-Nam  could  be  solved.
But  only  the  second  way  can  preserve  freedom.

"And  there  is  still  the  other  of  Viet-Nam's  great  problems — how  to  support
the  military  forces  it  needs  without  crushing  its  economy.

"Because  of  the  proximity  of  large  Communist  military  formations  in  the
North,  Free  Viet-Nam  must  maintain  substantial  numbers  of  men  under  arms.
Moreover,  while  the  government  has  shown  real  progress  in  cleaning  out  Com-
munist guerrillas,  those  remaining  continue  to  be  a  disruptive  influence  in  the
nation's  life.

"Unassisted,  Viet-Nam  cannot  at  this  time  produce  and  support  the  military
formations  essential  to  it,  or,  equally  important,  the  morale — the  hope,  the
confidence,  the  pride — necessary  to  meet  the  dual  threat  of  aggression  from
without  and  subversion  within  its  borders.

"Still  another  fact!  Strategically,  South  Viet-Nam's  capture  by  the  Com-
munists would  bring  their  power  several  hundred  miles  into  a  hitherto  free
region.  The  remaining  countries  in  Southeast  Asia  would  be  menaced  by  a
great  flanking  movement.  The  freedom  of  twelve  million  people  would  be  lost
immediately,  and  that  of  150  million  others  in  adjacent  lands  would  be  seriously
endangered.  The  loss  of  South  Viet-Nam  would  set  in  motion  a  crumbling
process  that  could,  as  it  progressed,  have  grave  consequences  for  us  and  for
freedom.

"Viet-Nam  must  have  a  reasonable  degree  of  safety  now — both  for  her  people
and  for  her  property.  Because  of  these  facts,  military  as  well  as  economic  help
is  currently  needed  in  Viet-Nam.

"We  reach  the  inescapable  conclusion  that  our  own  national  interests  demand
some  help  from  us  in  sustaining  in  Viet-Nam  the  morale,  the  economic  progress,
and  the  military  strength  necessary  to  its  continued  existence  in  freedom.

"Viet-Nam  is  just  one  example.  One-third  of  the  world's  people  face  a  similar
challenge.  All  through  Africa  and  Southern  Asia  people  struggle  to  preserve
liberty  and  improve  their  standards  of  living,  to  maintain  their  dignity  as
humans.  It  is  imperative  that  they  succeed.

"But  some  uninformed  Americans  believe  that  we  should  turn  our  backs  on
these  people,  our  friends.  Our  costs  and  taxes  are  very  real,  while  the  difficulties
of  other  peoples  often  seem  remote  from  us.

"But  the  costs  of  continuous  neglect  of  these  problems  would  be  far  more
than  we  must  now  bear — indeed  more  than  we  could  afford.  The  added  costs
would  be  paid  not  only  in  vastly  increased  outlays  of  money,  but  in  larger  drafts
of  our  youth  into  the  Military  Establishment,  and  in  terms  of  increased  danger
to  our  own  security  and  prosperity.

"No  matter  what  areas  of  Federal  spending  must  be  curtailed — and  some
should — our  safety  comes  first.  Since  that  safety  is  necessarily  based  upon  a
sound  and  thriving  economy,  its  protection  must  equally  engage  our  earnest
attention.


"As  a  different  kind  of  example  of  free  nation  interdependence,  there  is
Japan,  where  very  different  problems  exist — but  problems  equally  vital  to  the
security  of  the  free  world.  Japan  is  an  essential  counterweight  to  Communist
strength  in  Asia.  Her  industrial  power  is  the  heart  of  any  collective  effort  to
defend  the  Far  East  against  aggression.


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  627

I  "Her  more  than  90  million  people  occupy  a  country  where  the  arable  land
I  is  no  more  than  that  of  California.  More  than  perhaps  any  other  industrial  na-
I  lion,  Japan  must  export  to  live.  Last  year  she  had  a  trade  deficit.  At  one  time
I  she  had  a  thriving  trade  with  Asia,  particularly  with  her  nearest  neighbors.  Much
j of  it  is  gone.  Her  problems  grow  more  grave.

I  "For  Japan  there  must  be  more  free  world  outlets  for  her  products.  She  does
t  not  want  to  be  compelled  to  become  dependent  as  a  last  resort  upon  the  Com-
j  munist  empire.  Should  she  ever  be  forced  to  that  extremity,  the  blow  to  free
j  world  security  would  be  incalculable;  at  the  least  it  would  mean  for  all  other
j  free  nations  greater  sacrifice,  greater  danger,  and  lessened  economic  strength,
j  "What  happens  depends  largely  on  what  the  free  world  nations  can,  and
I  will,  do.

' "Upon  us — upon  you  here — in  this  audience — rests  a  heavy  responsibility.
We  must  weigh  the  facts,  fit  them  into  place,  and  decide  on  our  course  of  action.
"For  a  country  as  large,  as  industrious,  and  as  progressive  as  Japan  to  exist
I  with  the  help  of  grant  aid  by  others,  presents  no  satisfactory  solution.  Further-
more, for  us,  the  cost  would  be,  over  the  long  term,  increasingly  heavy.  Trade  is
the  key  to  a  durable  Japanese  economy.

"One  of  Japan's  greatest  opportunities  for  increased  trade  lies  in  a  free  and
developing  Southeast  Asia.  So  we  see  that  the  two  problems  I  have  been  discus-
I  sing  are  two  parts  of  a  single  one — the  great  need  in  Japan  is  for  raw  materials;  in
i  Southern  Asia  it  is  for  manufactured  goods.  The  two  regions  complement  each
j  other  markedly.  So,  by  strengthening  Viet-Nam  and  helping  insure  the  safety  of
the  South  Pacific  and  Southeast  Asia,  we  gradually  develop  the  great  trade
potential  between  this  region,  rich  in  natural  resources,  and  highly  industrialized
Japan  to  the  benefit  of  both.  In  this  way  freedom  in  the  Western  Pacific  will  be
greatly  strengthened  and  the  interests  of  the  whole  free  world  advanced.  But
i;  such  a  basic  improvement  can  come  about  only  gradually.  Japan  must  have
additional  trade  outlets  now.  These  can  be  provided  if  each  of  the  industrialized
nations  in  the  West  does  its  part  in  liberalizing  trade  relations  with  Japan."

*  *  *

26. Special  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the  Mutual  Security  Program,  Febru-
ary 16,  1960,  Public  Papers  of  the  Presidents — Eisenhower,  1960,  p.  178.

*  *  *

'  "The  Mutual  Security  Program  is  a  program  essential  to  peace.  The  ac-
complishments of  the  Mutual  Security  Program  in  helping  to  meet  the  many
challenges  in  the  mid-20th  Century  place  it  among  the  foremost  of  the  great
programs  of  American  history.  Without  them  the  map  of  the  world  would  be

'  vastly  different  today.  The  Mutual  Security  Program  and  its  predecessors  have
been  an  indispensable  contributor  to  the  present  fact  that  Greece,  Turkey,

j  Iran,  Laos,  Vietnam,  Korea  and  Taiwan,  and  many  nations  of  Western  Europe,

!  to  mention  only  part,  remain  the  home  of  free  men.

I "While  over  the  past  year  the  Soviet  Union  has  expressed  an  interest  in
I  measures  to  reduce  the  common  peril  of  war,  and  while  its  recent  deportment
t  and  pronouncement  suggest  the  possible  opening  of  a  somewhat  less  strained
period  in  our  relationships,  the  menace  of  Communist  imperialism  nevertheless
still  remains.  The  military  power  of  the  Soviet  Union  continues  to  grow.  In-
I  creasingly  important  to  free  world  interests  is  the  rate  of  growth  of  both  military
and  economic  power  in  Communist  China.  Evidence  that  this  enormous  power


628 Gravel  Edition/The  Pentagon  Papers/Vol.  I

bloc  remains  dedicated  to  the  extension  of  Communist  control  over  all  peoples
everywhere  is  found  in  Tibet,  the  Taiwan  Straits,  in  Laos  and  along  the  Indian
border.

"In  the  face  of  this  ever-present  Communist  threat,  we  must,  in  our  own
interest  as  well  as  that  of  the  other  members  of  the  free  world  community,
continue  our  program  of  military  assistance  through  the  various  mutual  security
arrangements  we  have  established.  Under  these  arrangements  each  nation  has
responsibilities,  commensurate  with  its  capabilities,  to  participate  in  the  develop-
ment and  maintenance  of  defensive  strength.  There  is  also  increasing  ability  of
other  free  world  nations  to  share  the  burden  of  this  common  defense.

"Obviously,  no  one  nation  alone  could  bear  the  cost  of  defending  all  the  free
world.  Likewise,  it  would  be  impossible  for  many  free  nations  long  to  survive
if  forced  to  act  separately  and  alone.  The  crumbling  of  the  weaker  ones  would
obviously  and  increasingly  multiply  the  threats  to  those  remaining  free,  even
the  very  strongest.

"Collective  security  is  not  only  sensible — it  is  essential."

* *  *

27. U.S.  Sends  Greetings  to  Viet-Nam  on  Anniversary  of  Independence,  White
House  Press  Release  dated  October  25,  1960,  Department  of  State  Bulletin.

"The  White  House  on  October  25  made  public  the  following  message  from
President  Eisenhower  to  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  President  of  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam.

"OCTOBER  22,  1960

"DEAR  MR.  PRESIDENT:  My  countrymen  and  I  are  proud  to  convey  our
good  wishes  to  you  and  to  the  citizens  of  Viet-Nam  on  the  fifth  anniversary  of
the  birth  of  the  Republic  of  Viet-Nam.

"We  have  watched  the  courage  and  daring  with  which  you  and  the  Viet-
namese people  attained  independence  in  a  situation  so  perilous  that  many
thought  it  hopeless.  We  have  admired  the  rapidity  with  which  chaos  yielded  to
order  and  progress  replaced  despair.

"During  the  years  of  your  independence  it  has  been  refreshing  for  us  to
observe  how  clearly  the  Government  and  the  citizens  of  Viet-Nam  have  faced
the  fact  that  the  greatest  danger  to  their  independence  was  Communism.  You
and  your  countrymen  have  used  your  strength  well  in  accepting  the  double
challenge  of  building  your  country  and  resisting  Communist  imperialism.  In  five
short  years  since  the  founding  of  the  Republic,  the  Vietnamese  people  have
developed  their  country  in  almost  every  sector.  I  was  particularly  impressed  by
one  example.  I  am  informed  that  last  year  over  1,200,000  Vietnamese  children
were  able  to  go  to  elementary  school;  three  times  as  many  as  were  enrolled  five
years  earlier.  This  is  certainly  a  heartening  development  for  Viet-Nam's  future.
At  the  same  time  Viet-Nam's  ability  to  defend  itself  from  the  Communists  has
grown  immeasurably  since  its  successful  struggle  to  become  an  independent
Republic.

"Viet-Nam's  very  success  as  well  as  its  potential  wealth  and  its  strategic  loca-
tion have  led  the  Communists  of  Hanoi,  goaded  by  the  bitterness  of  their  failure
to  enslave  all  Viet-Nam,  to  use  increasing  violence  in  their  attempts  to  destroy
your  country's  freedom.

"This  grave  threat,  added  to  the  strains  and  fatigues  of  the  long  struggle  to
achieve  and  strengthen  independence,  must  be  a  burden  that  would  cause


Justification  of  the  War — Public  Statements  629


moments  of  tension  and  concern  in  almost  any  human  heart.  Yet  from  long
observation  I  sense  how  deeply  the  Vietnamese  value  their  country's  inde-
pendence and  strength  and  I  know  how  well  you  used  your  boldness  when  you
led  your  countrymen  in  winning  it.  I  also  know  that  your  determination  has
been  a  vital  factor  in  guarding  that  independence  while  steadily  advancing  the
economic  development  of  your  country.  I  am  confident  that  these  same  qualities
of  determination  and  boldness  will  meet  the  renewed  threat  as  well  as  the  needs
and  desires  of  your  countrymen  for  further  progress  on  all  fronts.

"Although  the  main  responsibility  for  guarding  that  independence  will  always,
as  it  has  in  the  past,  belong  to  the  Vietnamese  people  and  their  government,  I
want  to  assure  you  that  for  so  long  as  our  strength  can  be  useful,  the  United
States  will  continue  to  assist  Viet-Nam  in  the  difficult  yet  hopeful  struggle
ahead.


"Sincerely,

"DWIGHT  D.  EISENHOWER."


630


Glossary


AAA Antiaircraft  Artillery
ACR Armored  Cavalry  Regiment
ABM Antiballistic  Missile
ABN  Airborne

ADP Automatic  Data  Processing
AFB Air  Force  Base
AID Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment

AIROPS Air  Operations
AM  Airmobile
AMB  Ambassador
ANG Air  National  Guard
APB Self-propelled  barracks  ship
ARL Landing  craft  repair  ship
ARVN Army  of  the  Republic  of  tSouth]
Vietnam

ASA U.S.  Army  Security  Agency
ASAP As  soon  as  possible
ASD Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense
BAR Browning  automatic  rifle
BDE  Brigade

BLT Battalion  Landing  Team

BN  Battahon

BOB Bureau  of  the  Budget

B-52 U.S.  heavy  bomber

B-57 U.S.  medium  bomber

CAP Combined  Action  Platoon

CAS Saigon  Office  of  the  U.S.  Central

Intelligence  Agency
CDC Combat  Development  Command
CG Civil  Guard
CHICOM Chinese  Communist
CHMAAG Chief, Military  Assistance

Advisory  Group
CI  Counterinsurgency
CIA Central  Intelligence  Agency
CIDG Civilian Irregular  Detachment
Group

CINCPAC Commander  in  Chief,  Pa-
cific

CIP Counterinsurgency  Plan

CNO  VNN  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,
Vietnamese  Navy

CJCS Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

CMD Capital  Military  District

COMUS U.S.  Commander

COMUSMACV  Commander,  U.S.  Mili-
tary Assistance  Com-
mand, Vietnam


CONARC Continental  Army  Command
CONUS Continental  United  States
CORDS Civil  Operations  and  Revolu-
tionary Development  Support
[pacification]
COS Chief  of  Station,  CIA
CPR Chinese  Peoples  Republic
CPSVN Comprehensive  Plan  for  South

Vietnam
CTZ Corps  tactical  zone
CY Calendar  year
DCM Deputy  Chief  of  Mission
DCPG Defense Command  Planning
Group

DEPTEL [State]  Department  telegram
DESOTO Destroyer  patrols  off  North
Vietnam

DIA Defense  Intelligence  Agency
DMZ Demilitarized Zone  separating

North  and  South  Vietnam
DOD Department  of  Defense
DPM Draft  Presidential  Memorandum

[from  the  Secretary  of  Defense]
DRV Democratic  Republic  of  [North]

Vietnam

DULTE Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  Dulles  to  addressee
ECM Electronic  Countermeasures
EXDIS Exclusive  (high  level)  distribu-
tion

FAL  and  FAR Royal  Armed  Forces  of
Laos

FARMGATE  Clandestine  U.S.  Air
Force  unit  in  Vietnam,
1964

FE  and  FEA Bureau  of  Far  Eastern
Affairs  in  the  State  De-
partment
FEC French  Expeditionary  Corps
FLAMING  DART Code name  of
bombing  opera-
tions, in  reprisal  for
attacks on  U.S.
forces

FOA Foreign Operations  Administra-
tion

FWMA Free  World  Military  Assistance
FWMAF Free  World  Military  Assist-
ance Force


Glossary 63 1


FY Fiscal  Year

FYI For  your  information

GRC  Government  of  the  Republic  of
China  (Nationalist  China)

GVN Government  of  [South]  Vietnam

G-3  U.S.  Army  General  Staff,  Branch
for  Plans  and  Operations

HES Hamlet  Evaluation  System

HNC High  National  Council

HOP  TAC  Program  to  clear  and  hold
land  around  Saigon,  1964

IBP International  Balance  of  Payments

ICA  International  Cooperation  Admin-
istration

ICC International  Control  Commission
IDA Institute  for  Defense  Analyses
IMCSH Inter-ministerial  Committee  for

Strategic  Hamlets
INR Bureau  of  Intelligence  and  Re-
search in  the  Department  of  State
ISA Office  of  International  Security  Af-
fairs in  the  Department  of  Defense

I  Corps Northern military region  of

South  Vietnam

II  Corps Central military region  in

South  Vietnam

III  Corps Military  region  in  South  Viet-

nam surrounding  Saigon
; IV  Corps Southern  military  region  in
i  South  Vietnam

JCS Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff
JCSM Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Memoran-
dum

JGS Vietnamese  Joint  General  Staff
( JOC Joint  Operations  Center
ji  Joint  Staff Staff  organization  for  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

JUSPAO  Joint  United  States  Public  Af-
!  fairs  Office,  Saigon

J-2 Intelligence  Branch,  U.S.  Army

KANZUS  Korean,  Australian,  New
i  Zealand,  and  U.S.

I KIA Killed  in  action

LANTFLT Atlantic  Fleet

LOC  Lines  of  communications  (roads,
I  bridges,  rail)

LST Tank  Landing  Ship

LTC Lt.  Col.

MAAG Military Assistance  Advisory
Group

MAB Marine  Amphibious  Brigade
' MAC Military  Assistance  Command

I;  MACCORDS Military  Assistance  Com-
mand,  Civil  Operations
and  Revolutionary  Devel-
^  opment  Support

'  MAF Marine  Amphibious  Force
MAP Military  Assistance  Program


MAROPS Maritime  Operations
MEB Marine  Expeditionary  Brigade
MEF Marine  Expeditionary  Force
MIA Missing  in  action
MDAP Mutual  Defense  Assistance  Pro-
gram

MOD Minister  of  Defense
MORD Ministry  of  Revolutionary  De-
velopment

MRC  Military  Revolutionary  Commit-
tee

MR5 Highland  Area
NATO North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organiza-
tion

NCO Non-commissioned  officer
NFLSV National  Front  for  the  Libera-
tion of  South  Vietnam
NIE National  Intelligence  Estimate
NLF National  Liberation  Front
NODIS No distribution (beyond  ad-
dressee)

NSA  National  Security  Agency  (special-
izes in  electronic  intelligence,  i.e.
monitoring  radio  communications)

NSAM  National  Security  Action  Mem-
orandum (pronounced  nas-sam;
described  presidential  decisions
under  Kennedy  and  Johnson)

NSC National  Security  Council

NVA North  Vietnamese  Army

NVN North  Vietnam

OB Order  of  battle

OCO  Office  of  Civil  Operations  [pacifi-
cation]

O&M Operations  and  Management
Opcon Operations  Control
OPLAN Operations  Plan
Ops  Operations

OSA  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  the
Army

OSD Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense
PACFLT Pacific  Fleet
PACOM Pacific  Command
PAT Political  Action  Team
PAVN People's  Army  of  [North]  Viet-
nam

PBR River  Patrol  Boat
PDJ Plaine  Des  Jarres,  Laos
PF Popular  Forces
PFF Police  Field  Force
PL Pathet  Lao

PNG Provisional  National  Government
POL Petroleum,  oil,  lubricants
POLAD Political  adviser  (usually.  State
Department  representative  as-
signed to a military  com-
mander)

PRV People's  Republic  of  Vietnam


632  Glossary


PSYOP Psychological  Operations
qte  Quote

RAS River  Assault  Squadron
RCT Regimental  Combat  Team
RD Rural  (or  Revolutionary)  Develop-
ment

RECCE  Reconnaissance

Reclama Protest  against  a  cut  in  budget

or  program
RF Regional  Forces
RLAF Royal  Laotian  Air  Force
RLG Royal  Laotian  Government
RLT Regimental  Landing  Team
ROK Republic  of  [South]  Korea
Rolling  Thunder Code  name  for  sus-
tained bombing  of
North  Vietnam

rpt  Repeat

RSSZ Rung  Sat  Special  Zone  (east  of
Saigon)

RT Rolling  Thunder  Program

RTA Royal  Thai  Army

RVN Republic  of  [South]  Vietnam

RVNAF  Republic  of  Vietnam  Air
Force  or  Armed  Forces

RVNF Republic  of  Vietnam  Forces

SA  Systems  Analysis  Office  in  the  De-
partment of  Defense

SAC Strategic  Air  Command

SACSA  Special  Assistant  [to  the  JCS]
for  Counterinsurgency  and  Spe-
cial [covert]  Activities

SAM Surface-to-air  missile

SAR Search  and  Rescue

SDC Self  Defense  Corps

SEA Southeast  Asia

SEACOOR  Southeast  Asia  Coordina-
ting Committee

SEATO  Southeast  Asia  Treaty  Organi-
zation

SecDef Secretary  of  Defense

SECTO Cable  identifier,  from  Secretary

of  State  to  addressee
Sitrep Situation  Report
SMM Saigon  Military  Mission
SNIE Special  National  Intelligence  Esti-
mate
SQD  Squadron
STRAF Strategic  Army  Force


SVN South  Vietnam

TAOR Tactical  Area  of  Responsibility

TCS Tactical  Control  System

TEDUL Cable  identifier,  overseas  post

to  Secretary  of  State  Dulles
TERM Temporary  Equipment  Recovery

Mission
TF Task  force

TFS Tactical  Fighter  Squadron
TO&E Table  of  organization  and  equip-
ment (for  a  military  unit)
TOSEC Cable  identifier,  from  overseas

post  to  Secretary  of  State
TRIM Training  Relations  and  Instruc-
tion Mission
TRS Tactical  Reconnaissance  Squadron
34A 1964 operations plan  covering
covert  actions  against  North  Viet-
nam

T-28 U.S.  fighter-bomber
UE Unit  equipment  allowance
UH-1  Helicopter
UK United  Kingdom
USAF U.S.  Air  Force
USARAL U.S.  Army,  Alaska
USAREUR U.S.  Army,  Europe
USASGV U.S.  Army  Support  Group,

Vietnam
USG United  States  Government
USIA U.S.  Information  Agency
USIB U.S.  Intelligence  Board
USIS U.S.  Information  Service
USOM U.S.  Operations  Mission  (for

economic  assistance)
VC Viet  Cong
VM Viet  Minh
VN  Vietnam

VNA Vietnamese  National  Army

VNAF  [South]  Vietnamese  Air  Force
or  Armed  Forces

VNQDD  Vietnam  Quocdandang  (pre-
independence,  nationalistic  po-
litical party)

VNSF  [South]  Vietnamese  Special
Forces

VOA Voice  of  America

WESTPAC Western  Pacific  Command

WIA Wounded  in  action


U.S.  SENATOR  MIKE  GRAVEL

ALASKA


Late  in  June  1971,  when  the  Federal
Government  had  succeeded  in  delaying
the  publication  of  even  newspaper
synopses  and  brief  excerpts  from  the
secret  Pentagon  Papers,  Senator  Mike
Gravel  convened  a  special  meeting  of
his  Subcommittee  on  Public  Buildings
and  Grounds.  The  Senator  had  re-
cently received  4,100  pages  of  the
Papers,  and  on  the  night  of  June  29,
at  that  extraordinary  meeting,  he
entered  them  into  the  official  record
of  the  subcommittee.

That  record  is  published  here  for  the
first  time,  in  order  that  the  American
public  can  have  access  to  the  full  story
of  American  involvement  in  Vietnam
from  the  early  1940s  to  March  of  1968.

Mike  Gravel  was  elected  to  the
United  States  Senate  in  1968  after
serving  two  terms  in  the  Alaska  State
House  of  Representatives,  one  of  them
as  Speaker.  A  native  of  Massachusetts,
Senator  Gravel  moved  to  Alaska  after
his  graduation  from  Columbia  Uni-
versity. In  the  Senate,  he  is  presently
a  member  of  the  Committee  of  Interior
and  Insular  Affairs,  the  Pubhc  Works
Committee,  and  the  Joint  Committee
on  Congressional  Operations.


Cover  designed  by  Richard  C.  Bartlett,
photograph  by  Wilson  Combs,  Alexandria,  Virgini'

BP  412

Volume  1 ISBN:  0-8070-0529-0

Paperback  set:  ISBN:  0-8070-0527-4

Individ  ual  vobimes  available  for  text  use  at  $5.00

$20.00  1  er  set


BEACON  PRESS BOSTON  02 1 08
