# The Complete Golden Dawn

*Israel Regardie (1993)*

Llewellyn’s Golden Dawn Series

The Original Account of the Teachings, Rites 
and Ceremonies of the Hermetic Order of

THE GOLDEN 
DAWN

as revealed by

ISRAEL REGARDIE

The 6th Edition, Revised and Enlarged 
Complete in One Volume with New Comprehensive Index

THE GOLDEN DAWN

“Howbeit we know after a time there will now be a general reformation, 
both of divine and human things, according to our desire and the 
expectation of others; for it is fitting that before the rising of the Sun 
there should appear and break forth Aurora, or some clearness or 
divine light in the sky. And so, in the meantime, some few, which shall 
give their names, may join together, thereby to increase the number 
and respect of our Fraternity, and make a happy and wished for 
beginning of our Philosophical Canons, prescribed to us by our 
Brother R.C., and be partakers with us of our treasures (which can 
never fail or be wasted) in all humility and love, to be eased of this 
world’s labours, and not walk so blindly in the knowledge of the 
wonderful works of God.”

FAMA FRATERNITATIS, (1614)

FOREWORD AND APPRECIATION

Just about 100 years ago (in 1887) we had the beginnings of The Hermetic Order 
of the Golden Dawn. It was then that (according to history and “myth”) Dr. William 
Westcott discovered a cipher manuscript that led to the founding of an English branch 
of Die Goldene Dammerung in 1888.

It was this Golden Dawn that attracted some of the most talented personalities of 
the time — including W. B. Yeats, Algernon Blackwood, Arthur Machen, Florence 
Farr, Annie Horniman, A. E. Waite, S. L. MacGregor Mathers, Dion Fortune and Aleis- 
ter Crowley. And it was this Golden Dawn that itself provided a NEW DAWN for 
“occultism” in the early 20th century.In the early 1900s, the original Order began to fragment. First Crowley pub- 
lished many of the G.D. rituals in The Equinox and left to form his own order, the A.A., 
in 1905. The original Isis-Urania Temple expelled Mathers, and then — as The Stella 
Matutina — under the direction of Waite, put more emphasis on mysticism than had 
the original G.D. Later Dion Fortune broke off from this Temple to form her own 
Inner Light group.

It was as a member of the Stella Matutina that Israel Regardie first published a 
nearly complete set of the rituals and teachings in 1937-40 as the first edition of this 
present work. Later he sold the copyrights for this and most of his other books at that 
time to the Aries Press, and ] purchased them in 1968 and brought out the second edi- 
tion, with new material from Regardie, in 1969.

As Sam Webster points out in the Epilogue to this fifth edition, this book has been 
the foundation for much of the “occult revival” of the last half of the twentieth cen- 
tury. It has provided resource materials for Wicca, the New Paganism, various magi- 
cal groups, and for tens of thousands of serious students.

And as Cris Monnastre points out in her Introduction, it is now beginning to pro- 
vide a structure into which modern psychology can flow to bring about a solution to 
the present world crisis which demands a dramatic expansion of consciousness and 
of the ‘tools’ of awareness.

It is the actual “structured” experience of magic — whether it be attained through 
group or solitary work — that is vital to the accelerated evolution of human con- 
sciousness beyond present limitations, and to the expansion of human awareness 
from communal to global dimensions, And it is this that is essential to avoidance of 
nuclear war and to the restoration of Nature to the environment and of humanity 
to Nature.The Golden Dawn is a curriculum of study, a workbook to the Great Work, and 
Cris Monnastre has provided guidelines to the practical approach to the Work. I can- 
not emphasize enough the importance of personal work, for it is that — whether 
undertaken alone or with a group — that is important. Only personal work can 
accomplish true initiation.

And The Golden Dawn is a valid curriculum for personal work even for those 
associated with other than Golden Dawn groups or systems of magical study. One of 
the great messages of the New Age is that of eclecticism — if it works, use it! There are 
many other valuable and valid resources for our evolution, and in this time of “quick-

ix

ening”, all are pertinent. But it is a personal and regular program of meditation that 
brings order to what otherwise might prove chaotic. Such a program, combined with 
the simple magical exercises of “The Middle Pillar” and “Banishing Ritual of the Pen- 
tagram”, and the keeping of a journal will initiate your own journey to the Light!

I want to give special appreciation to the writers who have added important 
materials to this new edition, but I also want to give personal appreciation to Israel 
Regardie for having recognized in 1937 that the “time for secrecy” was over. The 
twentieth century is a time in which the knowledge of the past has to be brought for- 
ward and integrated into a new “common sense” upon which a new humanity 
can be built.

Once, years ago, when I first talked about buying the Golden Dawn copyrights 
from the Aries Press, another occult writer made a statement to the effect that no one 
could “own” this knowledge — for it all came originally from God! 1 think that concept 
describes exactly what we are dealing with: true Spiritual Technology, Treat it as 
such!Throughout this edition we have retained the original pagination so that referen- 
ces to the original four volume edition could still be identified. I have made correc- 
tions to the original where they were needed, but unless important to the readers’ 
perception I have not made changes to the style. In addition, lam very much indebted 
to Cris Monnastre, MaDhyan Anupassana, George Wilson, Hal Sundt and Sam 
Webster for their help and their contributions. In most cases these are identified by 
initials, along with my own, in footnotes.

And it is with a great deal of pleasure that I announce that Cris Monnastre has 
been instrumental in bringing together these, and other G.D. practitioners, who will 
be producing a future series of “Golden Dawn Manuals” to develop individual 
techniques and exercises for study and use.

Carl Llewellyn Weschcke 
St. Paul, July 10, 1986

About the Contributors

Cris Monnastre, born April 2, 1946, is currently finishing a doctoral program in psy- 
chology with a specialty in clinical psychology. She is a therapist in the Los Angeles 
area and combines traditional therapy with Golden Dawn techniques. She is a poet, 
musician, and composer, and lives with her two sons, Aaron and Adam. She is 
interested in inquiries regarding Golden Dawn work and therapy. Please address let- 
ters to her care of Llewellyn Publications.

Hal Sundt, born August 14, 1950, B.A. in History presently working on Master's 
thesis regarding the Gnostic influence on Jacob Boehme and the Rosicricians. Has 
been studying/working with Golden Dawn groups for 12 years.Sam Webster, 25, B.A. in English. A student of symbolism and consciousness. He is a 
practitioner of Thelemic Magick and affiliated with several branches of the O.T.O. and 
other Thelemic groups. During 1983-84 he traveled to study with magickal prac- 
titioners scattered around the country. Presently he is involved in generating grimoires 
for Egyptian and Thelemic Magicks. As a poet and storyteller, he attends festivals and 
gatherings to share his art.

George Wilson, 39, B.A. Philosophy, B.S. Nursing. Professionally was an RN with a 
psychiatric specialty. Recently retired to devote full time to occult studies. A student 
of mysticism for 20 years, “Kabbalah led to G.D. Obtained The Golden Dawn in 1970 
and this was the focus of occult interests from that time on.” Currently engaged in 
projects focusing on Color Scales, the Outer Order rituals, and the generation of 
Magic Squares.

x

Ma Dhyan Anupassana, aka Suzan Wilson, born August 26, 1954, Sannyasin of 
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, has studied Eastern Religion at San Diego State University 
and practiced various occult systems since 1972. Also a student and teacher of 
Iyengar Yoga. She is married to George Wilson. They have three sons and plan to 
emigrate to New Zealand as soon as possible where they will continue personal 
magickal work, writing, and teaching yoga.

Carl L. Weschcke, born September 10, 1930, B.S. in Business Administration, work 
toward doctorate in Philosophy, D. Ph. Mag. (Honorary), Certificate in Clinical Hyp- 
nosis. Lifelong student of the occult, starting with Theosophy, several years of work 
with Crowley materials and as a correspondence student with the Society of the Inner 
Light, study of Jungian psychology and yoga. High Priest in Wicca, and Administrator 
General Aurum Solis. President of Llewellyn Publications since 1960.David Godwin, born in 1939 in Dallas, Texas, is a long-time student of esoteric lore. 
Learned and knowledgeable about cabalistic practices, he has successfully mastered 
them and written a classic treatise on the subject entitled Godwin’s Cabalistic Encyclopedia. 
Out of print for several years, popular demand dictated that it be reprinted. It is now 
available again with new additions and information, from Llewellyn Publications.

Godwin has worked as a manual laborer, a newspaper reporter, an editor for a petro- 
chemical magazine, a technical editor for two NASA contractors during the Apollo 
missions, a typesetter, a free-lance writer and a practicing astrologer. He has never 
been to a writers’ workshop, owns no cats, and is entirely ignorant of the martial arts. 
Godwin believes in maintaining the open-minded, balanced attitude advocated by 
the middle path of cabalism.

Donald Tyson of Halifax, Nova Scotia, was born in 1954. His work on the sigils drawn 
from the planetary kameas (magic squares) has been incorporated into this printing 
of The Golden Dawn and is presented in depth in an appendix to his annotated version 
of The Three Books of Occult Philosophy of Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, forthcoming 
from Llewellyn.

Tyson is the author of many books and articles on such subjects as the philosophy of 
magic (The New Magus), the history and use of runes (Rune Magic), and the occult 
revival in the Renaissance. He is the creator and designer of the Rune Magic cards and 
rune dice as well as anewsystem of runicastrology. A regular contributor to the Pallas 
Society News and the Llewellyn Magickal Almanac, his articles occasionally appear in Fate 
and other periodicals dedicated to Neo-Paganism and the modern occult tradition.

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

Normally speaking, “a book is a book... is a book” and no advice has to 
given about how it is used.HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

Normally speaking, “a book is a book... is a book” and no advice has to 
given about how it is used.

This book is different, for several reasons, and you will find advice on how to 
use it in the introductions by Cris Monnastre and Israel Regardie. Because it 
is a big book, and because it is both a text for study and a guide to practice as 
well as an encyclopedic reference work, you will use it many different 
ways.

In the Table of Contents, we have listed the major rituals in italics for easier 
location, and we have provided an extensive listing of the illustrations and 
tables to be make reference use easier and faster. Hopefully, ina subsequent 
edition, we will be able to provide a comprehensive index.

Page Numbers. There are two sets of them: those referring to this edition will 
be found at the top outer margin, or at the bottom center. Those that refer to 
the original four-volume edition may be found bracketed at the left margin to 
indicate approximately the location of the page break in the text. At the top of 
the page will be found reference to the original Volume and Book numbers. It 
is hoped in this way that references to the original edition found in other 
works may be easily located.

Corrections and Additions. Any book of this size can be expected to have some 
errors. We have corrected all those in the original edition that we could 
locate, and have subjected this edition to several proof-readings. Yet, we 
know that some will continue to be found. It is our hope that readers will 
consider this book so important that they will send us notes of such further 
corrections that we may make in future editions. We have also made some 
additions in the form of short introductions to some of the sections and as 
footnotes to the text where we felt clarification was needed.Future Work, The Golden Dawn is a complete system of Ceremonial Magic. 
Within the system may be found the basic technologies of spiritual develop- 
mentand their practical application. Future books and tapes in this series will 
simplify and expand these techniques, including the initiatory rituals, for 
greater ease of study and use.

Lodges and Study Groups. The Golden Dawn system is not dependent on 
affiliation with any group proclaiming itself as “Golden Dawn” or “Rosicrucian”. 
Nor, even though the initiatory rituals describe a lodge system, is group 
practice necessary for their enactment. All magic must ultimately take place 
in the psyche of the student. There are existing Golden Dawn Lodges, and 
Lodges and Study Groups of other organizations teaching ceremonial magic. 
Often the most practical way to make contact with a group is by placing an

advertisement in a local New Age or Occult tabloid or magazine. 
xi

Introduction 
To The Fifth Edition

“Inheritor of a Dying World, we call thee to the 
Living Beauty. Wanderer in the Wild Darkness, we 
call thee to the Gentle Light. Long hast thou 
dwelt in Darkness — Quit the Night and seek the Day.”With these poetic and deeply symbolic words, the three principal officers in the 
Neophyte Grade ceremony ritually bring the candidate into the Order of the Golden 
Dawn as well as to the Light. This is not unlike Edinger’s explanation in Ego and 
Archetype of the circular development of the ego-Self axis of which the anima may be 
the bridge. The “Night” is the unconscious, and the “Day” increased consciousness. 
Edinger refers to an alternating process of ego-Self separation and ego-Self union asa 
spiral-like psychological development throughout all of life. Whereas this is natural 
to the human condition, the system of the Golden Dawn acts as a precise catalytic agent 
which accelerates this growth toward Soul much as a “hot house” or “grow light” influen- 
ces the quality and development of plant growth. One may ask why the necessity for 
“acceleration.” Considering the world’s current political arena and that we are no 
longer, in a deeper reality, separate nations but a worldwide community, as much 
“consciousness” as possible is gravely necessary unto the very survival of our planet. 
Additionally, what with pervasive technological implementation, we also must estab- 
lish and maintain connection with the instinctual, transpersonal, and powerfully 
“rooted” experience of the deeper layers of the unconscious. And for this, the Golden 
Dawn provides its wonderous reservoir of symbol, sacrament, and ceremonial.It is important to establish that Israel Regardie did not look upon the Golden 
Dawn system as an abstruse or interesting “occult” oddity of the turn of this last cen- 
tury. In his initial introduction for the first publication of this book in the late nineteen 
thirties he writes, “It is for this reason that I hold that the Golden Dawn magic, the 
technique of initiation, is of supreme and inestimable importance to mankind at large. 
In it the work of academic psychology may ‘ind a logical conclusion and fruition, so 
that it may develop further its own particular contribution to modern life and culture. 
For this psycho-magical technique of ceremonial initiation indicates the solution of 
the ‘anima’ problem. ‘Arise! Shine! For thy light is come!’ ” And Regardie unreser- 
vedly maintained this position until his death in 1985.

Thinking through and fully understanding the usage of such terms as “occult” or 
“magic” apart from their historically negative or even lurid connotations is fun- 
damental. The association of these words with “black” magic or Satanism has uniform- 
ly been the result of hysteria, narcissistic theatrics, capitalization by the media, or 
psychosis. To truly explore the “dark arts” (or in other words, apprehend the arche- 
type of the shadow) through systematic ritual work demands not only extraordinary 
knowledge, discipline, and training, but a great deal of plain hard work toward which 
would-be dabblers never seem inclined. For any of us to integrate our “darker” side is 
a lifelong and necessary process, but a process which yields toward a more fullness of Self. 
As Edinger comments, “All these aspects of the rejected shadow are equated with the 
‘King,’ which means psychologically that acceptance of the shadow and compassion

xviixvii

for the inferior man are equivalent to acceptance of the Seif.” The masses have projec- 
ted (and not integrated) their shadow from the witch burnings of Salem to con- 
gressional hearings on censorship of lyrics in rock music. The “occult” means nothing 
more than the study of what is “hidden” beyond the perception of the five senses. 
Electricity could be construed as an “occult” force, and indeed to primitive man (as it 
manifested as an electrical storm) who partook of the mysterious since this was 
beyond the bounds of the ordinary. But electricity is no longer a “magical” force, for 
modern man has understood and harnessed it. So too, there are other forces beyond 
electricity and even nuclear power awaiting their further discovery and definition by 
man. Andas Crowley articulated, “magic” means creating change through conscious- 
ness at will. The alchemist preceded the chemist, the astrologer the astronomer. And 
the Magician is a threshold to an inner frontier which encompasses the limitless possibilities of 
the manifested and unknown universe as being contained, dormant, but inevitably actualized 
“within” the psyche.

There is no better explanation of the structure, function, and basic concepts of 
the Golden Dawn system than in Regardie’s introduction to the original edition of 
this book contained herein. This extensive and clarifying narrative demands reread- 
ing again and again. The Golden Dawn is a “system” of discovering, dialoguing, and 
even negotiating with the collective unconscious and is not a religion, philosophy or 
even a cult. As the candidate is about to take the obligation of the Neophyte, the 
Hierophant assures him or her that, “There is nothing contrary to your civil, moral, or 
religious duties in this Obligation.” Furthermore, the Hierophant reminds the can- 
didate to respect all religions, for each contains a spark of the divine.The key theme in both the Neophyte Grade and the ritual of Adeptus Minor is 
that of being brought to the Light. This Light is also referred toas L.V.X. In the introduc- 
tion to Volumes III and IV of The Golden Dawn, Regardie’s excellent analysis of the 
keyword (LN.R.I.) and subsequent gematric correspondences and conclusions will 
bear fruit from continued study and meditation regarding this Light. But a true “se- 
cret” of the entire system is that this Light is not a metaphysical or philosophically 
speculative construct meaning grace, spirituality, or healing (although the Light does 
bring all of these) but is an ACTUAL FORCE which although independent of egoic man can 
be generated by man through the use of his consciousness to bring about CHANGE AT 
WILL!

Although the so-called “new” physics has begun to come closer with any variety 
of theoretical models for this “force,” the brilliant work of Fred Alan Wolf in such 
books as Star Wave has come closest to explaining L.V.X. and the paradigmatic raison 
d’etre for not only what the Golden Dawn is based upon, but why it “works”!Wolf's work echoes Regardie’s intuitive leap of fifty years ago when Regardie felt 
(as in the above quotation) that psychology would find its “logical conclusion and 
fruition” within the Golden Dawn system! Although Wolf makes no reference to the 
Golden Dawn or L.V.X. per se, he has dealt a death knell to a classical physics model of 
psychological theory while a quantum mechanics model has been astoundingly and 
secretly kerneled within the profound symbology and initiatory technique of the 
Golden Dawn system for countless years! To quote Wolf, “It is my dream that quan- 
tum physics will bridge the gap between science and mysticism. As such it must lead 
thinkers and researchers to a new view of human behavior. B.F. Skinner was not so 
wrong in attempting to deal with behavior scientifically, but he was the Newton of 
behaviorists. We now search for the Einstein and the Bohr of human behavior to 
develop the quantum model of human beings.”

L.V.X. is generated in a number of ways and these are through ceremonial magic, 
the Middle Pillar technique, the Vibratory Formula of the Middle Pillar, and the 
Opening by Watchtower. Although Regardie published a progressive ritual use of the 
Opening by Watchtower in Ceremonial Magic, | would advise the beginning student to 
leave this particular ceremony strictly alone until he or she felt well within the 
initiatory containment and safety of the Second Order either through personal work

xviiixviii

or within an initiatory group. (Later in this introduction I will offer suggestions for 
the individual to plan a safe and successful approach to this Work overall.) This 
Light knows no moral or conscionable dictate. (Fire can burn your hand as surely as 
cook your favorite recipe!) But this is the “holy and formless fire” which either man- 
ifests in our external environment through the screen of our disciplined and CON- 
SCIOUS image making (Crowley gave great emphasis to developing the 
concentrated image making aspect of consciousness) as well as through the auto- 
matic UNCONSCIOUS complexes of our personalities. And hence Regardie 
insisted upon some form of psychotherapeutic work once the unconscious had been 
activated by the ritual work since it was unlikely that the Neophyte had yet even 
knowledge of the possibility of control of image building with consciousness and 
what effect this could have on the personal life, let alone the discipline to imple- 
ment it. The Neophyte was equally unlikely to be aware of the “sleeping dogs” (to 
use a phrase of Blavatsky’s) or unconscious complexes of the personality and how 
those unknown parts of ourselves influence our lives.This brings us to a discussion of “initiation.” Initiation means “beginning” and 
if performed effectively, brings the candidate to an entirely new threshold and 
phase of experience. Initiation in itself does not bring “happiness” or “wishes come 
true.” It is a starting point for difficult personal work ahead, and once the symbols 
are activated within the sphere of the candidate, it can mean many months, even 
years of difficult inward personal labor from one Grade to the next. The INNER 
completion of a ritual Grade does in fact bring a new awareness, more personal free- 
dom from automatic parts of oneself, increased control over conscious image build- 
ing, and a greater power, but with most of us this is usually hard won and painful. 
As to who is capable of initiating, the question of “succession” or “lineage” or the 
“transfer of power” has been debated for years regarding its pros and cons. Ulti- 
mately, the only person who can truly initiate another is one who has not only done 
the work pertaining to the particular Grade, but for the complete Order into which 
he or she initiates someone else. Unless the totality of the symbols is within the 
sphere of sensation of the initiator, little will be activated within the candidate and 
the ritual will be shallow the theatrics. As Jung wrote in a foreword to a book of 
Michael Fordham’s “The treatment of the transference reveals in a pitiless light 
what the healing agent really is: it is the degree to which the analyst himself can 
cope with his own psychic problems.” Just as the analyst can no more guide an 
analysand through territory he or she never struggled with or confronted within 
him or herself, so too the initiator’s effectiveness rests upon how well he or she has 
built the “Temple not made with hands” within his or her own psyche.In the late 1960s, the seeds of my destiny were actively fertilized toward what I 
much later understood as my personal “dance” with the unconscious, the process of 
magical initiation, the Golden Dawn system, and the Western Mystery Tradition. In 
the earlier part of 1969, I had had a brief, albeit intoxicating, exposure to Jungian 
analysis in San Francisco. In the latter part of 1969, by way of a powerful and 
unusual synchronicity, I had been told about a Los Angeles organization called 
Builders of the Adytum which had been founded by Pauli Foster Case (who I was to 
much later find out had been a participant in a Golden Dawn Temple of the earlier 
1900s). It took a full year for these connections to ripen before I embarked upon 
Case’s excellent correspondence lessons in a committed way. His work introduced 
me to an exciting and enriching world of the symbolism of Tarot, Qabalah, and 
basic ritual. These lessons provided me with a solid foundation which has played a 
significant part in my magical career ever since.

In that first year, I had a profound sense of a sudden major change of conscious- 
ness which manifested as frequent mystical-like experiences and a daily and perva- 
sive “feeling” of numinosity regarding my experience of life around and within me. 
As I look back on my early journal entries during this year, on the surface they

xixxix

appear naive, almost child-like as to the extent of a new found trust in the transper- 
sonal and a “sweetness” and joy with life. This was not unlike what Regardie had 
referred to in The Eye And The Triangle as the “awakening” which comes unbidden and 
cannot be determined by good works, conscious wishes, or the best of intentions. My 
former way of experiencing life was over and behind me. I had truly become a fresh 
inquisitive Child of the Universe. I enjoyed this upwelling type of experience almost 
daily for at least a year as an infant enjoys suckling the warm nourishing breast. But 
the Child was to grow into greater consciousness and Light, and although the Child 
leads with delight, sparkle, and vivaciousness; responsibility, hard work, and even 
the pain of struggle and loss are inevitable once psychic contact with the gods pre- 
sents the challenge toward further consciousness and inner growth beyond the safety 
of womb, new birth and breast.

In the fall of 1971, [had “accidentally” noticed a copy of Llewellyn’s then current 
edition of Regardie’s The Golden Dawn in a bookstore. I perused these books with a 
combination of awe, confusion, and reverence. The material was abstruse, and I 
remember while looking through its pages that I had a fleeting moment of fear (an 
Alice falling down the rabbit hole!!) as well as a sense of recognition, and realization 
that this information would thoroughly upset my current constructs of viewing life. 
My “rational” side felt ready for a fall! I left the books remaining on the store 
shelf!Over the next several weeks, Regardie’s writing became intensely more visible 
to me through any variety of additional “accidents.” In early October, without my 
requesting, a stranger spontaneously gave me Regardie’s telephone number and 
encouraged me to contact him. I spoke with Regardie for the first time on October 9, 
1971. I wrote in my journal simply that day “I seek Initiation.” I wrote further, “How 
sweet the Rose.” [ had virtually no idea at the time how powerful these simple words, 
their meaning, and the images they engendered were to become for me over the next 
15 years! On the evening of October 20, 1971 I had had my most powerful and 
perhaps last mystical experience of this earlier period. While meditating on the Tarot 
Trump, “The Hermit,” I was aware of a separate “consciousness” other than my own 
which I sensed clearly communicating the following via an inner awareness: “Come! 
Join Me at the Summit, and we shall watch the Dawn come upon us before others 
even know the Hour of Awakening is at hand. Run! Hurry! So that you too might sing 
with Me and rejoice in the Morning Light!” Two days later I sat opposite Regardie in 
his office in Studio City, California. I was 25 years of age, and I knew absolutely noth- 
ing about the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn!

I knew that Regardie had been practicing as a Reichian therapist at that time and 
my initial meeting with him was for purposes of introducing myself, inquiring about 
Reichian technique, and exploring with him why he felt psychotherapy was of such 
importance along with a magical regimen. I was too shy to venture any serious ques- 
tions about the nature of magic, and the few I hinted toward he avoided completely. 
Midway through my time with him, he had me read aloud from Light On The Path by 
Mabel Collins. Although a lengthy passage, it is well worth quoting here since it gives 
the student the first inkling of the personal Genius or more poetically, the Holy Guar- 
dian Angel.Stand aside in the coming battle, and though thou fightest be not thou the warrior. Look for 
the warrior and let him fight in thee. Take his orders for battle and obey them. Obey him not as 
though he were a general, but as though he were thyself and his spoken words were the utterance 
of thy secret desires; for he is thyself, yet infinitely wiser and stronger than thyself. Look for him, 
else in the fever and hurry of the fight thou mayest pass him; and he will not know thee unless 
thou knowest him. If thy cry reach his listening ear then will he fight in thee and fill the dull void 
within. And if this is so, then canst thou go through the fight cool and unwearied, standing aside 
and letting him battle for thee. Then it will be impossible for thee to strike one blow amiss. But if 
thou look not for him, if thou pass him by, then there is no safeguard for thee. Thy brain will reel,

xx

thy heart grow uncertain, and in the dust of the battlefield thy sight and senses will fail, and thou 
wilt not know thy friends from thy emenies.

He is thyself, yet thou art finite and liable to error. He is eternal and is sure. He is eternal 
truth. When once he has entered thee and become thy warrior, he will never utterly desert thee, 
and at the day of the great peace he will become one with thee.Ientered into Reichian therapy with Regardie for a period of approximately two 
years. Apart from Reich’s method of therapy, he also incorporated some basic prana- 
yama yoga techniques and chiropractic adjustments. But he also occasionally worked 
at activating one chakra located below my breastbone and above my solar plexus 
which on the Tree of Life would correspond to Tiphareth. Within a brief time, I felt the 
“streamings” referred to by Reich in his writings and others who have experienced 
this kind of therapeutic work. But the experience of this particular chakra being 
activated was beyond description! On one occasion I experienced an actual glowing, 
pulsating sphere within the center of my body which felt like an electrified tennis 
ball!

Years later, however, lam convinced that this kind of occurrence was not just the 
result of Regardie’s success as a good Reichian therapist, but also due to many years of 
his own dedicated work with the Middle Pillar technique which he frequently 
referred to as the “sine qua non” of all magical work. In other words, Regardie was 
able, by a kind of process of induction, to begin to open me up to the entrance of 
powerful healing creative energy from profoundly deep reservoirs of the uncon- 
scious (and in the absence of verbal therapy!). Wilhelm Reich had called this energy 
“orgone” and, in his opinion, it is what numberless generations before revered and 
worshipped as “God.” A Jungian may call this Soul, Self, or “meaning” depending 
upon individual interpretation. Or a Freudian may relate to this phenomenon as a 
release of libido. But the Magician calls this experience and influx of energy L.V.X.and 
with proper training and dedication, is able to release it him or herself WITHOUT 
THE AID OF AN OUTSIDE PERSON OR AGENCY!Regardie had a phenomenal ability in generating this kind of energy quickly and 
efficiently. However, once in 1982 he confided to me that if any person worked the 
Middle Pillar technique twice daily for a significant period of time, that the same 
result would eventually occur. If this daily work were combined with sustained relax- 
ation and prolonged rhythmic deep breathing, one could, in effect, become one’s OWN 
“Hierophant” and trust that one’s personal Genius would guide one within the pure 
intention of sincere effort.

Several months into my therapeutic work with Regardie, he one day suddenly 
placed a copy of Crowley’s The Holy Books in my hands. I had read very little of 
Crowley at that time. He asked me to open the book at random and suggested that by 
doing so, I mught have a more conscious sense of my “Dharma” or destiny. I opened 
to the Path of Tav, the Path of Saturn, the Astral plane, and the Path of the uncon- 
scious. My “dance” with the inner life, the nonrational and unconscious life has 
blessedly unfolded ever since!

My therapy with Regardie ended in 1974 and for the next two years we were 
occasionally in contact with each other. Ithen moved out of the Los Angeles area, and 
we maintained a correspondence for several years. Throughout this time, he still con- 
tinued to be reticent regarding any discussion of magical matters. In 1979, while I was 
experiencing anxiety and an acute depression, he suggested I begin working the 
Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram daily fora full year and in complete silence during 
that time. The tide had turned, and this was my true entry into practical magic!In 1981, Regardie gave mea gift of approximately 200 pieces of his lifelong magi- 
cal paraphernalia and equipment which is currently in a bank vault and will even- 
tually be sent as a gift to the Warburg Institute in London, England for preservation 
and future generations to appreciate and experience. At this same time, Regardie had 
also made a gift of his practical alchemical equipment to another friend. He had se- 
cretly maintained an alchemical laboratory in a garage adjacent his house for nearly 10

xxi

years! Although Regardie’s earlier conceptions pertaining to the “Stone of the 
Wise” reflected that the alchemical process was one of spiritual transformation, 
in the latter years before he died he changed his thinking and did believe in an 
actual “philosopher's stone.” He had told me about such a Stone where one took 
off slight shavings with a sharp knife and mixed them with a small amount of 
white wine to be ingested daily. He also had several physicists and mathemati- 
‘cians around the country quietly working toward a scientific solution of the 
“Stone of the Wise.” This was not an aging man’s fantasy attempting to defy 
death’s inevitability. Metaphorically, this was a Leonardo DaVinci who was 
making “intuitive drawings” of his conception of the “flying machine”!

Between 1981 and 1983, I studied magic under Regardie in his home and per- 
sonal Temple in Sedona, Arizona. Hundreds of hours of personal instruction, stim- 
ulating conversation, practical ritual, magical drill, and warm companionship 
replaced his reticence of discussing magical topics ten years before! This time with 
him had been a period of true asylum for me, and experiencing the pristine though 
primitive atmosphere of his home in Sedona with its “red rock” landscapes and 
quiet lifestyle contributed to the romantic conception of the “magical retirement.”In the summer of 1983, Regardie and I traveled to Fiji, Australia and New 
Zealand for magical as well as personal reasons. His magical career had turned full 
circle with his re-connection with the Felkin’s legacy in New Zealand, and power- 
ful feelings and memories were stirred within him with a disquieting poignancy. 
He had once remarked that the “giants” of magic had all died, and while in New 
Zealand reflected upon who would continue on with the work he had so carefully © 
helped to preserve over the past fifty years. In New Zealand, I purchased a novel by 
Mary Renault, which I read on the tedious plane ride. Its title proved to be predic- 
tive. When Regardie and:I returned to the United States, I was never to see him 
again. He died two years later. The novel I read was entitled The King Must Die.

Regardie’s work and legacy is that he established a bridge from the Victorian 
magicians to the modern day inquiring student. But the crucial question is how 
does that student approach and benefit from this vast and complex wealth of sym- 
bology and ritual without the aid of a guide or the support of a working group. 
And more importantly, how does the Golden Dawn system successfully make a 
“difference” in the individual’s usual way of experiencing life. I am convinced 
that by working assiduously, or as Crowley would say “Work. .. Work blindly, 
foolishly, misguidedly, it doesn’t matter in the end. Work in itself has absolute 
virtue” is an essential attitude to be taken toward this work. And hard work it is!

I know of two women who intuitively decided to perform the Neophyte cere- 
mony, imagining the roles of the officers while acting as Neophyte. Although 
they had no duly installed Hierophant presiding, and may not have understood 
the magical formulae underlying their action at the time, the results were remark- 
able in terms of their individual magical growth and eventually being linked 
with an active Temple.Upon approaching this book, I would make the following suggestions. For 
the first several weeks, read Regardie’s introduction to the original 
edition contained herein. I would suggest several careful readings since 
this gives the student an overview of the history, structure, and function 
of not only the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn but of the Great Work itself. 
Allow this material to settle deeply into consciousness by reflecting, meditating, 
or associating any variety of images or ideas to it. Then I would suggest reading 
the First Knowledge Lecture and then immediately begin the task of memorizing 
the Hebrew alphabet and its correspondences, both found within the First 
Knowledge lecture. Within this system, the Hebrew alphabet has no connotation 
of religion or sect. Its letters are considered “generic” and “holy” symbols—pow- 
erful doorways into the inner world—and are not associated with dogma or eso- 
teric religious organization. A convenient way of memorizing these letters is to 
place them on “flash” cards, not unlike what we have all become acquainted

xxii

with in elementary school or in foreign language courses as a means of acquiring 
vocabulary.xxii

with in elementary school or in foreign language courses as a means of acquiring 
vocabulary.

The next step is to acquire a notebook of some kind and begin a magical journal 
which must be kept daily, even if it is only to quickly jot down that no work was 
accomplished on a given day or that one was ill. I have heard so many excuses 
throughout the years that journal keeping is cumbersome, purposeless, or simply not 
convenient, but the journal is essential. Not only is ita means of keeping track of one’s 
progress, but it becomes the means for an active dialogue with the inner world and 
one’s unconscious. The way in which a journal is kept can be as varied as is appro- 
priate to any one personality, but apart from the date and time and a record of one’s 
magical work; dreams, fantasies, body sensations, events of the day, synchronicities, 
astrological aspects and transits, and spontaneous imagery can all be incorporated at 
the choice of the student.

At this point, I would suggest the student make a full year’s commitment to per- 
forming the Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram twice a day. And this should be done 
with a vow to silence, meaning that one does not discuss one’s personal work with 
friends, even if they be of likemindedness. The purpose of this is to begin building 
with “thought,” that is, by paying “attention” to a particular system of symbols they 
are then “built” within the “sphere of sensation” or aura much as a sculptor creates 
with clay. The Astral Light as termed by French occultist Eliphas Levi (Louis Al- 
phonse Constant) is malleable by FOCUSED and CONCENTRATED thought! The

. symbols thus created within the aura act as doorways for healing, inspiration, protec- 
tion, and guidance and prevent emotional and psychological contagion. How many 
of us have felt depleted by being around a depressed person or otherwise influenced 
by a negative environment.Using the description of this ritual in the First Knowledge lecture as a guide, with 
right hand at full extension straight ahead, the Banishing Pentagram begins just 
opposite the left hip tracing a large inverted “V” down to the right hip crossing up to 
and outwards from the left shoulder, over to the right shoulder, and then most impor- 
tantly reconnecting at the starting point. The dagger is never lowered and also traces a 
circle connecting each pentagram. The tracing is imagined as blue flame flecked with 
gold, not unlike a gas flame. The four archangels are imagined as towering figures 
which bring a refreshing Air from the East, cleansing Water from the West, purifying 
Fire from the South, and Earth as a stabilizer in perseverance from the North. The 
ritual is performed without expecting results, change, or power, but quietly per- 
severed in fora full year while carefully noting how it affects the personality and outer 
life. Ideally, the ritual should be performed in the same location apart from the gaze of 
others, and if possible, in a place set apart from day to day interference.At this point, I would then suggest the student read the Neophyte Ritual slowly, 
carefully, and contemplatively over the period of at least a month while still maintain- 
ing daily devotion to the Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram and persevering in the 
memorization work discussed above. It is within this ritual that are the formulae for 
future practical magical operations as well as it being the engine whereby the can- 
didate is brought to the Light. The importance of this ritual cannot be emphasized 
enough, not only in its content, but in the movements and identities of the officers as 
well as a kind of “glamour” that is created by a number of the speeches. Although the 
style of writing is at times oblique, this is not only a ritual to be understood in terms of 
its content, but to be additionally “experienced” devoid of rational explanation of 
content! And the writing style facilitates this greatly. Toward the end of this month, 
the student may wish to add the Neophyte meditation which also is contained within 
the First Knowledge lecture. Although Regardie was never particularly attracted to or 
impressed by these simple meditations at the end of each Knowledge Lecture, I have 
found them of immense value.

This then is a suggested schema for approaching each of the elemental rituals 
and Knowledge Lectures in the Outer Order that follow the Neophyte Ritual. The

xxiiiThis then is a suggested schema for approaching each of the elemental rituals 
and Knowledge Lectures in the Outer Order that follow the Neophyte Ritual. The

xxiii

elemental rituals have been criticized from a variety of courts as to their superfi- 
ciality or continued maintenance of Victorian occult "claptrap." Nothing could be 
further from the truth! Anyone who would make such allegations has not expe- 
rienced these rituals in full Temple again and again and seen their worth, stimu- 
lating possibility and enduring freshness. If the student would persevere slowly 
and with discipline in the above for at least six months, a very firm foundation 
would be laid indeed! At that point, a study of the Inner Order rituals and the 
material of Books Four, Five, and Six will not only be easier to comprehend, but 
a fertile inner "soil" within the psyche will have been well prepared for the plant- 
ing of powerful inner life generating seeds. At this point the student should 
begin to pay persistent attention to the "Z" documents, appreciating that a life- 
time will never exhaust their amazing wealth of possibilities and inspiration. 
Finally, echoing Regardie's earlier warning, and a fair warning it is, the Enochi- 
an system of magic should be left strictly alone until one has left no other stone 
unturned in this book to the point where every correspondence is memorized, 
every technique understood, and every ritual experienced.The above suggestions presuppose that the student will be working alone, 
and working alone can be a very effective way to approach one's Holy Guardian 
Angel or personal Genius through attention to this inner awareness, inspiration, 
and guidance. The "Right" persons or situation will automatically be available 
for the individual as he or she is ready for them, as in the often quoted occult 
aphorism, paraphrased: when the student is ready, the teacher will appear. So 
there should be a relaxed attitude toward persisting in the work and knowing 
that one is guided in spite of oneself! However, the student may eventually be 
brought into contact with a group and the following are important issues to 
reflect upon. ALL groups have a hierarchy or "pecking" order even if this may be 
heatedly denied by the group. Regardie felt that the Golden Dawn system was 
particularly effective in activating the darker or unknown parts of each member. 
While this may be true, it has been my observation that ANY group (be it even 
most benign and well-intentioned in its purpose) still grapples with projections 
of all kinds and ultimately with the issue of POWER! A talented and creative 
professor of mine once commented to me several years ago that the next great 
frontier for psychological research (beyond the current fascination with sex 
roles) was power! Participation in group effort automatically calls for multiple 
parental and sibling projections and each person's genetic material comes into 
play. The student's only safeguard in these situations is "consciousness," which 
is not easily come by! Regardie felt the only way for these conflicts to be worked 
through was for the individual to be in psychotherapy in tandem with magical 
work. His adamant insistence upon this is something to be seriously examined.While driving back to his home from Flagstaff, Arizona one day through a 
tentative drizzling rain, Regardie had confided to me that it had taken him about 
seven years to recover from his breach with Crowley. At some point, Dion For- 
tune had offered him rest and asylum in her country home in the neighborhood 
of Glastonbury in England. There the younger Regardie went to heal and plan 
his life further. Fortune was fascinated by this "new" brand of self-exploration 
called Freudian "analysis" and even went so far as to engage in being (what was 
then called) a "lay" analyst. This term meant that the analyst was not bound by 
the training, educational, or licensure restrictions which were adopted in the 
United States sometime after World War I, but instead studied privately under 
a mentor who more often than not was one's own analyst. I would speculate that 
Fortune was a significant influence on Regardie at that time in terms of aiding 
him toward a different kind of explanation of the chaos and abandonment he 
had been experiencing up to that point as well as helping him to forage an 
expanded understanding of the future direction of his life within the contain- 
ment of his interests in magic and mysticism.

Regardie experienced Jungian analysis in London and Reichian therapy later in 
New York City. While he maintained a profound respect for Jung's theoretical con- 
cepts, he felt that Reichian technique was infinitely more effective than free associa-

XXIVXXIV

tion, dream interpretation, or a verbal analysis of the transference. While both 
approaches to therapy have their merits and limitations, I am more convinced 
that the "match" between therapist and client is a more salient issue than orien- 
tation. ] would suggest that the student who engages in therapy in tandem with 
magical work read the first edition of Robert Langs' Psychotherapy, A Basic Text, 
as a guide, paying particular attention to what Langs refers to as the "frame- 
work." The "framework" (or Jungian "temenos") is universal and essential, and 
depending on how well a therapist maintains it, determines the outcome and 
effectiveness of therapy.

In Regardie's first edition of The Middle Pillar in 1938 he wrote, "These ideas 
are mentioned not because a systematic union of Magic and Psychology will be 
here presented, but in the hope that this effort will spur some psychologist 
acquainted with magical and mystical techniques to attempt such a task. Who- 
ever does succeed in welding the two indissolubly together, to him mankind will 
ever be grateful.” And so this book has great value for therapists as- well to 
explore its content for fresh ideas and catalytic suggestions toward innovative 
research. Jung's The Psychology of Transference is immeasurably illuminated by 
Golden Dawn concepts of Rosicrucianism and alchemy. When Jung speaks of 
the "rose" in this work, by interpreting that rose as the Rose Cross of the Inner 
Order, one's associations and insights are deeply enriched knowing that this is 
not an abstruse alchemical reference, but a powerful engine for any variety of 
practical purpose. Additionally, Edinger's development of such themes in Ego 
and Archetype as the "blood of Christ" or the four elements is markedly enhanced 
when understood with the respective Golden Dawn concepts pertaining to the 
Hebrew letter "Shin" or the significance of the four elements on the altar in the 
Neophyte Hall.The Current of The Hermetic Order the Golden Dawn is alive with a bril- 
liant blaze reignited by Regardie's patient tending to it over the past 50 years 
when many a storm threatened to extinguish it when it became a small spark. 
And the student will find that Current by personal inner work and not through 
external organizations, initiations for a fee, or publicized Grade attainments. As 
Paul Foster Case wrote in The True and Invisible Rosicrucian Order, “There is a true 
Rosicrucian Order. If you are duly and truly prepared, you will undoubtedly 
make contact ...in due season ... I do not condemn pretenders. They condemn 
themselves.”

Llewellyn Publications and Carl L. Weschcke are to be congratulated on this 
special presentation of the first paperback edition of this significant work. That 
the original pagination has been maintained for purposes of reference and future 
research is only one example that points to the long standing commitment of 
Llewellyn to high standards and impeccable quality. Many people have played 
an invaluable and special role in my life since 1980, and I would like to acknowl- 
edge some of them now. The contributing editors to this edition: Anupassana, 
George Wilson, and Hal Sundt have taken immense time and responsibility for 
making this an unparalleled edition of critical and extended material. Adam For- 
rest has been my faithful Golden Dawn companion and guide, and Chic Cicero 
has achieved attainments in actualizing Golden Dawn symbolism seldom possi- 
ble. I also wish to thank Stephan Hoeller, for the first Light, Don Kraig for stim- 
ulating conversation and ideas, and my dear friends in New Mexico for bringing 
me closer to the Feminine. Finally, I wish to heartfully thank Richard Auger 
Ph.D. for his patient participation in my own perilous “Night Sea Journey."When. Regardie finished his introduction to the original edition, he con- 
cluded with the words that his work was done. My work, your work, all of us as 
true fratres and sorores who seek the Ruby Rose, the Cross of Gold, and the True 
Stone of the Wise . .. our Work too, just begun!

Cris Monnastre 
Corpus Christi 
Los Angeles, 1986 
XXV

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION 
Volumel ,

It would be trite to say that life is a strange, wonderful and mysterious process. But it 
is! In his Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, the alchemist Basil Valentine describes his 
antimony as a deadly poison on the one hand, yet, when purified alchemically, as a 
potent medicament on the other. Apparently this Golden Dawn material has to be de- 
scribed in rather the same way—reminding me of an old adage concerning money. It 
passes through the lives of an infinite number of people to change their lives catalyti- 
cally, but in the process always remaining untouched itself.

At the same time, it recalls to mind several letters that were received years ago 
following the publication of the first of the four volumes in the original edition. Any- 
one would have thought, judging from the tone of some of these letters, that I had 
become exalted to the throne of God Almighty himself. Even a few came from active 
Order members scattered in various parts of the world, corroborating many of the 
critical allegations made earlier in My Rosicrucian Adventure. Though the latter book 
was published independently of The Golden Dawn, it was originally written to serve as 
an introduction to the whole body of Order teaching.On the other hand, there was a long letter from the late Captain J. Langford Gar- 
stin, under his Order sacramental name, chiding me severely for publishing the se- 
cret teachings of the Order, and asking me in the future never again to refer to the 
Order by name. And, strangely enough, one of the last letters received from Aleister 
Crowley before we became estranged (as described in The Eye in the Triangle) stated 
two things. First, in connection with my statement that one of the officiating officers 
had hurried through an initiatory ritual as though reading a batch of grocery bills—he 
remarked that I should have rudely told him to go to Jericho, or words to that effect. 
And secondly, relative to the material itself, he roundly scolded me, stating I had 
absolutely no right whatsoever to have published this material and to have broken 
my sacred obligation to secrecy. Many decades earlier, he had published these same 
Order teachings in the Equinox—only under direct command from the Secret Chiefs 
of the Order, at least that was his claim.

If Aleister Crowley disapproved of my action, I have to be egostistical enough to 
assume that my editorial job was far better than his own with his amanuensis of that 
time, Captain ]J. F. C. Fuller. My version certainly was more orderly, more adherent to 
the letter of the Order system, and unmarred by too many extraneous comments and 
some hideous garbling.

So there we are. Some approved of the publication of these books; a very few dis- 
approved. That's all there is to it.So there we are. Some approved of the publication of these books; a very few dis- 
approved. That's all there is to it.

Whatever I have done in the past, has been done. I have, basically, no regrets. 
Perhaps the only fleeting or hesitant regret that I do have is a doubt as 
to whether publication has actually done much good, whether students at large were 
able to utilize the system in the manner I had hoped for. This is a serious doubt; oral 
instruction is invaluable, and should be given only under the guidance ofa teacher, or 
within the framework of an Order.

The past two or three decades have revealed something else as a definite disad- 
vantage. The average student approaching The Golden Dawn has simply been over- 
whelmed by the sheer weight and wealth of original teaching material. As he glances 
through the large four-volume set, understanding but little of it; he becomes alto-

1

2 The Golden Dawn

gether confused, thrust headlong into despair, and does not pause long enough to 
study the system in small sections until he does discover its intent and purpose.

In the Order—or any occult organization for that matter—no student was ever 
bombarded with too much study material at the beginning. He is spoonfed small 
doses, as it were, monthly. Some critics regard this procedure as a “come on,” as bait 
merely to keep the student paying his monthly dues for long periods of time. Insome 
instances, this may well be true. On the contrary, it is sometimes given im this form, I 
am sure, so that the student can study a little of it ata time, transmuting it into personal 
property by assimilating it piecemeal into his own psychic structure. Then more 
teaching was assigned, and so on. Periodically an examination, oral and written, was 
given, not to grade the student in conventional terms, nor to put him on the spot, but 
to ascertain whether or not he had grasped and understood the preceding lessons.This procedure is not possible in a book like The Golden Dawn. Of course it could 
have been re-written in lesson form with the above intent in mind, cautioning the stu- 
dent not to proceed until he had thoroughly grasped each segment of the work. But it 
was not done that way.

Under these circumstances, therefore, it remains only for the intelligent student 
to work out his own study technique or regimen. If he is not astute enough to perceive 
the practicality or necessity of the above, then quite evidently he is not intelligent 
enough to deal with the material itself,and it should not be in his possession at 
all.

This is the counsel I would give to the serious student of the Great Work. Study 
the contents of the first two volumes, now combined to forma single book, as if you 
were a member of an Order, and were receiving a monthly monogram or lesson from 
headquarters. Glance through all the material once or twice just to get the drift of it, 
and then allocate to yourself a few pages only at a time.

If these pages are not clear at first, which is more than likely, then I would 
strongly suggest supplementing them with additional reading. First of all, I would 
recommend an old book of mine, The Garden of Pomegranates. This is a simple outline of 
the Qabalah comprising the backbone of the Order philosophy. It has been out of 
print for several years. Thanks to Llewellyn Publications it is on its way back into cir- 
culation once more ina new edition. It should prove a useful guide through the initial 
knowledge lectures of the Order as given in volume one of The Golden Dawn.In particular, two Order papers in this volume are supremely important docu- 
ments. They are The Path of the Chameleon (p. 95) which deals comprehensively with 
the Tree of Life, and another one entitled The Microcosm (p. 100). It is my suggestion 
that they should be studied over and over again, if necessary using The Garden of 
Pomegranates as a companion and as an aid to simplification. Sometimes the language 
of S. Liddell MacGregor Mathers, who apparently was the author of these papers, was 
notas simple as it might have been. Be that as it may, nothing should deter the serious 
student from extracting the last drop of intellectual nutriment from these papers.

There is also the new edition of The Tree of Life (Samuel Weiser, New York, 1968), 
which provides an elementary introduction to magical procedures, the heart and core 
of the practical work of the Order. With these two simple books, and only a few pages 
of The Golden Dawn handled at any single time, most of the complex problems should 
be eliminated.

Such a course is analogous to the procedure used in driving across the country, 
say from Los Angeles to New York City, approximately three thousand miles. This is a 
considerable distance. But by setting intermediate goals and marking them on your 
road maps the journey is made much easier. Then each day one aims not for New 
York but for the next town or city, perhaps three or four hundred miles from your pres- 
ent stop. In this way, the limited objective is easily reached without the driver being 
overwhelmed by the enormity of the distance to his final goal, New York City.

Introduction 3

Much the same progress should be followed here where the study material is 
concerned. Make sure you allow enough time for this initial material to be absorbed 
before you press onward. More haste means less speed. Take your time. There is no 
hurry. In many such cliches, there is a profound wisdom.In the opening passages of the very first initiatory ritual of the Order is found the re- 
markable phrase “By names and images are all powers awakened and reawakened.”

This simple phrase sets the stage, as it were, for all subsequent Order teaching. In 
effect it reveals the essential fact involved in all practical magical work. Most of the 
later instructions merely elaborate the necessity for the correct vibration of the 
highest Divine Names, and the building up in the imagination of pictures of one kind 
or another. In all of the major rituals, and in all such instructions as those on talismans 
and telesmatic images, the basic factors are those mentioned in the very simple 
phrase given above. Never let it be forgotten, when apparently submerged in a mass 
of complicated attributions and technical details, that the essence of magic is simple. 
So simple in fact, that a vast amount of self-discipline and training is required to make 
it effective.

The counsel given in the Portal document (p. 175 of volume One), preparing the 
student for the Adept grade is of the greatest importance here. It should be read, 
reread, and then studied some more.

One of the items referred to for the first time in this Portal document is “building 
the Tree of Life in the aura.” I have found this rudimentary scheme so useful and so 
important in my own growth and development that it came to have tremendous 
significance in my own daily practice. There is rarely a time when I permit myself to 
fall asleep at night without “lighting the lamp above my head”, as I personally de- 
scribe for myself the formulation of Kether. This powerful magical technique is vital and I 
cannot recommend it too highly. Ihave elaborated this rudimentary outline considerably 
ina simple little manual I wrote over thirty years ago entitled The Art of True Healing. It 
should also prove useful to the student just getting the feel of these magico- 
mystical methods.This particular Portal document is one of the most practical of all in The Golden 
Dawn curriculum. The reader should study it almost beyond all else, applying its 
recommendations in his efforts to integrate The Golden Dawn teachings into his life 
and mind. Its counsel is invaluable. If only the students who had written to me to com- 
plain of the overwhelming quantity and quality of teaching, had first heeded its 
instructions and counsel, their opinion might have been different. It is a sensible and 
rational approach to a vast subject with almost infinite ramifications.

Once this counsel has been well heeded, and closely adhered to, then the student 
could start dealing with the simplest elements of ritual and ceremonial procedures. 
An attempt to handle the complex initiatory rituals of the Grades without proper 
preparation and guidance, can only end in failure. Much the same is true of the com- 
plicated ceremonies described in the third volume. Leave them severely alone until 
you have studied them sufficiently to know what you are doing. This may take con- 
siderable time.

Start off first with what is known as the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram 
(p. 106, Volume I). This is a simple procedure. Follow the written instructions to the 
letter—literally, and then the ritual itself will present no difficulties. Problems only 
arise when the student propels himself in to these activities without proper study and 
preparation. Stay with this simple ritual until you become expert. Then begin to prac- 
tice what should be done with the imagination as you make the appropriate gestures 
with your outstretched arm (without a magical weapon—that comes later), and the 
appropriate movements around your own axis or around the room where you work. 
Do not leave the topic until absolute perfection has been obtained, else you may be 
obliged to return and master it before you can proceed to more advanced matters.

4 The Golden Dawn4 The Golden Dawn

Then experiment with the simple Rose-Cross Ritual (p. 46 of Volume II). 
Though this ritual is described ina later volume than the two now under discussion, it 
could well be taken out of context and mastered at the same time as the Pentagram 
Ritual. This ritual of the Rose-Cross teaches the formulation of the symbol in the four 
corners of the room, as well as above and below the axis where you stand. It results in 
surrounding yourself with the traditional symbol. It will provide basic discipline in at 
least three important matters:

1. Tracing geometrical figures with the hand. 
2. Imagining them clearly in your mind. — 
3. Vibrating the appropriate names.

A simple instruction on the latter process is to be found in the Portal paper 
already mentioned, as well as in several other very important documents scattered 
through the remaining volumes. Study could be supplemented by consulting another 
old book of mine The Middle Pillar (Llewellyn Publications, St. Paul, 1970), which sum- 
marizes most of the Order teachings on this topic.

The meditations given in Volume [are relatively simple, though some of the de- 
scriptive material attached to them are not likely to be applicable to the beginner. In 
addition to these, or else as an alternative, I would like to recommend a series of 
meditations or psychophysical exercises which could do much to prepare the student 
in a more dynamic way for this phase of things. They are to be found in a little book 
recently written by me called Twelve Steps to Spiritual Enlightenment (Sangreal Founda- 
tion, Texas, 1969). It should prove useful in this connection.It might also be worthwhile for the student really to start studying the initiatory 
rituals, beginning naturally with the 0=0 or Neophyte degree. Again, I would counsel 
patience. Do not hurry. Read the ritual many times in order to clearly understand its 
importance, its theme of bringing the candidate to the Light, and what is involved in 
the various movements of the officers. Only when thoroughly conversant with these 
ideas, should the student attempt to place himself in his imagination within the 
ritualistic movements themselves. This should be done in segments, a little at a time, 
until he feels at ease practicing the ritualistic movements in his imagination. The same 
type of procedure should be followed with each of the following elemental initia- 
tions.

Naturally, this involves a great deal of effort and time, and should be extended 
over many weeks or months. Hurrying through it in order to get to the next grade will 
only defeat your own purpose, and you will derive next to nothing from what you do. 
Again and again, it has to be stated—Make haste slowly! Don’t hurry.

Some of the speeches made by various officers during the ceremonies are 
magnificent and are well worth memorizing. The adoration that is a constant through 
all the rituals and which is of Gnostic origin is certainly one of these:

Holy art thou, Lord of the Universe.

Holy art thou, whom Nature hath not formed. 
Holy art thou, the Vast and the Mighty One. 
Lord of the Light and the Darkness.

Another lovely passage which deserves a place in all of one’s private devotions 
and spiritual exercises is this one:

Glory be to Thee, Father of the Undying. For thy Glory flows out rejoicing, to 
the ends of the earth.

Perhaps one of the most important of these passages to be memorized, and 
which is unequivocally at the core of all the Qabalistic teaching in the Order is the 
excerpt from the Neophyte ritual:

Unbalanced Power is the ebbing away of life.

Introduction 5Unbalanced Power is the ebbing away of life.

Introduction 5

Unbalanced Mercy is weakness and the fading out of the Will. 
Unbalanced Severity is cruelty and the barrenness of Mind.

A whole textbook could be elaborated on this one simple piece of teaching. 
Since the Order system is replete with such choice gems, it is clear that volumes 
would be required to elaborate the beauty and full meaning of its teaching.

Still another dynamic passage which could be incorporated into one’s daily 
practice of the Middle Pillar technique:

I come in the power of the Light.

I come in the Light of Wisdom.

I come in the Mercy of the Light. 
The Light hath healing in its Wings!

All of these are beautiful and their eloquence lingers with deep feeling in my 
memory. In one’s private spiritual work, a place could be found for many of them. 
As one progresses in the Path of Light, they take on more significance and radiance, 
tending to evoke higher states of consciousness.

I should like to add a little more to the general counsel of this all-important Por- 
tal document. If the student has not recently brushed up on his or her anatomy and 
physiology, the essentials of which are absolutely necessary parts of the intellectual 
armamentarium of a well-educated person, I should like to recommend an excellent 
manual which has impressed me and which should answer the average need rather 
well. It is Logan Clendenning’s The Huiman Body. It once appeared in a paperback 
edition, which was rapidly sold out. I am hoping it will soon be reprinted in a simi- 
lar edition.

The following books are recommended in lieu of those mentioned in the text. 
From my viewpoint, they are more up-to-date and therefore more useful.The following books are recommended in lieu of those mentioned in the text. 
From my viewpoint, they are more up-to-date and therefore more useful.

For a general outline of psychological functioning, I would suggest Psychology 
by Norman Munn (Houghton Mifflin, Boston). On the dynamic side, An Elemen- 
tary Textbook of Psychoanalysis by Charles Brenner (Anchor Books, New York, 
1957) is superb, to be followed by Man and His Symbols edited by Carl G. Jung 
(Doubleday, New York, 1964).

The Function of the Orgasm by Wilhelm Reich (Orgone Institute Press, New 
York, 1942) is a must. A cheaper paperback edition has appeared since that date. I 
consider it a necessity, because, without intending to do so, Reich has succeeded in 
building a bridge between the modern psychologies and occultism. Were he alive, 
he would have a fit to learn of this interpretation—but fit or no fit, it is still a fact. 
What he had to say, and the therapeutic method he developed and called vege- 
totherapy, have been found of inestimable value in my life, and the two hundred 
hours of therapy I had years ago comprise an experience that today, in retrospect, I 
would not be without.

With these materials in mind, the serious student might well be persuaded, 
as I was once, to enter psychotherapy. It is of small consequence what analyt- 
ical school he selects. All are useful. All provide help for the student in his 
search for the Light, and serve as excellent preparation for the serious disci- 
pline of Magic and self-knowledge.

Where the divinatory techniques are concerned, the counsel given in the Portal 
paper under consideration is still valid. Newer and better books on astrology have 
been published since that Portal paper was first written. Dane Rudhyar’s Astrology 
of Personality is an excellent textbook for the inquisitive student. The author 
regards astrology as the “algebra of life,” which gives meaningful relationships to 
the events of life.A more comprehensive but less philosophical text is the A to Z Horoscope Maker 
and Delineator by Llewellyn George (Llewellyn Publications, St. Paul). These two 
should be studied together.

With regard to alchemy, while some of the basic definitions of the so-called

6 The Golden Dawn

Knowledge lectures are accurate enough so far as generalizations go, they may be of 
small value when examining classical spagyric texts. The later work of the Order is 
also surprisingly vague on alchemy, and contributes little to clarify understanding. 
Some extraneous help is obviously required on this topic. I strongly recommend The 
Alchemist’s Handbook by Frater Albertus (Paracelsus Research Society, Salt Lake City, 
1964). While lacking in literary style, it is nevertheless one of the most complete 
introductions to alchemy I have ever found, providing as it does, an ABC of practical 
instruction. I know of no other that even attempts this task.

The Order instructions on Geomancy are in the fourth volume of the original 
edition (Volume II of this new one). I mention it here, albeit prematurely, because the 
Portal paper brings up the topic. There is no equivalent instruction elsewhere. I grew 
to like this as a divinatory method, using and experimenting with it extensively for 
several years. It can be operated swiftly and easily to get a direct “yes” or “no” answer, 
though a great many more details can be elicited with but little application and 
study. ,In spite of A. E. Waite’s stuffiness and turgidity, his short method of Tarot divina- 
tion using a ten card layout, as described towards the end of his book A Pictorial Key to 
the Tarot (University Books, New York), is a useful, simple and direct method. It can 
and should, of course, be supplemented by some of the brief Order definitions as laid 
down in the second volume of this edition. Practice will demonstrate its value. The 
unsuspecting student will rapidly discover his intuition and psychic faculties will 
undergo a marked stimulation and development by the use of these methods.

Insofar as the Portal document suggests the student reflect on “words and the 
power of words,” lam reminded of something I have long wanted to say, but some- 
how neglected. I would like strongly to recommend The Miracle of Language by 
Charlton Laird (Premier Books, New York, 1953), a superb piece of writing, with deep 
insight and humor, relative to the origins of our own language. And secondly, the 
topic of general semantics is an absolute necessity for the serious student on the Path. 
Language in Action by S. I. Hayakawa (Harcourt Brace, New York, 1939) is a lucid, 
insightful introduction to a difficult subject, which should be followed by People in 
Quandaries by Wendell Johnson (Harper, New York, 1946).Few mystics or occult teachers have taken general semantics to their bosoms. 
Most of them, I fancy, know nothing about the subject. A few hold it in disdain, 
perhaps out of fear. With considerable pleasure, I urge every student to read The Prob- 
lem of Good and Evil or The Christos by Vitvan (School of the Natural Order, Baker, 
Nevada). Both of these books attempt to correlate the ancient wisdom both of the East 
and the West with the techniques of Count Korzybski who developed general seman- 
tics. Reading this literature should considerably broaden the mental and spiritual 
horizons of the sincere and serious student. It will also help him keep a level head 
where the occult jungle is concerned, so that he will not fall prey to the vast mass of 
fantasy and hysteria which have sadly infiltrated this field.

If it appears that in dealing with this opening volume of The Golden Dawn I have 
done little else than recommend a wide selection of books, I had a purpose in so 
doing. Those books suggested are excellent additions to the basic requisites of a 
sound occult library. Secondly, they may succeed in training the would-be mystic and 
student of magic to be skeptical, well-informed, and intuitive all at the same time. 
Thirdly, they will go far towards disciplining his mind, enabling him to manage more 
intelligently this mass of material subsumed under the words The Golden Dawn.

Sucha preparation is not easily come by, and for that reason should not be lightly 
treated,

November 25, 1968 
ISRAEL REGARDIE

Introduction 7

NOTE TO THIRD EDITIONSucha preparation is not easily come by, and for that reason should not be lightly 
treated,

November 25, 1968 
ISRAEL REGARDIE

Introduction 7

NOTE TO THIRD EDITION

As a final word I should like to add that the Introduction written for the 
original edition is still important, in my estimation. It should certainly be stud- 
ied by the new student. When stimulated by enquiries from correspondents in 
various countries all over the world, I have often returned to it myself, reading it 
with renewed interest as though written by other than myself long ago. Com- 
posed under trying circumstances, it succeeded in conveying nonetheless the 
essential facts surrounding the history and noble teaching of the Order.

I do not think the Order will have good reason for disowning it, should this 
book survive and be read a century or two from today. It emphases the funda- 
mental theme of Order teaching—” Long hast thou dwelt in darkness. Quit the 
Night and seek the Day.” =:

I pray this will never be forsaken.

November 14, 1969

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION 
Volume II 
This second volume (comprising Volumes III and IV of the first edition) should 
present little problem to the student who has scrupulously followed the counsel 
detailed in the Introduction to the first volume (Volumes I and II of the first edi- 
tion). Exactly the same procedure should be followed where this particular vol- 
ume is concerned as with the first.These volumes are nothing less than an ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PRACTICAL 
OCCULTISM, and the wise student will regard them as absolutely that, and per- 
haps a good deal more. Most phases of the ancient knowledge are explored and 
described in full in one document or another. They need to be read and studied 
and practiced over a long period of time for their usefulness fully to be realized. 
An encyclopedia should be handled with loving care; how much more so then, 
an encyclopedia which elaborates so many hitherto obscure aspects of the secret 
knowledge?

“Before all things are the Chaos, the Darkness and the Gates of the Land of the 
Night.” Thus runs one excerpt from a ritual in this particular volume. It is partic- 
ularly apt. All the ritual workings and descriptions of the magical rubrics to be 
employed will at first appear utterly chaotic and without meaning. Only with 
consistent effort and a well-laid out plan of study and practice will this chaos 
gradually lift to be replaced by enlightenment, order, and meaning.

“ After the formless and the Void and the Darkness, then cometh the knowl- 
edge of the Light”

Let the student therefore give himself ample time to-study casually at first this 
next volume—remembering that it contains the last two volumes of the old edi- 
tion, replete with the most illuminating material conceivable, which requires to be 
understood thoroughly. Even after the lapse of forty years, when I first became 
aware of this teaching through Aleister Crowley’s several volumes of The Equinox, 
I still thrill inwardly with spiritual excitement as I glance through the volumes to 
be commented on. I can wish no less for the sincere student who is willing to 
devote time and effort to comprehending the nature of this magical system.The first two documents that should be thoroughly studied are the descrip- 
tions of the usages of the Pentagram and Hexagram. The language is unneces- 
sarily archaic, and one of the aids to comprehension that I would suggest is this: 
After reading it many, many times so as to be quite sure that the contents are 
understood, try to rewrite the instructions in simple evéry-day English. This is not 
as difficult as it sounds. The benefit to be derived from this is an increase in 
understanding far greater than anything you would initially expect.

8 The Golden Dawn

In the earlier volume, there was a lesser form of Pentagram ritual given for 
daily usage, together with the simple Rose-Cross ritual. If the student has fol- 
lowed this recommendation, by the time he gets to studying this present volume, 
he should be quite expert in tracing these lineal figures. All that is required now 
is a slight expansion of his already existent knowledge, to incorporate the new 
but basic data to be found in these two documents. The rewriting that the student

‘will do is to enable him to omit all extraneous and unnecessary verbiage, leaving 
the essence of the instruction uncomplicated and simple. It will be this simple 
material which needs to be assimilated to the previously learned data.Continuing with the study of the rituals, let the student study the beautiful 
simplicity of the construction of such rituals as are intended for the consecration 
of the various weapons or instruments that are to be used. There is no need to 
rush headlong into making the instruments. Delay this process for a while until 
the meaning of the ceremonies is assimilated into the psyche. Again, I would sug- 
gest that the students select a simple consecration ceremony, such as that for the 
Lotus Wand, and analyze it with as much attention and care as he would have 
done the Neophyte Ritual in the preceding volume. Apart from all else, it lays 
down the simplest possible forms or principles upon which ceremonies should 
be constructed.

Though the manufacture of the elemental weapons is a simple enough procedure, 
although a time-consuming one, these should be postponed until all the consecration 
ceremonies have been studied closely enough to have yielded their ultimate secrets. 
There are far more complicated rituals depicted in Volume III (old edition) but these 
particular shorter consecration ceremonies take the prize for simplicity, sincerity and 
efficacy. I was particularly impressed by the skill and ingenuity involved in the writ- 
ing, for example, of the consecration ceremony for the four elemental weapons. Its 
virtuosity renders it altogether unique. ;These matters make one ponder anew the origins of The Golden Dawn and its 
teachings. What McGregor Mather has written and published is of course good; of 
this there is little question. But not one of three published works—The Kabbalah 
Unveiled, The Greater Key of King Solomon, and The Sacred Magic of Abramelin— 
bears the intrinsic stamp of genius or uniqueness. Nothing that Dr. William Wynn 
Westcott wrote is exempt from the same criticism. His book on the Kaballah is 
simple, clear and informative—but it bears no resemblance to the peculiar quality 
or character of the Golden Dawn documents which I suggest contain the hallmarks 
of genius. Whoever was the originator of the Golden Dawn system left the mark 
both of genius and uniqueness on every phase of the work. He is still unknown— 
he, or a line of continental Rosicrucian Adepts, or? ... we do not know! ;

Volume III (of the first edition) contains the Z—2 document, which the stu- 
dent will recognize as being a finely structured analysis of the Neophyte Ritual, 
breaking it down into several movements and sections. This then serves as the 
basis for the construction of several elaborate types of ceremonies. These will be 
altogether without meaning until and unless the students have thoroughly stud- 
ied the Neophyte Ritual. Nor will it convey much if he has neglected to master 
the basic principles of the Qabalah, particularly the dynamics involved in Tetra- 
grammaton, the four-lettered Name—and how, by the descent of the Divine Fire, 
it becomes converted into the Pentagrammaton. With a display of great erudition, 
even the letter Shin representing the divine fire becomes classified according to 
the Three Mother letters, (Aleph, Mem, Shin—Air, Water, and Fire), each serving 
as the basis of a distinct type of ritual.This document is one of the intrinsic signs of the genius of the G. D. I have 
been impressed by its magnificence as well as practicality for nearly forty years, 
when I first discovered it in Equinox 3. Time has not diminished the lustre, nor 
familiarity its mark of uniqueness.

Z-1 is an important paper descriptive of the Neophyte Ritual, given to the

Introduction 9

newly inducted Adeptus Minor for whom it discloses a depth of symbolism and a 
wealth of practical formulae he could never have previously thought possible. The 
beginner who glances through this grade initiation may perceive very little in it, until 
he studies this particular document. It explains the meaning and purpose of the 
manifold symbols employed, the regalia worn by the officers, and the various move- 
ments made by the officiants. A companion document Z—3 explains the symbolism 
of the admission of the Candidate. I still find this an extremely interesting document 
that reveals level upon level of insight, no matter how many years elapse between 
readings. An occasional perusal of its material will prevent the student from taking a 
prosaic attitude towards this and other initiatory rituals. Both of these papers are 
among the most important of all Order documents, since so many general magical 
formulae are there described. They pertain to a great many magical matters, other 
than initiation.Asanaside, for the serious student who is interested in making comparisons and 
drawing deductions, l recommend aslim volume entltled The Ceremony of Initiation by 
W.L. Wilmshurst, an eminent British Freemason. This little volume, though privately 
printed in 1953, is available to the general public, being obtainable through J. M. Wat- 
kins, London. It purports to be an analysis and commentary on Masonic initiations. Its 
similarity to the Z—2 documentis startling, though the latter is of course written ona 
much deeper level than its Masonic equivalent, and is esoterically slanted. But 
without knowing anything about Masonry, the student could read this volume side 
by side with Z—2, and develop a very clear idea of the nature of Masonic initiation.

Other papers in this final volume are still no less valuable than the day they were 
first published. Those on clairvoyance, astral projection, and skrying are still the most 
complete instructions on these subject yet written. I doubt if much can be added to 
them, or whether they can be improved upon. Evena great deal of Aleister Crowley’s 
later magical writing, which is always excellent, does not elaborate very much more 
on some of this basic Golden Dawn magical teaching.

The material in the 4th Volume (first edition) or the last half of this present 
Volume II (second edition) is of maximum importance. Here are to be found the ground 
rules as it were governing magic in all of its many branches.Would you know what a talisman is? And how it is constructed? The necessary 
information is to be found here. Sigils—what they are, and how made, are also 
elucidated in this volume. Full instruction in all such matters is given in several 
documents republished in this volume. There is no other text which is as explicit. 
Francis Barrett’s The Magus and Henry Cornelius Agrippa’s far older work on magical 
philosophy give the sigils derived from the magic squares, but neither is particularly 
explicit in description, etc. This deficiency is repaired in these G. D. manuscripts.

Is it divination that interests you? The Order method of Tarot reading is second 
to none.

In the first place, the description of the cards themselves is unique. From these 
descriptions the enterprising student could draw or paint a pack for himself. Whether 
he produces a finely polished, artistic pack or a set of crude amateurish drawings as I 
have, makes no difference. The effort alone will have made strong multi-sensory 
impressions on his psyche. These will be drawn upon, consciously or unconsciously, 
when divining.

Furthermore, some of the character descriptions given of the Court cards give 
one pause. These are evidently not the work of a mere gypsy fortune teller. They be- 
tray sound psychological insights of an unusually penetrating nature, and many a 
professional writer has drawn on them in one way or another. I know at least a couple 
of books which have used them at great length, though without acknowledgement, 
but in this instance that does not mean very much.

Some abstruse teaching relative to the Tarot and other germane matters is scat-

10 The Golden Dawn

tered through several of these Order documents. One matter which I have never seen 
taken up by astrological writers is that concerning starting the Zodiac with the Star 
Regulus in Leo. The teaching emphasizes that were this done, the constellations and 
the signs would coincide.“Within the Zodiac,” wrote Louis MacNiece in his book Astrology, “there are 
twelve constellations ... These bear the same names as the twelve signs used by the 
astrologers, but astrologically they have nothing to do with the case. If you are told 
that the Sun was in that particular sign when you were born between March 31 and 
April 30—this does not mean that you were born under the actual group of stars 
known as Aries. Once upon a time the Sun was (or appeared to be) among that group 
at that time of year, but he is not there now, thanks to what is known as the ‘precession 
of the equinoxes’ (a very slow shift in the sky pattern, as observed from the earth, that 
takes 25,800 years to come full circle). The signs that most modern astrologers deal 
with are 12 exactly equal sections of the total circle of the Zodiac. Each section 
measures 30° and it makes no difference what fixed stars are contained in it.

“This disconcerting fact provides ready ammunition for opponents of astrology

As all students of the subject know, due to the precession of the Equinoxes, the 
signs and the constellations are now separated by as much as a whole sign. This has 
led to two distinct schools in astrology, the Tropical and the Sidereal. The adoption of 
the Order recommendation, could lead to some closing of the distance between these 
two approaches.One of the things that slightly puzzles me occasionally is the frequency with 
which the almost wholly untutored beginner invariably selects the Enochian system 
to start with. He is intrigued by its mystery and its complexity. It is the most com- 
plicated of the Order sub-systems, and really is used as the basis for synthesizing all 
the previously given knowledge of the Order. Qabalah, Tarot, Geomancy, skrying, 
ritual magic, etc. are all drawn together and worked up into a single majestic system. 
Therefore to appreciate it, one must have acquired a good working knowledge of all 
the partial systems. As such, it is the province of the seasoned veteran in occult mat- 
ters, of the mature well-informed student, certainly not the tyro.

In Crowley's A.A. (which he founded on what he thought and hoped were the 
ashes of the G.D.), this kind of selection would not altogether have been frowned on. 
In fact, one of the cardinal rules which was never to have been abrogated, was that the 
Probationer should personally select from all that he has read, anything that per- 
sonally appeals to him. And for one year he was required to do whatever practices his 
own ingenium selected.

But the A.A. is not the Golden Dawn, even though it has its roots deeply buried in 
the fertile soil that was prepared by Mathers and Westcott. Nor is the G.D, completely 
dead. I am glad to hear periodically that there is a Temple here and there which still 
continues to use the time-honored methods. Under these circumstances, someone 
has to try and drum some rationality into the beginning student whose enthusiasm 
and fanaticism may well run away with him. For this reason, I suggest the Enochian 
system—rich, suggestive and powerful that it is—be left alone until a great deal of 
prior knowledge and magical experience be obtained.

The Adeptus Minor obligation contains the following clause, which is the quin- 
tessence of the entire Golden Dawn magical work:The Adeptus Minor obligation contains the following clause, which is the quin- 
tessence of the entire Golden Dawn magical work:

I further promise and swear that with the Divine Permission I will, from 
this day forward, apply myself to the Great Work—which is, to purify and exalt 
my Spiritual Nature so that with the Divine Aid I may at length attain to be more 
than human, and thus gradually raise and unite myself to my Higher and 
Divine Genius, and that in this event I will not abuse the great power entrusted 
to me.

Introduction 11

Many years after Crowley had become exposed to this obligation, and had 
labored hard on the road to magical accomplishment, he took this obligation and trans- 
lated it as seeking and acquiring the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guard- - 
ian Angel. In the use of this archaic language, he merely followed McGregor Mathers 
who had translated into English The Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage, where this 
phrase was first used.

As the Tiphareth clause of the obligation, it is the most important one of all the 
ten clauses. And in one way or another, its fulfillment is pointed to in nearly every 
important phase of the Order work. Regardless of which phase you may think of— 
skrying in the spirit-vision, ceremonial magic, formation of telesmatic images, etc.— 
this one goal is in the background, giving meaning and substance to all else. No 
matter, then, what aspect of the work the student devotes himself to, he should never 
lose sight of this one clause, and the goal to which it refers.

One particular passage in Z—2 found immediately after its opening confirms 
this notion in a specially powerful way. Describing the temple in reference to the 
Sephiroth, it says:One particular passage in Z—2 found immediately after its opening confirms 
this notion in a specially powerful way. Describing the temple in reference to the 
Sephiroth, it says:

The Temple as arranged in the Neophyte Grade of the Order of the 
Golden Dawn in the Outer, is placed looking towards the YH or YHVH in 
Malkuth in Assiah. That is, as Y and H answer unto the Sephiroth Chokmah and 
Binah in the Tree, (and unto Abba and Aima, through whose knowledge alone 
that of Kether may be obtained) even so, the Sacred Rites of the Temple may 
gradually, as it were, in spite of himself, lead the Neophyte unto the knowledge of 
his Higher Self.

(Italics mine.)

There are several other passages confirmatory of this important set of ideas. One 
of them relates to the Hierophants’ wand which “represents him as touching thereby 
the Divine Light of Kether and attracting through the Middle Pillar to Malkuth.” 
Another concerns the so-called Banner of the East which “affirms the mode of action 
employed by the Divine Light in its operation by the Forces of Nature. Upon it is the 
symbol of the Macrocosm so colored as to affirm the action of the Fire of the Spirit 
through the Waters of Creation under the harmony of the Golden Cross of the Recon- 
ciler .. . The whole represents the ascent of the Initiate into Perfect Knowledge of the 
Light.”

(Italics mine.)(Italics mine.)

In the Adeptus Minor Ritual is to be found the analysis of the so-called keyword 
LN.R.I It is found in several places thereafter; its very frequency should make the stu- 
dent suspect its importance. Few, however, take time out to apply basic Qabalisticand 
magical principles to elucidate its meaning. So in order to convey some idea of 
elementary meanings, I have decided to show the student what can be done with 
these four English letters N.R.I. They are, of course, the initials of a Latin phrase once 
placed by the Romans at the head of the Cross representing the phrase “Jesus of 
Nazareth, King of the Jews.” Several other theological meanings to these letters have 
been given at different periods in history by various groups of people and scholars.

For example, the medieval alchemists suggested that .N,R.]. meant “Igne Natura 
Renovatur Integra.” “The whole of Nature is renewed by Fire.”

Another example of about the same period elaborated the four letters to “Igne 
Nitrum Raris Invenitum,” translated as “shining (or glittering) is rarely found in 
fire.”

The Jesuits in their day interpreted it as “Justum Necare Regis Impius”—“It is 
just to kill an impious king.”

J.S.M. Ward in his book Freemasonry and the Ancient Gods gives yet another 
example:

12 The Golden Dawn

Yam = Water 
Nour=Fire 
Ruach= Air 
Yebeshas= Earth

Thus the four letters may be used as Hebrew initials of the four ancient ele- 
ments.

In the nineteenth century when the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn came 
to be formed, these letters were picked up and integrated into the complex structure 
of the Order symbolism. To understand the interpretation used by the Order, we 
need only the most superficial knowledge of the basic attributions given in the 
Sepher Yetzirah, the Tarot pack of cards, a smattering of Gnosticism and astrology. 
The first gesture is to convert the four letters into their Hebrew equivalents and then 
to direct Yetziratic attributions, as follows:1. = Yod = Virgo 
N. = Nun = Scorpio 
R. = Resh = Sun

I = Yod = Virgo

The final “I”, being repetitious, is dropped, only to be picked up again ina later 
place in order to extend the significance of the meanings derived from the analysis.

This breakdown, though not getting us very far, is nonetheless highly sugges- 
tive, Elementary astrology will extend the meaning a little. Virgo represents the 
virginal sign of nature itself. Scorpio is the sign of death and transformation; sex is 
involved here as well. Sol, the Sun, is the source of light and life to all on earth; it is the 
centre of our solar system. All the so-called resurrection gods are known to be solar 
connected. The Sun was thought to die every winter when vegetation perished and 
the earth became cold and barren. Every Spring, when the Sun returned, green life 
was restored to the Earth.

In various of the grade rituals as well as the elementary knowledge lectures of the 
Order, we find the following which we can add to the data already obtained:

Virgo=Isis—who was Nature, the Mother of all things.

Scorpio= Apophis—death, the destroyer.

Sol=Osiris—slain and risen, the Egyptian resurrection and vegetative God.Virgo=Isis—who was Nature, the Mother of all things.

Scorpio= Apophis—death, the destroyer.

Sol=Osiris—slain and risen, the Egyptian resurrection and vegetative God.

Here we now begin to get a definite sequence of ideas that proves somewhat 
meaningful. The simplicity of a natural state of affairs in, shall we say, the Garden of 
Eden representing the springtime of mankind, is shattered by the intrusion of the 
knowledge of Good and Evil, sexual perception. This is due to the intervention of the 
destroyer Apophis, the Red Dragon, or Lucifer, the Lightbearer, who changed all 
things—by illuminating all things. Thus the Fall—as well as the Fall of the year. This is 
succeeded by the advent of Osiris the resurrection God who is quoted as stating: 
“This is my body, which I destroy in order that it may be renewed.” He is the symbolic 
prototype of the perfected solar Man, who suffered through earthly experience, was 
glorified by trial, was betrayed and killed, and then rose again to renew all things.

The final analysis of the keyword sums up the formula with the initials Isis, 
Apophis, Osiris=IAO, the supreme God of the Gnostics. (AO is pronounced ee— 
ah—oh!)

Since the Sun is the giver of life and light, the formula must refer to Light as the 
redeemer. The Order was predicated on the age-old process of bringing Light to the 
natural man. In other words, it taught a psycho-spiritual technique leading to illu- 
mination, to enlightenment. In this connection, one should always remember those 
beautiful versicles about the Light in the opening chapter of the Gospel according to 
St. John.

In the very first or Neophyte Ritual of the Golden Dawn, the candidate is startled

Introduction 13

to hear the strangely-worded invocation “Khabs Am Pekht. Konx om Pax. Light in 
Extension.” In other words, may you too receive the benediction of the Light, and 
undergo the mystical experience, the goal of all our work.“The enlightenment by a ray of the divine light which transforms the psychic 
nature of many may be an article of faith,” says Hans Jonas in his excellent book The 
Gnostic Religion, “but it may also be an experience ... Annihilation and deification of 
the person are fused in the spiritual ecstasis which purports to experience the 
immediate presence of the acosmic essence.

“In the gnostic context, this transfiguring face-to-face experience is Gnosis in the 
most exalted sense of the term, since it is knowledge of the unknowable ... The mysti- 
cal gnosis theou—direct beholding of the divine reality —is itself an earnest of the con- 
summation to. come. It is transcendence become immanent; and although prepared 
for by human acts of self-modification which induce the proper disposition, the event 
itself is one of divine activity and grace. It is this as mucha ‘being known’ by God asa 
‘knowing’ him, and in this ultimate mutuality the ‘gnosis’ is beyond the terms of 
‘knowledge’ properly speaking...”

Since this is the basic theme recurrent through all the Golden Dawn rituals and 
teaching, we would expect to find it repeated and expanded in the analysis of the 
Keyword of the Adeptus Minor grade. And of course it is there, clearly defined.

The word ‘Light’ is translated into LVX, the Latin word for Light. A series of physi- 
cal mimes or gestures are employed by the officiants to represent the descent of this 
Light, as well as to summarize the symbolism of the previous findings.

So one Adept or officiant raises his right arm directly in the air above him, while 
extending his left arm straight outwards (as though to makea left turn when driving a 
car). This forms by shape the letter ‘L’.

A second Adept raises his arms as though in supplication above his head—the 
letter ‘V’.

The third Adept extends his arms outwards forming a Cross.

All together finally cross their arms on their chests, forming the letter ‘X’.The third Adept extends his arms outwards forming a Cross.

All together finally cross their arms on their chests, forming the letter ‘X’.

(A single person may of course perform the identical gestures.)

The letters form ‘LVX’ which is now interpreted as the ‘Light of the Cross’, It is so 
interpreted because the letters ‘INRI’ were initially found on the Cross, as well as 
because LVX means Light. Finally the letters ‘LVX’ themselves are portions of one type 
or another of the Cross.

A process of repetition is followed in order to synthesize all these variegated 
ideas and gestures, and to add one more mime to replace the second ‘T’ that was 
eliminated for being repetitious.

As the ‘L’ sign is being made, the Adept says: “The Sign of the Mourning of Isis.” 
This expresses the sorrow of Isis on learning that Osiris had been slain by Set or 
Apophis.

As the ‘V’ sign is made, the Adept says: “The Sign of Apophis and Typhon.” 
These are other names for Set, the brother and murderer of Osiris, whose body was so 
mutilated that only the phallus could be found by Isis who had searched all over crea- 
tion for him.

As the Adept spreads his arms outward from the shoulders forming actively the

14 The Golden Dawn

Cross, he says: “The Sign of Osiris Slain.”

Then crossing one arm over the other on the chest, he adds: “And risen. Isis, 
Apophis, Osiris, LAO.”

Thus what started out to be a simple abbreviation of a traditional Latin sentence 
on the Cross above the head of Jesus, has now evolved by a Qabalistic process of 
exegesis into a complex series of evocative ideas and symbolic gestures which extend 
tremendously the root idea. And by knowing these ideas, the gestures may be used 
practically to aspire to the illumination it suggests. This is the essential value of the 
sacramental actions.The Rosicrucian equivalent of this formula is found in the Fama Fraternatitas, 
one of the original three classical Rosicrucian documents. Ex Deo Nascimur. In Jesu 
Morimur. Per spiritus sanctus reviviscimus. “From God are we born. In Christ we die. 
We are revived by the Holy Spirit.”

Nor is this all. If we take ‘LVX’ as symbols of Roman numerals, we have 65. This 
number, therefore, attains the symbolic equivalent of Light, gnosis and illumination.

The Adeptus Minor obligation imposed on the candidate during the ritual initia- 
tion, obligates him, as already demonstrated, to aspire and work and practise so that 
by enlightenment he may one day “become more than human.” This is the Qabalistic 
philosophy summarized in the statement that the Adept seeks to unite himself to his. 
higher soul or his higher Self, symbolized again in the Hebrew word Adonai. All the 
above notions therefore are synthesized in this word Adonai, literally translated “My 
Lord.” Its Hebrew letters are:

Aleph Daleth Nun  Yod 
1+ 4 + 50 + 10 = 65.

This number is also that of LVX Light. Qabalistically the process enables us to per- 
ceive a necessary connection between Adonai and the Light, their identity. From here 
we can move in a variety of exegetical directions.

But enough has been said, I hope, to show the student not to accept superficially 
any phase of the Rituals and the teachings, but to subject them to the most exact- 
ing scrutiny.

November 25, 1968 
ISRAEL REGARDIENovember 25, 1968 
ISRAEL REGARDIE

<13> INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EDITION 
It was in the year 1890 that Dr. Franz Hartmann, in an endeavour to provide a simple 
outline of the vicissitudes of what came to be known as the Rosicrucian Order, wrote a 
book entitled In the Pronaos of the Temple. The central figure of this history was a monk, 
Fr. R. C.—described in the earliest Rosicrucian manifesto the Fama Fraternitatis as the 
“pious, spiritual and highly-illuminated Father . . . It is said that he was a German 
nobleman who had been educated in a convent, and that long before the time of the 
Reformation he had made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in company with another 
brother of this convent, and that while at Damascus they had been initiated by some 
learned Arabs into the mysteries of the secret science. After remaining three years at 
Damascus, they went to Fez, in Africa, and there they obtained still more knowledge 
of magic, and of the relations existing between the macrocosm and microcosm. After 
having also travelled in Spain, he returned to Germany, where he founded a kind of 
convent called Sanctus Spiritus, and remained there writing his secret science and con- 
tinuing his studies. He then accepted as his assistants, at first, three, and after- 
<14> wards, four more monks from the same convent in which he had been 
educated, and thus founded the first society of the Rosicrucians. They then 
laid down the results of their science in books, which are said to be still in existence, 
and in the hands of some Rosicrucians. It is then said that 120 years after his death, the

Introduction 15Introduction 15

entrance to his tomb was discovered. A stair-case led into a subterranean vault, at the 
door of which was written, Post annos CXX patebo. There was a light burning in the 
vault, which, however, became extinct as soon as it was approached. The vault had 
seven sides and seven angles, each side being five feet wide and eight feet high. The 
upper part represented the firmament, the floor, the earth, and they were laid out in 
triangles, while each side was divided into ten squares. In the middle was an altar, 
bearing a brass plate, upon which were engraved the letters, A.C.R.C,, and the words 
Hoc Universi Compendium vivus mihi Sepulchrum feci. In the midst were four figures sur- 
rounded by the words, Nequaquam Vacuum. Legis Jugum. Libertas Evangelii. Dei Gloria 
Intacta. Below the altar was found the body of Rosenkreutz, intact, and without any 
signs of putrefaction. In his hand was a book of parchment, with golden letters 
marked on the cover with a T, and at the end was written, Ex Deo nascimur. In Jesus 
morimur. Per Spiritum Sanctum reviviscimus.”

It was upon this schema and from this original body, to state it briefly, that the 
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn claimed direct descent. Its history lecture, 
however, volunteered very few verifiable details as to the historical facts which, from

the scholarly point of view, we should be acquainted with—the details for 
<15> example of the line of descent from, say, 1614 to 1865. Current within thethe scholarly point of view, we should be acquainted with—the details for 
<15> example of the line of descent from, say, 1614 to 1865. Current within the

present day Order was the belief that at various dates within the period 
named, the Order as an organised body of students ceased to exist. Instead, there was 
an oral continuation of teaching from isolated initiates here, there and everywhere, 
until more recent times when religious and political conditions did not militate 
against the advisability of formulating a group. With the institution of a definite body, 
the original system of grades was re-established, and the systems of Alchemy, the 
Qabalah and Magic once more were taught to zealous, aspiring Neophytes. Asa cloak 
to their activities, they likewise continued in the early agreement of the Order 
which was:

“First, that none of them should profess any other thing than to cure the sick, and 
that gratis.

Second, None of the posterity should be constrained to wear one certain kind of 
habit, but therein to follow the custom of the country.

Third, that every year, upon the day C. they should meet together at the house 
Sanctus Spiritus, or write the cause of his absence.

Fourth, Every Brother should look about for a worthy person who, after his 
decease, might succeed him.

Fifth, The word R. C. should be their seal, mark, and character.

Sixth, The Fraternity should remain secret one hundred years.

With this preliminary account, we may turn to the claims of the Order within the 
more historical times of the late 19th century, though unfortunately, these claims are 
no more verifiable and certainly no clearer than those which characterised itsbeginning. 
<16> “The Order of the Golden Dawn,” narrates the history lecture of that 
Order, “is an Hermetic Society whose members are taught the principles of 
Occult Science and the Magic of Hermes. During the early part of the second half of 
last century, several eminent Adepti and Chiefs of the Order in France and England 
died, and their death caused a temporary dormant condition of Temple work.

“Prominent among the Adepti of our Order and of public renown were Eliphas 
Levi the greatest of modern French magi; Ragon, the author of several books of occult 
lore; Kenneth M. Mackenzie, author of the famous and learned Masonic Encyclo- 
paedia; and Frederick Hockley possessed of the power of vision in the crystal, and 
whose manuscripts are highly esteemed. These and other contemporary Adepti of 
this Order received their knowledge and power from predecessors of equal and even 
of greater eminence. They received indeed and have handed down to us their doc-

16 The Golden Dawn

trine and system of Theosophy and Hermetic Science and the higher Alchemy froma 
long series of practised investigators whose origin is traced to the Fratres Roseae 
Crucis of Germany, which association was founded by one Christian Rosenkreutz 
about the year 1398 A. D.

“The Rosicrucian revival of Mysticism was but a new development of the vastly 
older wisdom of the Qabalistic Rabbis and of that very ancient secret knowledge, the 
Magic of the Egyptians, in which the Hebrew Pentateuch tells you that Moses the 
founder of the Jewish system was ‘learned’, that is, in which he had been initiated.”In a slender but highly informative booklet entitled Data of the History of 
<17> the Rosicrucians published in 1916 by the late Dr. William Wynn Westcott, we 
find the following brief statement: “In 1887 by permission of S.D.A. a con- 
tinental Rosicrucian Adept, the Isis-Urania Temple of Hermetic Students of the G.D. 
was formed to give instruction in the mediaeval Occult sciences. Fraters M.E.V. with 
S.A. and S.R.M.D. became the chiefs, and the latter wrote the rituals in modern 
English from old Rosicrucian mss. (the property of S.A.) supplemented by his own 
literary researches.”

In these two statements is narrated the beginning of the Hermetic Order of the 
Golden Dawn — an organisation which has exerted a greater influence on the 
development of Occultism since its revival in the last quarter of the 19th century than 
most people can realise. There can be little or no doubt that the Golden Dawn is, or 
rather was until very recently, the sole depository of magical knowledge, the only 
Occult Order of any real worth that the West in our time has known. A great many 
other occult organisations owe what little magical knowledge is theirs to leakages 
issuing from that Order and from its renegade members.

The membership of the Golden Dawn was recruited from every circle, and it was 
represented by dignified professions as well as by all the arts and sciences, to make 
but little mention of the trades and business occupations. It included physicians, psy- 
chologists, clergymen, artists and philosophers. And normal men and women, hum- 
ble and unknown, from every walk of life have drawn inspiration from its font of 
wisdom, and undoubtedly many would be happy to recognise and admit the enor-

mous debt they owe it. 
<18> As an organisation, it preferred after the fashion of its mysterious parentmous debt they owe it. 
<18> As an organisation, it preferred after the fashion of its mysterious parent

always to shroud itself in an impenetrable cloak of mystery. Its teaching and 
methods of instruction were stringently guarded by serious penalties attached to the 
most awe-inspiring obligations in order to ensure that secrecy. So well have these 
obligations, with but one or two exceptions, been kept that the general public knows 
next to nothing about the Order, its teaching, or the extent and nature of its mem- 
bership. Though this book will touch upon the teaching of the Golden Dawn, con- 
cerning its membership as a whole the writer will have nothing to say, except perhaps 
to repeat what may already be more or less well-known. For instance, it is common 
knowledge that W. B. Yeats, Arthur Machen and, if rumour may be trusted, the late 
Arnold Bennett were at one time among its members, together with a good many 
other writers and artists.

With regard to the names given in Dr. Westcott’s statement it is necessary that we 
bestow to them some little attention in order to unravel, so far as may be possible, the 
almost inextricable confusion which has characterised every previous effort to detail 
the history of the Order. M.E.V. was the motto chosen by Dr. William Robert Wood- 
man, an eminent Freemason of the last century. Sapere Aude and Non Omnis Moriar 
were the two mottos used by Dr. Westcott, an antiquarian, scholar, and coroner by 
profession. S. R. M. D. or S’Rhiogail Ma Dhream was the motto of S. L. MacGregor 
Mathers, the translator of The Greater Key of King Solomon, the Book of the Sacred Magic of

Abramelin the Mage, and The Kabbalah Unveiled, which latter consisted of certain 
<19> portions of the Zohar prefixed by an introduction of high erudition. He also

Introduction 17Abramelin the Mage, and The Kabbalah Unveiled, which latter consisted of certain 
<19> portions of the Zohar prefixed by an introduction of high erudition. He also

Introduction 17

employed the Latin motto Deo Duce Comite Ferro. S. D. A. was the abbreviation of 
the motto Sapiens Dominabitur Astris chosen by a Fraulein Anna Sprengel of 
Nuremburg, Germany. Such were the actors on this occult stage, this the dramatis per- 
sonae in the background of the commencement of the Order. More than any other 
figures who may later have prominently figured in its government and work, these 
are the four outstanding figures publicly involved in the English foundation of what 
came to be known as The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.

How the actual instigation of the Order came to pass is not really known. Or 
rather, because of so many conflicting stories and legends the truth is impossible to 
discover, At any rate, so far as England is concerned, without a doubt we must seek for 
its origin in the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia. This was an organisation formulated 
in 1865 by eminent Freemasons, some of them claiming authentic Rosicrucian initia- 
tion from continental authorities. Amongst those who claimed such initiation was 
one Kenneth H. Mackenzie, a Masonic scholar and encyclopaedist, who had received 
his at the hands of a Count Apponyi in Austria. The objects of this Society which con- 
fined its membership to Freemasons in good:standing, was “to afford mutual aid and 
encouragement in working out the great problems of Life, and in discovering the se- 
crets of nature; to facilitate the study of the systems of philosophy founded upon the 
Kaballah and the doctrines of Hermes Trismegistus.” Dr. Westcott also remarks that

today its Fratres “are concerned in the study and administration of medi- 
<20> cines,and in their manufacture upon old lines; they also teach and practise thetoday its Fratres “are concerned in the study and administration of medi- 
<20> cines,and in their manufacture upon old lines; they also teach and practise the

curative effects of coloured light, and cultivate mental processes which are 
believed to induce spiritual enlightenment and extended powers of the human 
senses, especially in the directions of clairvoyance and clairaudience.”

The first Chief of this Society, its Supreme Magus so-called, was one Robert 
Wentworth Little who is said to have rescued some old rituals from a certain Masonic 
storeroom, and it was from certain of those papers that the Society’s rituals were 
elaborated. He died in 1878, and in his stead was appointed Dr. Williarn R. Woodman. 
Both Dr. Westcott and MacGregor Mathers were prominent and active members of 
this body. In fact, the former became Supreme Magus upon Woodman’s death, the 
office of Junior Magus being conferred upon Mathers. One legend has it that one day 
Westcott discovered in his library a series of cipher manuscripts, and in order to 
decipher them he enlisted the aid of MacGregor Mathers. It is said that this library was 
that of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, and it is likewise asserted that those cipher 
manuscripts were among the rituals and documents originally rescued by Robert Lit- 
tle from Freemason’s Hall. Yet other accounts have it that Westcott or a clerical friend 
found the manuscripts on a bookstall in Farringdon Street. Further apocryphal 
legends claim that they were found in the library of books and manuscripts inherited 
from the mystic and clairvoyant, Frederick Hockley, who died in 1885. Whatever the 
real origin of these mysterious cipher manuscripts, when eventually deciphered withthe aid of MacGregor Mathers, they were alleged to have contained the 
<21> address of a Fraulein Anna Sprengel who purported to be a Rosicrucian 
Adept, in Nuremburg. Here was a discovery which, naturally, not for one 
moment was neglected. Its direct result was a lengthy correspondence with Fraulein 
Sprengel, culminating in the transmission of authority to Woodman, Westcott and 
Mathers, to formulate in England a semi-public occult organisation which was to 
employ an elaborate magical ceremonial, Qabalistic teaching, and a comprehensive 
scheme of spiritual training. Its foundation was designed to include both men and 
women ona basis of perfect equality in contradistinction to the policy of the Societas 
Rosicruciana in Anglia which was comprised wholly of Freemasons. Thus, in 1887, 
the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was established. Its first English Temple, 
Isis-Urania, was opened in the following year. 
There is a somewhat different version as to its origin, having behind it the

18 The Golden Dawn18 The Golden Dawn

authority of Frater F. R., the late Dr. Felkin, who was the Chief of the Stella Matutina as 
well as a member of the Societas Rosicruciana. According to his account, and the 
following words are substantially his own, prior to 1880 members of the Rosicrucian 
Order on the Continent selected with great care their own candidates whom they 
thought suitable for personal instruction. For these pupils they were each individu- 
ally responsible, the pupils thus selected being trained by them in the theoretical 
traditional knowledge now used in the Outer Order. After some three or more years 
of intensive private study these pupils were presented to the Chiefs of the Order, and 
if approved and passed by examination, they then received their initiation into the 
Order of the Roseae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis. 
<22> The political state of Europe in the nineteenth century was such that the 
strictest secrecy as to the activities of these people was very necessary. 
England, however, where many Masonic bodies and semi-private organisations were 
flourishing without interference, was recognised as having far greater freedom and 
liberty than the countries in which the continental Adepts were domiciled. Some, but 
by no means all, suggested therefore that in England open Temple work might be 
inaugurated. And Dr. Felkin here adds, though without the least word of explanation 
as to what machinery was set in motion towards the attainment of that end, “and so it 
was ... It came about then that Temples arose in London, Bradford, Weston-super- 
Mare, and Edinburgh. The ceremonies we have were elaborated from cipher manu- 
scripts, and all went well for a time.”Since the history of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn subsequent to this 
period has already been narrated elsewhere there is little need to repeat it. Those who 
may be interested in a detailed meticulous history of the Rosicrucian claim as it has 
existed in Europe during the past three hundred years are advised to consult Arthur 
Edward Waite’s The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross. While in my small work My Rosicru- 
cian Adventure the events that occurred to the Golden Dawn, culminating in this pres- 
ent publication of its teaching and rituals, are delineated at some length. The motives 
which have confirmed me in this decision to act contrary to the obligation of secrecy 
are there presented and discussed. And with these directions, let us pass from histori- 
cal bones to what is the dynamic life and soul of the Order, its teaching and cere- 
monial technique of initiation.

§§

<23> Before one can grasp the nature of ceremonial initiation, which was the 
assumed function of the Golden Dawn, a few fundamental notions of the 
philosophy underlying its practice must be grasped. The basic theory of the Order 
system was such as to identify certain of the grades with various spritual principles 
existing in the universe. Hence a philosophy which describes, classifies, and purports 
to understand the nature of the universe must be studied before the significance of 
the grades can be appreciated. One of the most important backgrounds of the system 
is the scheme of the Qabalah, a Jewish system described at length in my Tree of Life and 
the knowledge lectures herein. Since it is primarily a mystical method, the Qabalah 
has innumerable points of identity with the more ancient systems elaborated by other 
peoples in other parts of the world. Its most important root concept is that the ultimate 
root from which this universe, with all things therein, has evolved is Ain Soph Aour, 
-Infinite or Limitless Light. So far as our minds are capable of conceiving such 
metaphysical abstractions, this is to be understood as an infinite ocean of brilliance 
wherein all things are held as within a matrix, from which all things were evolved, and 
it is that divine goal to which all life and all beings eventually must return. 
Issuing from or within this Boundless Light, there manifests what is called the . 
Tree of Life. Qabalists have produced a conventional glyph indicating thereupon ten 
numerations or Sephiroth which are the branches of that Tree growing or evolving.

Introduction 19

<24> within space, ten different modes of the manifestation of its radiation — ten 
varying degrees of but one ubiquitous substance-principle.Introduction 19

<24> within space, ten different modes of the manifestation of its radiation — ten 
varying degrees of but one ubiquitous substance-principle.

The first of these numerations is called Kether, the Crown, and is the first manifes- 
tation from the Unknown, a concentration of its Infinite Light. As the radiant apex of 
this heavenly tree, it is the deepest sense of selfhood and the ultimate root of sub- 
stance. It constitutes the divine centre of human consciousness, all the other prin- 
ciples which comprise what we call man being rather like so many layers of an onion 
around a central core. From this metaphysical and universal centre duality issues, two 
distinct principles of activity, the one named Chokmah, Wisdom, and the other Binah, 
Understanding. Here we have the roots of polarity, male and female, positive and 
negative, fire and water, mind and matter, and these two ideas are the noumena of all 
the various opposites in life of which we have cognisance.

These three emanations are unique in a special way, and they especially sym- 
bolise that “Light which shineth in darkness,” the Light of the spiritual Self. As Light 
shines into darkness, illuminating it without suffering a diminution of its own exist- 
ence, so the workings of the Supernals, as these three Sephiroth are called, overflow 
from their exuberant being without thereby diminishing in any degree the reality or 
infinite vitality of their source. They are considered hence to have but little relation 
with the inferior Sephiroth which issue from them, except as stem and root. Yet 
though hardly in any philosophic relation to our phenomenal universe, we find when 
engaged in magical working that it is customary — even necessary — to open our-

selves by invocation to its influence so that this divine power of the Supernal 
<25> Light, descending through the human mind, may sanctify and accomplish theselves by invocation to its influence so that this divine power of the Supernal 
<25> Light, descending through the human mind, may sanctify and accomplish the

object of the ceremony itself. The Supernals are often portrayed diagram- 
matically and symbolically as a woman clothed with the Sun, stars above her head and 
the moon at her feet — the typical anima figure of modern psychology.

She represents thus that First Matter of the Alchemists, the description of which 
given by Thomas Vaughan in his Coelum Terrae is interesting to quote as indicating 
further the nature and qualities of the Supernals: “A most pure sweet virgin, for noth- 
ing as yet hath been generated out of her... She yields to nothing but love, for her end 
is generation, and that was never yet performed by violence. He that knows how to 
wanton and toy with her, the same shall receive all her treasures. First, she sheds at 
her nipples a thick heavy water, but white as any snow; the philosophers call it 
Virgin’s Milk. Secondly, she gives him blood from her very heart; it is a quick, 
heavenly fire; some improperly call it their sulphur. Thirdly and lastly, she presents 
him with a secret crystal, of more worth and lustre than the white rock and all her 
rosials. This is she, and these are her favours.”

From this first triad, a second triad of emanations is reflected or projected 
downwards into a more coarse degree of substance. They likewise reflect the nega- 
tive and positive qualities of two of the Supernals with the addition of a third factor, 
a resultant which acts as a reconciling principle. In passing, I should add that plane- 
tary attributions are given to these Sephiroth as expressing the type of their opera- 
tion. Kether is Spirit, Chokmah refers to the Zodiac, and Binah is attributed toSaturn. 
<26> The fourth Sephirah is Chesed, meaning Grace or Mercy; also Gedulah is 
its other name, meaning Greatness, and to it is referred the astrological quality 
called Jupiter. Its concept is one of construction, expansion and solidification.

Geburah is the fifth enumeration, Power of Might, and it is a symbol of creative 
power and force. Its planetary attribution is Mars, its quality being that destructive 
force which demolishes all forms and ideas when their term of usefulness and healthy 
life is done. It symbolises not so much a fixed state of things, as an act, a further 
passage and transition of potentiality into actuality.

Six is the harmonising and reconciling Sephirah, Tiphareth. The word itself

20 . The Golden Dawn

means beauty and harmony. It is attributed to the Sun, the lord and centre of our solar 
system. Just as Kether referred to the most secret depths of the Unconscious, the core 
of man’s life, so Tiphareth is its reflection, the ego, the ordinary human consciousness. 
This Sephirah completes the second triad, which is a triad of consciousness, as the 
first triad of the Supernal Light may be considered the triad of that which is supremely 
divine, the Superconscious.

Netzach, Victory, to which the planet Venus is referred, is the first Sephirah of the 
third and reflected triad, and marks an entirely different order of things. Here we 
enter the elemental sphere, where Nature’s forces have their sway. It is also the region 
in the human sphere of what we may term the Unconscious. The magical tradition 
classifies this Unconsciousness into several strata, and to each of therm is attributed

some one of the four elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth. Netsach is attributed 
<27> tothe element of Fire, and so far as concerns the classification of man’s prin- 
ciples, it represents his emotional life.Its opposite pole on the Tree of Life, is Hod, which means Splendour, which 
receives the attribution of the planet Mercury. Its element is Water, and its action rep- 
resents fluidic mind, the thinking, logical capacity in man, as well as what may be 
called his magical or nervous force — what the Hindu systems denominate as 
Prana.

The third of that triad is Yesod, the Foundation, the ninth Sephirah, the operation 
of the Sphere of the Moon. This is the airy sphere of the fourth dimension, termed in 
occultism the Astral plane. Here we find the subtle electro-magnetic substance into 
which all the higher forces are focussed, the ether, and it constitutes the basis or final 
model upon which the physical world is built. Its elemental attribution is that of Air, 
ever flowing, shifting, and in a constant flux — yet because of that flux, in perpetual 
stability. Just as the tremendous speed of the particles insures the stability of the atom, 
so the fleeting forms and motion of Yesod in all its implications constitute the per- 
manence and surety of the physical world.

Pendant to these three triads is Malkuth, the Kingdom, referred to the element of 
Earth, the synthesis or vehicle of the other elements and planets. Malkuth is the physi- 
cal world, and in man represents his physical body and brain, the Temple of the Holy 
Ghost — the actual tomb of the allegorical Christian Rosenkreutz.

These Sephiroth are not to be construed as ten different portions of objective

space, each separated by millions and millions of miles —though of course 
<28> they must have their correspondences in different parts of space. They are,space, each separated by millions and millions of miles —though of course 
<28> they must have their correspondences in different parts of space. They are,

rather, serial concepts, each condition or state or serial concept enclosing the 
other. Each Sephirah, be it spiritual, ethereal, or physical, has its own laws, conditions, 
and “times,” if one may borrow terminology from Dunne’s Experiment with Time. The 
distinction between them is one of quality and density of substance. The difference 
may well be one of dimension, besides representing different type-levels of con- 
sciousness, the “lower” worlds or Sephiroth being interpenetrated or held. by the 
“higher.” Thus Kether, the Crown, is in Malkuth, as one axiom puts it, by virtue of the 
fact that its substance is of an infinitely rare, attenuated, and ethereal nature, while 
Malkuth, the physical universe is enclosed within the all-pervading spirit which is 
Kether in precisely the same way that Dunne conceives Time No. 1, to be enclosed or 
contained, or moving as a field of experience, within Serial Time No. 2.

So far as concerns the Supernals, for these are the ideas which must principally 
interest us, the Qabalah teaches us that they comprise an abstract impersonal princi- 
ple. That is, it is explained as an exalted condition of consciousness rather than of sub- 
stance; an essence or spirit which is everywhere and at all times expressed in terms of 
Light. In one sense, and from a comparative point of view, it may help our under- 
standing if we imagine it to have certain similarities to what our leading Analytical 
Psychologists call the Collective Unconscious.

Introduction 21Introduction 21

Though wholly impersonal in themselves and without characteristics that 
are readily understandable to the ordinary mind, the Supemals are, to all 
intents and purposes, what is commonly thought of as God. In the 
Tibetan Buddhist system, an analogous concept is Suntaya, the Void. 
And the realisation of the Void through Yoga processes and the technical medi- 
tations of the Sangha is, to quote Dr. Evan-Wentz’s book The Tibetan Book of the 
Dead, to attain “the unconditioned Dharmakaya, or the Divine Body of Truth, the 
primordial state of uncreatedness, of the Supramundane Bodhic, All-conscious- 
ness—Buddhahood.” In man, this Light is represented by the very deepest levels 
of his Unconscious—a mighty activity within his soul, which one magical system 
calls the higher and Divine Genius. Though the Golden Dawn rituals persistent- 
ly use phraseology which implies the belief in a personal God, that usage to my 
mind is a poetic or dramatic convention. A number of its very fine invocations are 
addressed to a deity conceived of in a highly individualistic and personal man- 
ner, yet if the student bears in mind the several Qabalistic definitions, these ritu- 
als take on added and profound meaning from a purely psychological point of 
view. That is, they are seen to be technical methods of exalting the individual 
consciousness until it comes to a complete realisation of its own divine root, and 
that universal pure essence of mind which ultimately it is.

It may be convenient for the reader if I tabulate the names of the Sephiroth 
with the Grades employed in the Golden Dawn, together with a few important 
attributions:

<29>It may be convenient for the reader if I tabulate the names of the Sephiroth 
with the Grades employed in the Golden Dawn, together with a few important 
attributions:

<29>

<30>1. Kether. The Crown. Spirit. Ipsissmus @ = 
2. Chokmah. Wisdom. Magus @®= 2 
3. Binah. Understanding. Magister Templi = B) 
4. Chesed. Mercy. Adeptus Exemptus @® = @ 
5. Geburah. Might. Adeptus Major ©= 
6. Tiphareth. Harmony. Adeptus Minor ®= 
7. Netzach. Victory. Fire. Philosophus @ = 
8. Hod. Splendour. Water. Practicus @®= 
9. Yesod. Foundation. Air. Theoricus @= BI 
10. Malkuth. Kingdom. Earth Zelator G) = bd

In the consideration of the Grades, I shall not discuss any others than those 
existing between Zelator and Adeptus Minor. My reason for doing so is that it is 
impossible for the ordinary individual to understand those above the Grade of . 
Adeptus Minor, and individuals who lay claim openly to such exalted Grades, by 
that very act place a gigantic question mark against the validity of their attain- 
ment. He that is exalted is humble. And to have tasted that which is conveyed by 
the Adeptus Minor Grade is so lofty an experience that few in their right minds, 
unless they were extremely saintlike in character, would consider themselves as 
having passed officially to a higher spiritual state.

Before proceeding to an analysis of the Grades, and the ceremonies 
which were supposed to confer them, it has been thought advisable to con- 
sider the nature of initiation itself, which was the avowed function and

purpose of the Order. What exactly is Initiation? Those of us who 
<31> have read some of the neo-occult and pseudo-Theosophical literature 
will also have heard the word initiation just too often to feel wholly at 
ease. Lesser Initiations and Greater Initiations have been written of at some 
length. But the entire subject was surrounded with that vague air of

22 The Golden Dawn22 The Golden Dawn

mystery, that halo of sanctity and ambiguity whose only excuse can be ignorance on 
the part of the writers thereof. The degree of phantasy and attenuated sentimentality 
which has obtained expression from these sources, plus the real lack of knowledge as 
to the objects of these degrees and mysteries, act as a constant source of irritation. Par- 
ticularly, when we remember that they were issued to satisfy people spiritually 
hungry, and yearning with an indescribable hunger for but a few crumbs of the 
divine wisdom.

Learned dissertations have been published describing in great detail the folk 
customs of Australian aborigines and Polynesian and other primitive peoples. All the 
strange habits and unfamiliar rites of these tribes are paraded before our gaze — from 
their hour of birth, through the vicissitudes of their emotional life, to the moment of 
death and interrment. We are asked to accept that these are initiations. The sole 
import attached to the word “initiation” in this connection is that of the formal accept- 
ance of a boy at puberty, for example, into the communal life of his people.

Moreover, Jane E. Harrison, Sir J. G. Frazer and a host of other excellent scholars

have provided us with a wealth of anthropological data so far as the Greeks 
<32> and Romans of another day are concerned. Some knowledge of their religious

rites and observances is displayed. The daily habits of the people are carefully 
noted and recorded in many a tome.rites and observances is displayed. The daily habits of the people are carefully 
noted and recorded in many a tome.

They also describe, though more haltingly and with rather less confidence, the 
circumstances surrounding the Ancient Mystery Cults. The symbolism of these mys- 
tery religions was, we see, in certain aspects uniform. All were dramas of redemption, 
plans of salvation, ways of purgation. Degrees of initiation, baptism by water, a mysti- 
cal meal for the privileged, dramatic plays depicting the life and death of some god or 
other — these are the familiar incidents of the cults described by our scholars.

But the obvious question arises, what spiritual value have such things for us? Do 
they help our own interior development so that we may solve our personal problems 
and handle more satisfactorily the rather difficult process of living today? And is this 
sort of thing what the Adepts of old implied by initiation? And if this is all there is to it, 
why should so many moderns have been so curiously perturbed and excited by it all. 
Some other meaning must be latent herein; some other purpose to the rite must have 
been understood by their original observers whereby they were spiritually assisted 
and aided not only to deal adequately with life but to further the conquest and 
manifestation of their own latent spiritual nature.

For despite every record, and every learned attempt to penetrate into the signifi- 
cance of these rites, as to the exact procedure of the Theurgic technique we still obtain

no lasting satisfaction, or understanding. There was undoubtedly a secret 
<33> about these celebrations, both ethnic and early Christian, which no exotericno lasting satisfaction, or understanding. There was undoubtedly a secret 
<33> about these celebrations, both ethnic and early Christian, which no exoteric

record has divulged or common sense, so-called, succeeded wholly to explain 
away. And the reason no doubt it this. Though the early writers felt no hesitancy in 
expounding certain principles of the philosophy of their Mysteries, none felt it 
incumbent upon himself to record in black and white the practical details of the magi- 
cal technique. Hence it is, in the absence of a description of the practical elements of 
these rites, that our scholars, anthropologists and philosophers do not feel inclined to 
attach much significance to the ancient Mysteries other than an ordinary religious or 
philosophic one. That is, it is their belief that ordinary notions of an advanced 
theological or philosophical nature were promulgated therein. For I may add in pass- 
ing the complete esoteric technique of initiation has never previously passed into 
open publication. It has been reserved in all secrecy for initiates of the sacred schools 
of Magic. While various documents explaining the principia of this wisdom were cir- 
culated amongst the members of these schools, the oaths of secrecy attaching to their 
receipt was such that in recent times, as I have said, few lay exponents of the ancient 
religions and philosophies have never so much as suspected the existence of these

Introduction 23

principia.

The root of the word itself means “to begin,” “to commence anew.” Initiation is 
thus the beginning of a new phase or attitude to life, the entry, moreover, into an 
entirely new type of existence. Its characteristic is the opening of the mind to an 
awareness of other levels of consciousness, both within and without. Initiation means

above all spiritual growth — a definite mark in the span of human life. 
<34>  Nowone ofthe best methods for bringing about this stimulus of the innerabove all spiritual growth — a definite mark in the span of human life. 
<34>  Nowone ofthe best methods for bringing about this stimulus of the inner

life, so that one does really begin or enter upon an entirely new existence 
characterised by an awareness of higher principles within, is the Ceremonial tech- 
nique. By this we mean that a Ceremony is arranged in which certain ideas, teaching 
and admonitions are communicated to the candidate in dramatic form in a formally 
prepared Temple or Lodge room. Nor is this all — otherwise, no claim could be made 
on behalf of Magic that it really and not merely figuratively initiates. For the utterance 
of an injunction does not necessarily imply that it can sink sufficiently deeply into 
consciousness so as to arouse into renewed activity the dormant spiritual qualities. 
And we have already witnessed the invalidity and spiritual bankruptcy of innumer- 
able organisations, religious, secular, and fraternal so-called, which have their own 
rituals and yet, taking them by and large, have produced very few initiates or spiritually- 
minded men and women, saints or adepts of any outstanding merit.

The efficacy of an initiation ceremony depends almost exclusively on the initiator. 
What is it that bestows the power of successful initiation? This power comes from 
either having had it awakened interiorly at the hands of some other competent 
initiator, or that a very great deal of magical and meditation work has successfully 
been performed. It is hardly necessary at this juncture to labour at a description of 
these exercises and technical processes of development which were undertaken by 
candidates and would-be initiators. These have been delineated at length elsewhere,

both in my Tree of Life, and in an incomparably fine form in the Golden Dawn 
<35> documents presented herein. But it is necessary to emphasize the fact that anboth in my Tree of Life, and in an incomparably fine form in the Golden Dawn 
<35> documents presented herein. But it is necessary to emphasize the fact that an

anterior personal training and prolonged magical effort are the sole means by 
which one is enabled so to awaken the dormant spiritual life of another that he may 
well and truly be called “initiated.”

Now we know from an examination of the above mentioned documents and of 
ancient literature that the object of the Theurgic art, as the magical concept of initia- 
tion was then termed, was so to purify the personality that that which was there 
imprisoned could spring into open manifestation. As one of the alchemical expositors 
has expressed it: “Within the material extreme of this life, when it is purified, the Seed 
of the Spirit is at last found.” The entire object of all magical and alchemical processes 
is the purification of the natural man, and by working upon his nature to extract the 
pure gold of spiritual attainment. This is initiation.

§

These Golden Dawn rituals and ceremonies of initiation are worthy of a great 
deal of study and attention. It is my sincere and fervent hope that meditation and a 
close examination will be made of the text. Now, if we examine these texts carefully, 
we shall find that we can epitomise in a single word the entire teaching and ideal of 
those rituals. If one idea more than any other is persistently stressed from the begin- 
ning that idea is in the word Light. From the candidate’s first reception in the Hall of 
the Neophytes when the Hierophant adjures him with these words: “Child of Earth,long hast thou dwelt in darkness. Quit the night and seek the day,” to the 
<36> transfiguration in the Vault ceremony, the whole system has as its objective 
the bringing down of the Light. For it is by that Light that the golden banner of 
the inner life may be exalted; it is in light where lies healing and the power of growth. 
Some vague intimation of the power and splendour of that glory is first given to the

wai

24 The Golden Dawn

aspirant in the Neophyte Grade when, rising from his knees at the close of the invoca- 
tion, the Light is formulated above his head in the symbol of the White Triangle by the 
union of the implements of the three chief officers. By means of the Adeptus Minor 
ritual, which identifies him with the Chief Officer, he is slain as though by the destruc- 
tive force of his lower self. After being symbolically buried, triumphantly he rises 
from the tomb of Osiris in a glorious resurrection through the descent of the white 
Light of the Spirit. The intervening grades occupy themselves with the analysis of that 
Light as it vibrates between the light and the darkness, and with the establishment 
within the candidate’s personal sphere of the rays of the many-coloured rainbow 
of promise.

“Before all things,” commences a phrase in one ritual, “are the chaos, the dark- 
ness, and the Gates of the Land of Night.” It is in this dark chaotic night so blindly 
called life, a night in which we struggle, labour and war incessantly for no reasonable 
end, that we ordinary human beings stumble and proceed about our various tasks. 
These gates of the far-flung empire of the night indeed refer eloquently to the 
material bondage which we ourselves have created — a bondage whereby we are tied 
to our circumstances, to our selves, to trial of every kind, bound to the very things we

so despise and hate. It is not until we have clearly realised that we are 
<37> enmeshed in darkness, an interior darkness, that we can commence to seekso despise and hate. It is not until we have clearly realised that we are 
<37> enmeshed in darkness, an interior darkness, that we can commence to seek

for that alchemical solvent which shall disperse the night, and call a halt to the 
continual projection outwards of the blackness which blinds our souls. As in the 
Buddhist scheme, where the first noble truth is sorrow, so not until we have been 
brought by experience to understand life as sorrow, can we hope for the cessation of 
its dread ravage. Only then does the prospect open of breaking the unconscious pro- 
jection, the ending of which discloses the world and the whole of life in a totally dif- 
ferent light. “One thing only, brother, do I proclaim,” said the Buddha, “now as 
before. Suffering and deliverance from suffering.”

These restricting circumstances and bonds are only the gates of the wilderness. 
The use of the word “gate” implies a means both of egress and ingress. By these gates 
we have entered, and by them also may we go. out if so we choose, to enter the 
brilliance of the dawning Sun, and perchance greet the rising of the spiritual splen- 
dour. For “after the formless, the void, and the darkness, then cometh the knowledge 
of the Light.” As intimated above, one first must have realised that one’s soul is lost in 
darkness before a remedy can be sought to that irresponsible participation mystique, 
the unconscious projection outwards of interior confusion, and aspire to that divine 
land which is, metaphorically, the place of one’s birth. In that land is no darkness, no 
formlessness, no chaos. It is the place of the Light itself — that Light “which no wind 
can extinguish, which burns without wick or fuel.”

Being “brought to the Light” then is a very apposite description of the

<38> function of Initiation. It is the Great Work. There is no ambiguity in the con- 
ception of the Rituals, for it appears throughout the entire work from Neo-<38> function of Initiation. It is the Great Work. There is no ambiguity in the con- 
ception of the Rituals, for it appears throughout the entire work from Neo-

phyte to Adeptus Minor and perhaps beyond. For the Path is a journeying upwards 
on the ladder of existence to the crown of the Tree of Life, a journey where every effort 
made and every step taken brings one a little nearer to the true glory of the Clear 
Light. As we know, the experience of the rising of the Light in both vision and waking 
state is common to mystics of every age and of every people. It must be an experience 
of the greatest significance in the treading of the Path because its appearance seems 
always and everywhere an unconditional psychic thing. It is an experience which 
defies definition, as well in its elementary flashes as in its most advanced transports. 
No code of thought, philosophy or religion, no logical process can bind it or limit it or 
express it. But always it represents, spiritually, a marked attainment, a liberation from 
the turmoil of life and from psychic complications and, as Dr. C. G. Jung has expressed 
the matter, it “thereby frees the inner personality from emotional and imaginary

Introduction 25

entanglements, creating thus a unity of being which is universally felt as a release.” It 
is the attainment of spiritual puberty, marking a significant stage in growth.

Symptomatic of this stage of interior growth is the utter transformation that 
comes over what previously appeared to be “the chaos, the darkness, and the Gates of 
the Land of Night.” While man is assumed into godhead, and the divine spirit is 
brought down into manhood, a new heaven and a new earth make their appearance,

and familiar objects take ona divine radiance as though illumined by an inter- 
<39> nal spiritual light. And this is what, in part at any rate, was meant by the oldand familiar objects take ona divine radiance as though illumined by an inter- 
<39> nal spiritual light. And this is what, in part at any rate, was meant by the old

alchemists, for the finding of the Philosopher's Stone converts all base metals 
into the purest gold. In his book Centuries of Meditation, Thomas Traherne gives an 
interesting description of the rapture of the inner personality, its reaction to the 
world, when it is freed by the mystical experience from all entanglements. He says: 
“The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which never should be reaped, nor was 
ever sown. I thought it had stood from everlasting to everlasting. The dust and the 
stones of the street were as precious as gold; the gates were at first the end of the 
world. The green trees when I saw them first through one of the gates, transported 
and ravished me, their sweetness and unusual beauty made my heart to leap, and 
almost mad with ecstasy, they were such strange and wonderful things. The men! O 
what venerable and reverent creatures did the aged seem! Immortal Cherubim! And 
the young men glittering and sparkling angels, and maids, strange seraphic pieces of 
life and beauty. Boys and girls tumbling in the street, and playing, were moving jewels 
... [knew not that they were born or should die. But all things abided eternally as they 
were in their proper places. Eternity was manifest in the Light of the Day, and some- 
thing infinite behind everything appeared...”

And to illustrate the magical attitude towards life and the world when initiation 
has produced its true result, there is another exalted panegyric by Traherne which I 
cannot desist from quoting. For let me add that Magic does not countenance a retreat

from life, an escape from the turmoils of practical life. It seeks only to trans- 
<40> mute what formerly was dross into goid. Initiation has as its object the com-from life, an escape from the turmoils of practical life. It seeks only to trans- 
<40> mute what formerly was dross into goid. Initiation has as its object the com-

mencement of a new life, to transform the base and low into the pure and 
unutterably splendid. “All appeared new and strange at first, inexpressibly rare and 
delightful and beautiful. I was a little stranger which at my entrance into the world was 
saluted and surrounded with innumerable joys. My knowledge was Divine; I knew 
by intuition those things which since my Apostacy I collected again by the highest 
reason. My very ignorance was advantageous. I seemed as one brought into the state 
of innocence. All things were spotless and pure and glorious; yea, and infinitely mine 
and joyful and precious. I knew not that there were any sins, or complaints or laws. I 
dreamed not of poverties, contentions, or vices, All tears and quarrels were hidden 
from my eyes. Everything was at rest, free and immortal. [knew nothing of sickness or 
death or exaction. In the absence of these I was entertained like an angel with the 
works of God in their splendour and glory; I saw all in the peace of Eden... All Time 
was Eternity, and a perpetual Sabbath...”

Such is the stone of the Philosophers, the Quintessence, the Summum Bonum, 
true wisdom and perfect happiness.

Psellus, the Neoplatonist, has written that the function of Initiatory Magic was “to 
initiate or perfect the human soul by the powers of materials here on earth; for the 
supreme faculty of the soul cannot by its own guidance aspire to the sublimest intui- 
tion and to the comprehension of Divinity.” It is a commonplace aphorism in Occult- 
ism that “Nature unaided fails.” That is to say that the natural life, if left to itself, andisolated from the impact of a higher type of life or consciousness, can only 
<41> produce a commonplace thing of the natural life. It reminds us of the senti- 
ment of the alchemists who expressed contempt of their first matter as it 
existed in its natural or impure state, in the condition where it normally is found. But

26 The Golden Dawn26 The Golden Dawn

this first matter, cleansed and purified by the psycho-chemical art of alchemy, that is 
to say by Initiation —is that which is transformed into the most precious thing in the 
whole world. But until cleansed and purified it is of little or no value. Nature, 
however, aided where she had left off by wise and devout men, may surpass herself. 
And this is why Psellus claims that the soul of itself and by itself is not able to attain to 
divinity unless and until it is guided by Initiates and thus enfolded into another life. It 
is to effect this integration, to bring about this initiation, this exaltation of the con- 
sciousness above its natural state to the light divine, that the magical system of the 
Golden Dawn, or of any other legitimate initiating system, owes its existence. The 
function of every phase of its work, the avowed intention of its principal rituals, and 
the explicit statement of its teaching, is to assist the candidate by his own aspirations 
to find that unity of being which is the inner Self, the pure essence’ of mind, the 
Buddha-nature. Not only does the system imply this by its ritualistic movements and 
axiomata, but there are clear and unmistakable passages where these ideas are given 
unequivocal expression. Thus, we find it written that the entire object of initiation and 
mystical teaching is “by the intervention of the symbol, ceremonial and sacrament, so 
to lead the soul that it may be withdrawn from the attraction of matter and delivered 
from the absorption therein, whereby it walks in somnambulism, knowing 
<42> not whence it cometh nor whither it goeth.” And moreover, in the same 
Ritual, celebrated at the autumnal and vernal Equinoxes, the Chief Adept 
officiating recites an invocation beseeching guidance for the newly-installed Hiero- 
phant. It is asked “that he may well and worthily direct those who have been called 
from the tribulation of the darkness into the Light of this little kingdom of Thy love. 
And vouchsafe also, that going forward in love for Thee, through him and with him, 
they may pass from the Desire of Thy house into the Light of Thy presence.” This is 
succeeded by sentences read by the Second and Third Adepti: “The desire of Thy 
house hath eaten me up,” and “I desire to be dissolved and to be with Thee.”And finally, that not the least vestige of misunderstanding or misconception may 
remain as to the objects of this divine Theurgy, let me reproduce one last quotation 
from this same ritual. Referring to the Supernals and the Temple that in old time was 
built on high, the speech adds: “The holy place was made waste and the Sons of the 
house of Wisdom were taken away into the captivity of the senses. We have wor- 
shipped since then in a house made with hands, receiving a sacramental ministration 
by a derived Light in place of the cohabiting Glory. And yet, amidst Signs and sym- 
bols the tokens of the Higher presence have never been wanting in our hearts. By the 
waters of Babylon we have sat down and wept, but we have ever remembered Zion,

“and that memorial is a witness testifying that we shall yet return with exultation into 
the house of our Father.”

Thus and unmistakably is the true object of the Great Work set before us, and we

shall do well ever to keep eye and aspiration firmly fixed thereto. For while the 
<43> road to the spiritual Zion demands great exertion, and because it is a way that

at times proceeds by devious routes, there is great temptation to linger by the 
roadside, to stroll down pleasant side-lanes, or to play absent-mindedly with toys or 
staves cut but to assist our forward march. But if we forget not to what noble city the 
winding path leads us, little danger can overtake any who pursue it steadfast to the 
end. It is only when the abiding city is forgotten that the road becomes hard, and the 
way beset by unseen danger and difficulty.

Prior to attempting to describe a few of the salient points of the Rituals —briefly, 
for since they appear within these volumes, they must be individually studied and 
experienced so that an individual point of view may be acquired — it may be advis- 
able to devote a few explanatory words to the Art of Ceremonial Initiation itself.A useful and significant preface may be taken from Dr. Jung’s commentary to 
Wilhelm’s translation of The Secret of The Golden Flower, where there is much that

Introduction 27explains the ritualistic functions of Magic. “Magical practices are,” he declares, “the 
projections of psychic events which, in cases like these, exert a counter influence on 
the soul, and act like a kind of enchantment of one’s own personality. That is to say, by 
means of these concrete performances, the attention or better said the interest, is 
brought back to an inner sacred domain which is the source and goal of the soul. This 
inner domain contains the unity of life and consciousness which, though once 
possessed, has been lost and must now be found again.” 
From one point of view the officers employed in these Rituals represent 
<44> just such psychic projections. They represent, even as figures in dreams do, 
different aspects of man himself — personifications of abstract psychological 
principles inhering within the human spirit. Through the admittedly artificial or con- 
ventional means of a dramatic projection of these personified principles in a well- 
ordered ceremony a reaction is induced in consciousness. This reaction is calculated 
to arouse from their dormant condition those hitherto latent faculties represented 
objectively in the Temple of Initiation by the officers. Without the least conscious 
effort on the part of the aspirant, an involuntary current of sympathy is produced by 
this external delineation of spiritual parts which may be sufficient to accomplish the 
purpose of the initiation ceremony. The aesthetic appeal to the imagination — quite 
apart from what could be called the intrinsic magical virtue with which the G. D. documents Z. 1. and Z. 3, deal at some length — stirs to renewed activity the life of the 
inner domain. And the entire action of this type of dramatic ritual is that the soul may 
discover itself exalted to the heights, and during that mystical elevation receive the 
rushing forth of the Light.3, deal at some length — stirs to renewed activity the life of the 
inner domain. And the entire action of this type of dramatic ritual is that the soul may 
discover itself exalted to the heights, and during that mystical elevation receive the 
rushing forth of the Light. Applying these ideas then, to the Neophyte or @=[2] — so called because it is 
not attributed to any of the enumerations or Sephiroth on the Tree of Life since it is a 
preliminary or probationary grade — we find that the Kerux is an officer who per- 
sonifies the reasoning faculties. He represents that intelligent active part of the mind 
which functions ever in obedience to the Will — the Qabalistic Ruach, ina word. The 
higher part of that mind, the aspiring, sensitive, and the intuitive conscious- 
<45> ness is represented by the Hegemon, who seeks the rising of the Light. And 
the Hierophant, in this initial ceremony of Neophyte, acts on behalf of the 
higher spiritual soul of man himself, that divine self of which too rarely, if ever at all, 
we become aware, “The essence of mind is intrinsically pure,” is a definition of the 
Bodhisattva Sila Sutra, and it is this essential state of enlightenment, this interior Self, 
Osiris glorified through trial and perfected by suffering, which is represented by the 
Hierophant on the dais. He is seated in the place of the rising Sun, on the throne of the 
East, and with but two or three exceptions never moves from that station in the Tem- 
ple. As the Qabalah teaches, the everlasting abode of the Higher Self is in the Eden of 
Paradise, the supernal sanctuary which is ever guarded from chaos by the flaming 
sword of the Kerubim whirling every way on the borders of the abyss. From that aloof 
spiritual stronghold it gazes down upon its vehicle, the lower man, evolved for the 
purpose of providing it with experience — involved in neither its struggles or 
tribulations, yet, from another point of view, suffering acutely thereby.Introduction 27

As the Qabalah teaches, the everlasting abode of the Higher Self is in the Eden of 
Paradise, the supernal sanctuary which is ever guarded from chaos by the flaming 
sword of the Kerubim whirling every way on the borders of the abyss. From that aloof 
spiritual stronghold it gazes down upon its vehicle, the lower man, evolved for the 
purpose of providing it with experience — involved in neither its struggles or 
tribulations, yet, from another point of view, suffering acutely thereby. And seldom 
does that Genius leave its palace of the stars except when, voluntarily, the lower self 
opens itself to the higher by an act of sincerest aspiration of self-sacrifice, which alone 
makes possible the descent of the Light within our hearts and minds. Thus when the 
Hierophant leaves the Throne of the East, he represents that Higher Self inaction, and 
as Osiris marks the active descent of the Supernal splendour. For he says, as he leaves 
the dais with wand uplifted: “I come in the Power of the Light. I come in the Light of 
Wisdom. I come in the Mercy of the Light. The Light hath healing in its wings.” 
<46> And having brought the Light to the aspirant, he returns to his throne, as 
though that divine Genius of whom he is the symbol awaited the deliberate 
willing return of the aspirant himself to the everlasting abode of the Light.

28 The Golden Dawn28 The Golden Dawn

Even in the communication of the usual claptrap of secret societies, the signs and 
grips, all these are explained solely in terms of the quest for the Light. Also the various 
groupings of officers and their movements in the Temple are not without profound 
meaning. These should be sought out, since they constantly reiterate the implicit pur- 
pose of the rite. Thus, at the altar, the three principal officers form about the candidate 
a Triad, representing in symbolic formation again the Supernal clear Light of the Void, 
and this also is represented by the number of the circumambulations about the con- 
fines of the Temple. The white cord bound thrice about the waist has reference to the 
same set of ideas. Even upon the altar of the Temple are symbols indicating the rise of 
Light. A red calvary cross of six squares as symbolic of harmony and equilibrium is 
placed above a white triangle — the emblem of the Golden Dawn. They form the sym- 
bol of the Supernal Sephiroth which are the dynamic life and root of all things, while 
in man they constitute that triad of spiritual faculties which is the intrinsically pure 
essence of mind. Hence the triangle is a fitting emblem of the Light. And the place of 
the Cross above the Triangle suggests not the domination of the sacred spirit, but its 
equilibriation and harmony in the heart of man. Despite the fact that the whole of this 
intricate symbolism can hardly be realised by the candidate at the time of his initia-

tion, its intrinsic value is such that unconsciously as an organised body of sug- 
<47> gestion it is perceived and noted and strikes the focal centre.tion, its intrinsic value is such that unconsciously as an organised body of sug- 
<47> gestion it is perceived and noted and strikes the focal centre.

Weare taught by tradition that the entire object of the sacred rites was the 
purification of the soul so that its power could gradually dissolve the impediments of, 
and percolate through, the heavy body and opaque brain. “Know” says Synesius, 
“that the Quintessence and hidden thing of our stone is nothing else than our viscous 
celestial and glorious soul drawn out of its minera by our magistery.” Hence the entire 
trend of the preliminary Neophyte grade of the Golden Dawn is towards the purifica- 
tion of the personality. It fulfills the testimony of the Hermetic Art so that the Light 
within could be fermented and perfected by the ceremonial method of initiation. 
Purification and consecration — this is the insistent and uncompromising theme 
caught by the candidate’s ear. “Unpurified and unconsecrated thou canst not enter 
our sacred Hall!” Fire and water assist in these several consecrations until, eventually, 
the candidate is placed in the position of balanced power, between the two Pillars, 
where the first link is effected with his higher and divine Genius.

§

The Neophyte Ritual really stands by itself. It is an introductory ceremony 
shadowing forth all the major formulae and techniques. With the Adeptus Minor 
ritual it is concerned almost entirely with the Light itself. The five grades that are 
placed between them have as their object the awakening of the elemental bases of

what must develop into the instrument of the higher. Awakened and purified, 
<48>* they may be consecrated to the Great Work, in order that they may becomewhat must develop into the instrument of the higher. Awakened and purified, 
<48>* they may be consecrated to the Great Work, in order that they may become

worthy vehicles for the indwelling of the Light. First, however, itis necessary 
that they be awakened. For, psychological truism that it is, until their presence is 
realised their transmutation cannot be accomplished. In symbolic form and pagean- 
try, the ceremony of each grade calls forth the spirits of a particular element. And asa 
steel placed in close proximity to a magnet receives some degree of its magnetism, 
and comparable to the electrical phenomenon of induction, so the presence of power 
induces power. Contact with the appropriate type of elemental force produces an 
identical type of reaction within the sphere of the Neophyte, and it is thus that growth 
and advancement proceeds. The speeches of the officers deal almost exclusively with 
the knowledge pertaining to that element and grade, and excerpts from fragmentary 
remains of the ancient Mysteries and from certain of the books of the Qabalah do 
much towards producing an impressive atmosphere.

The element offered for the work of transmutation in the Grade of Zelator is the

Introduction 29The element offered for the work of transmutation in the Grade of Zelator is the

Introduction 29

earthy part of the Candidate. The ritual symbolically admits him to the first rung of 
that mighty ladder whose heights are obscured in the Light above. This first rung is 
the lowest sphere of the conventional Tree of Life, Malkuth, the Sanctum Regnum. To it 
are ascribed the first grade of Zelator, and the element of Earth. Herein, after the Earth 
elementals are invoked, the Candidate is ceremonially brought to three stations, the 
first two being those of evil and the presence divine. At each of these stations the 
Guardians reject him at the point of the sword, urging him in his unprepared 
<49> state to return. His third attempt to go forward places him in a balanced posi- 
tion, the path of equilibrium, the Middle Way, where he is received. Anda way 
is cleared for him by the Hierophant, who again represents the celestial soul of things. 
During his journey along that path, the stability of earth is established within him, that 
eventually it may prove an enduring temple of the Holy Spirit.Some have criticised these elemental grades a little harshly and severely; others 
have rejected them entirely. In a letter sent to me from a former Praemonstrator of 
one G. D. Temple, these rituals too were condemned in that they were said to be sim- 
ply a parade, redundant and verbose, of the occult knowledge that one of the Chiefs 
possessed at that time. In one sense, of course, what those critics claim is perfectly 
true. The principal formulae and teaching are concealed in the preliminary Neophyte 
Grade and that of Adeptus Minor. It is the development of the ideas in these cere- 
monies which constitutes the Great Work — the disclosure of the essence of mind, the 
invocation of the higher Genius. These, however, are the high ends and the final goals 
of the mystic term. Notwithstanding his limitations these are ultimates to which every 
man must work, Meanwhile, in order to render that attainment possible in its fullest 
sense, several important matters require attention. The personality must be har- 
monised. Every element therein demands equilibriation in order that illumination 
ensuing from the magical work may not produce fanaticism and pathology instead of 
Adeptship and integrity. Balance is required for the accomplishment of the Great

Work. “Equilibrium is the basis of the soul.” Therefore, the four grades of 
<50> Earth, Air, Water and Fire plant the seeds of the microcosmic pentagram, andWork. “Equilibrium is the basis of the soul.” Therefore, the four grades of 
<50> Earth, Air, Water and Fire plant the seeds of the microcosmic pentagram, and

above them is placed, in the Portal ceremony, the Crown of the Spirit, the 
quintessence, added so that the elemental vehemence may be tempered, to the end 
that all may work together in balanced disposition. These grades are therefore an 
important and integral part of the work, despite shortsighted hostile criticism. To . 
compare them, however, with those which precede and follow, is symptomatic of an 
intellectual confusion of function. It is rather as if one said that milk is more virtuous 
than Friday — which, naturally, is absurd. Yet similar comparisons in magical matters 
are constantly being made without exciting ridicule. It is obvious that different 
categories may not be so compared. The purpose of the Neophyte ritual is quite dis- 
tinct from that of Zelator, and it is mistaken policy to compare them. What rightly 
could be asked is whether the Zelator and the other elemental grades accomplish 
what they purport to do. That is another matter. The concensus of experienced opin- 
ion is on the whole that they do, and I am content for the time being to accept 
that authority.

The candidate by these grades is duly prepared, so it is argued, to enter the 
immeasurable region, to begin to analyse and comprehend the nature of the Light 
which has been vouchsafed him. The first three elemental grades could be taken just 
as quickly as the candidate, at the discretion of the Chiefs, desired. There were no 
requirements other than to indicate by examination that the appropriate meditations 
had been performed and certain items of Qabalistic knowledge necessary to themagical routine committed to memory. 
<S1> Before proceeding further in the analysis of the grades, there is one 
rather fine prose passage in the Zelator grade which must be given here — a 
passage of beauty, high eloquence, and lofty significance. “And Tetragrammaton

30 The Golden Dawn

placed Kerubim at the East of the Garden of Eden and a Flaming Sword which turned 
every way to keep the path of the Tree of Life, for He has created Nature that man 
being cast out of Eden may not fall into the Void. He has bound man with the stars as 
with a chain. He allures him with scattered fragments of the Divine Body in bird and 
beast and flower. And He laments over him in the Wind and in the Sea and ‘in the 
Birds. And when the times are ended, He will call the Kerubim from the East of the 
Garden, and all shall be consumed and become infinite and holy.”

It would be a happy task, were it advisable, to devote several pages of this 
introduction to praising the excellence of what are called the four elemental prayers. 
Each one of the elemental Initiation ceremonies closes with a long prayer of invoca- 
tion which issues, as it were, from the heart of the elements themselves. These must 
be silently read, continuously meditated upon and frequently heard fully to be 
appreciated, when the reader will find his own personal reactions crystallising. 
Recited by the Hierophant at the end of the ceremony, these prayers voice the 
inherent aspiration of the elements towards the goal they are striving in their own 
way to reach, for here they are conceived as blind dumb forces both within and 
without the personal sphere of man. They are given assistance by the human beings 
who, having invoked them and used their power, strive to repay in some way the debt

owed to these other struggling lives. 
<52> The grade after the Earth ceremony is that of Theoricus. It is referred toowed to these other struggling lives. 
<52> The grade after the Earth ceremony is that of Theoricus. It is referred to

the Ninth Sephirah on the Tree of Life, Yesod, the Foundation, and to it are 
attributed the sphere of the operation of Luna and the element Air. Here the can- 
didate is conducted to the stations of the four Kerubim, the Angelic choir of Yesod. 
The Kerubim are defined in that ritual as the presidents of the elemental forces, the 
vivified powers of the letters of Tetragrammaton operating in the Elements. Over 
each of these rules some one of the four letters of the mirific word and the Kerubim. It 
is always through the power and authority and symbol of the Kerub that the elemen- 
tal spirits and their rulers are invoked. In this ritual, as in all the others, important 
practical formulae of ceremonial magic are concealed.

At this juncture, of the ceremony, with the Airy elements vibrating about him 
and through him, the Zelator is urged to be “prompt and active as the Sylphs, but 
avoid frivolity and caprice. Be energetic and strong as the Salamanders but avoid 
irritability and ferocity. Be flexible and attentive to images, like the Undines, but avoid 
idleness and changeability. Be laborious and patient like the Gnomes, but avoid 
grossness and avarice. So shalt thou gradually develop the powers of thy soul and fit 
thyself to command the spirits of the elements.”

In each of the grades, several drawings and diagrams are exhibited, each one 
conveying useful knowledge and information required in the upward quest. The 
Tarot Keys are also dealt with, as indicating pictorially the stages of that journey, and 
depicting the story of the soul. It may not be possible because of the exigencies of

space to reproduce in these volumes a pack of Tarot cards based upon esoteric 
<53> descriptions — though I should very much liked to have done so. But by usingspace to reproduce in these volumes a pack of Tarot cards based upon esoteric 
<53> descriptions — though I should very much liked to have done so. But by using

the Waite and the available French and Italian packs, and by comparing them 
with the accounts given in the rituals, the imagination of the reader will render this 
omission unimportant.

The third grade is that of Practicus referred to the Sephirah Hod, the Splendour, 
the lowest of the Sephiroth on the left hand side of the Tree, the Pillar of Severity. Its 
attributions refer to the sphere of the operation of Mercury, but more especially to the 
element of Water which in this ceremony is invoked to power and presence. AsI have 
previously remarked, and it bears constant reiteration, the Tree of Life and the 
Qabalistic scheme as a whole should be carefully studied so that the aptness of the 
attributions both to the Sephiroth and the Paths may be fully appreciated. Two Paths 
lead to the Sphere of Splendour, the Path of Fire from Malkuth, and the Path of the

Introduction 31

reflection of the sphere of the Sun from Yesod. Water is germinative and maternal, 
whilst Fire is paternal and fructifying. It is from their interior stimulation and union, 
the alchemical trituration, that the higher life is born, evenas has been said, “Except ye 
be baptised with water and the Spirit ye cannot enter the Kingdom of heaven.”

Therefore in this grade, the Candidate is led to the sphere of stagnant water 
which by the presence of solar and fiery elements is vitalised and rendered a perfect 
creative base. Most of the speeches in this ritual are depicted as issuing from the 
Samothracian Kabiri, the deluge Gods, though the main body of the ritual consists of

the sonorous and resonant versicles of the Chaldaean Oracles, the translation, I 
<54> believe, of Dr. Westcott, with a few modifications authorised by Mathers.the sonorous and resonant versicles of the Chaldaean Oracles, the translation, I 
<54> believe, of Dr. Westcott, with a few modifications authorised by Mathers.

Briefly, the entire symbolism of the Practicus grade is summarised by the 
position on the altar of the principal Golden Dawn emblems so arranged that “the 
cross above the Triangle represents the power of the Spirit rising above the triangle of 
the Waters.” That also indicates the immediate task of the Candidate. At this juncture, 
too, the diagrams displayed begin to take on especial significance, and though their 
theme apparently is biblical in nature, accompanied by explanations in a curious 
phraseology consonant therewith, they are nevertheless highly suggestive, as con- 
taining the elements of a profound psychology. After this grade follows an automatic 
wait of three months, referred to the regimen of the elements, a period as it were of 
silent incubation, during which time the rituals were given to the candidate that he 
may make copies for his own private use and study.

The fourth grade of Philosophus carries the candidate one step further. The 
Sephirah involved is Netsach, Victory, to which is referred the operation of the planet 
Venus and the element of Fire, while the paths that connect to the lower rungs of the 
ladder are principally of a watery nature. Thus the elements encountered are of an 
identical nature with those of the preceding grade, but their order and power is quite 
reversed. Previously the water was predominant. Now the Fire rages and whirls in 
lurid storm, with water only as the complementary element whereon it may manifest, 
and in order that due equilibrium may be maintained, as it is written: — “The Ruach 
Elohim moved upon the face of the Waters.” These two are the primary terrestrial

elements which, intelligently controlled and creatively employed may lead 
<55> eventually to the restoration of the Golden Age. By their transmutation anewelements which, intelligently controlled and creatively employed may lead 
<55> eventually to the restoration of the Golden Age. By their transmutation anew

paradise may be re-created from the darkness and chaos into which formerly 
it had fallen. For the Light may not legitimately be called forth upon man, nor dwell 
within him, until chaos has been turned into equilibrium of complete realisation and 
enlightenment. Not until order has been restored to the lower elements of his earthy 
kingdom, neither peace nor inner security may be his rightful lot.

The symbols depicted while traversing the Path of Peh, which joins the spheres 
of Fire and Water, indicate the results as it were of the first stages of the Path, for the 
Tarot card shown demonstrates the destruction of a Tower by lightning. The three. 
holes blasted in the walls symbolise the Supernal Triad, the establishment of the 
divine through and following the destruction of the outer self. Though Fire and 
Water, warmth and moisture, are essentially creative, their stimulation within the 
being of the Neophyte draws his attention, perhaps for the first time, to the chaotic 
condition of his natural existence, and the complete psychic muddle into which his 
ignorance and spiritual impotence have stranded him. Evocative of the highest within 
his soul, these elements equally call forth that which is base and low. The result of the 
first step is analytical, an unbalancing, the levelling down of all that man formerly held 
true and holy — the chaos, the darkness, and the Gates of the Land of Night. An 
unhappy state, but a very necessary one if Progress is to be made and if the pre- 
liminary chaos is to be transcended. From these ruins may be erected the new temple 
of Light, for it is always from the mbbish heap that are selected the materials for the

32 The Golden Dawn

<56> manifestation of god-head. These symbols have a dual reference. Not only do32 The Golden Dawn

<56> manifestation of god-head. These symbols have a dual reference. Not only do

they refer to the epochs of creative evolution whose memory has long since 
faded even from the visible memory of nature, but also to the recapitulations of these 
periods within personal progress on the Path. “The Aspirant on the threshold of 
Initiation,” observes Crowley very aptly, “finds himself assailed by the ‘complexes’ 
which have corrupted him, their externalisation excruciating him, and his agonised 
reluctance to their elimination plunging him into such ordeals that he seems (both to 
himself and to others) to have turned from a noble and upright man into an unutter- 
able scoundrel.” These are the experiences and events which occur to every aspirant 
when initiation forces the realisation upon him that “all is sorrow.” In fact, it is my 
belief that the criterion or hall mark of successful initiation is the occurrence of these 
or similar experiences. The whole universe, under the stimulation of the magical 
elements and inward analysis, seems to tumble like a pack of cards crazily about one’s 
feet. This is the solve half of the alchemical solve et coagula formula.

Analysis must precede synthesis. Corruption is the primitive base from which 
the pure gold of the spirit is drawn. Moreover the alchemical treatises are eloquent in 
their description of the poisonous nature of this condition which, though extremely 
unpleasant, is a highly necessary one, and success in its production is at least one 
symptom of good working. It is held that the highest results may not be obtained until 
this particular type of change has occurred. So far as the nature of the environment

and the creative power of the personal self permits, the task implied by the 
<57> coagula formula is to assemble them and remould them nearer to the heart'sand the creative power of the personal self permits, the task implied by the 
<57> coagula formula is to assemble them and remould them nearer to the heart's

desire. And here again, the alchemists are adamant in their insistence upon 
the aphorism that “Nature unaided fails.” For the alchemist, so the tradition asserts, 
commences his work where Nature has left off. And were this solve phenomenon to 
occur spontaneously in the course of nature, the result and the outcome — the 
coagulation of previously dissolved elements — would not be very dissimilar to that 
which previously existed. But with the technique of initiation, the chaos is lifted up 
and fermented so to speak, that from it, with the aid of the invoked white Light of the 
divine Spirit, a higher species of being, illumined and enlightened, may develop.

In two Altar diagrams — one called the Garden of Eden, shown in the Practicus 
grade, and the other called The Fall shown in the Philosophus grade, all these ideas 
are expanded and synthesized. They should be carefully studied and receive long 
meditation, for in them are many clues to the spiritual and psychological problems 
which beset the traveller on the Path, and they resume the entire philosophy of 
Magic. Many hints, moreover, which may be found useful as assisting meditation are 
contained in The ‘Curse’ from a Philosophical Point of View in the second volume of 
Blavatsky’s Secret Doctrine in connection with the Prometheus myth and the awaken- 
ing of Manas, mind.

Since both of these diagrams may be found reproduced in the body of the text 
very little by way of prolonged explanation need here be said. The first depicts a per- 
sonified representation of the three fundamental principles in Man. Each of these is

apparently separate, functioning independently on its own plane without co- 
<58> operation with, because apparently unaware of, either the higher or theapparently separate, functioning independently on its own plane without co- 
<58> operation with, because apparently unaware of, either the higher or the

lower. Principally, it represents man in the now departed morning of the race, 
in the primal rounds of evolutionary effort when self-consciousness had not yet been 
won by self-induced and self-devised efforts, and when peace and harmony pre- 
vailed both within and without by right of heritage rather than through personal 
labour. The diagram appears in the Water grade of Practicus, since Water is a fitting 
representation of this placid peace. At the summit of the diagram stands the Apoca- 
lyptic woman clothed with the Sun of glory, crowned with the twelve stars, and the 
moon lying at her feet. Her symbolism pertains to the supernal essence of mind, rep- 
resenting thus the type and symbol of the glittering Augoeides, the Neschamah.

Introduction 33

Speaking of an analogous psychological conception in his commentary to The Secret of 
the Golden Flower, Dr. C. G. Jung remarks that this figure represents “a line or principle 
of life that strives after superhuman, shining heights.” At the base of the tree stands 
Eve, the Nephesch or unconscious who, in opposition to this divine Genius, stands for 
the dark, “earthborn, feminine principle with its emotionality and instinctiveness 
reaching far back into the depths of time, and into the roots of physiological con- 
tinuity.” Between the two stands Adam, supported by the fundamental strength of 
Eve, the Ruach or Ego not yet awakened to a realisation of its innate power and 
possibility. From the larger point of view he represents the race as a whole and “is the 
personified symbol of the collective Logos, the ‘Host’, and of the Lords of Wisdom or 
the Heavenly Man, who incarnated in humanity.” Otherwise he represents 
<59> the individual Candidate on the Path, prior to the awakening of the “sleeping 
dogs” within his being, to use Blavatsky’s apt expression.Beneath these three figures sleeps a coiled dragon, silent, unawakened. None it 
would seem is aware of that latent power, titanic and promethean, coiled beneath — 
the active magical power centered in man, his libido, neutral, of vast potentialities but 
neither good nor evil in itself.

Very similar in some respects is the diagram revealed in the Philosophus Grade. 
As the divine peace of the Garden of Eden was manifested during the Water grade, so 
in this Grade of Philosophus, the power of Fire is shown to have called forth catas- 
trophe. Formerly coiled beneath the tree, the hydra-headed dragon in this Diagram 
has usurped its proper place. Its several horned heads wind their way up into the very 
structure of the Tree of Life, even unto Daath at the foot of the Supernals. Lured 
downwards by the tree of knowledge — and remembering in what sense the Bible 
speaks of the verb “to know,” we gather that the root of the trouble was an imperfect 
apprehension of creative power — towards the “darkly splendid world wherein con- 
tinually lieth a faithless depth,” Eve, the lower self, ceases to give support to Adam. 
She has yielded to the awful fascination of the awakening psyche. Far easier is it to fall 
than to climb to the distant heights. Yet only from one viewpoint is the Fall catas- 
trophic. The awareness of the rise of the Dragon endows man also with consciousness 
of power — and power is life and progress. The Dragon stands as the symbol of the 
great enemy to be overcome, and, as the task of equilibration proceeds, the great prize

awaiting success. 
<60> The Fall as a state of consciousness is analagous to that condition de-awaiting success. 
<60> The Fall as a state of consciousness is analagous to that condition de-

scribed by various mystics as the dark Night of the Soul. It is accompanied bya 
sense of intolerable dryness, a dreaded awareness of the fact that all the powers of the 
soul seem dead, and the mind’s vision closed in dumb protest, as it were, against the 
harsh discipline of the Work itself. A thousand and one seductions will tend to lure 
the candidate from the contemplation of the magical goal, and there will be presented 
to him a thousand and one means of breaking in spirit his vow to “persevere in the 
divine science” without breaking it in letter. And it will appear that the mind itself will 
run riot and become unstable, warning the candidate that it were better for him to 
enjoy a lull in his magical operations. This state is allegorically referred to by the 
alchemists in their descriptions of the poisonous Dragon which follows upon the cor- 
ruption of their First Matter. Vaughan calls it: “a horrible devouring Dragon — creep- 
ing and weltering in the bottom of her cave, without wings. Touch her not by any 
means, not so much as with thy hands, for there is not upon earth such a violent, 
transcendent poison.” But as the mystics teach, if this condition be patiently endured, 
it passes, a higher spiritual consciousness gradually dawning in the heart and mind. 
So also in the alchemical writings, we find that Vaughan observes: “As thou hast 
begun so proceed, and this Dragon will turn to a Swan, but more white than the 
hovering virgin snow when it is not yet sullied with the earth.”

The Qabalistic Sephirah of Daath is the conjunction of Chokmah and Binah on

34 The Golden Dawn

the Tree of Life, the child of Wisdom and Understanding —knowledge. It 
<61> refers to the symbolic sphere formed within or above the Ruach by means of34 The Golden Dawn

the Tree of Life, the child of Wisdom and Understanding —knowledge. It 
<61> refers to the symbolic sphere formed within or above the Ruach by means of

experience obtained, and this assimilated becomes transmuted into intuition 
and faculty of mind. But fundamentally it is the ascent of the Dragon or, if you wish, an 
upwelling of the Unconscious archetypes — a highly dangerous and unbalancing 
ascent, until they are assimilated to consciousness — which first renders Daath a 
possibility. It is the Fall which is responsible for the acquisition of self-knowledge. 
“Thus it stands proven” claims Blavatsky, “that Satan, or the red Fiery Dragon, the 
‘Lord of Phosphorus’ and Lucifer, or ‘Light-bearer,’ is in us; it is our Mind — our 
temptor and Redeemer, our intelligent liberator and saviour from pure animalism.”

In the evolutionary scheme, the Fall occurs through a higher type of intelligence 
coming into close contact with nascent humanity, thus stimulating the psyche of the 
race — or so the magical tradition has it. The recapitulation of this process within the 
individual sphere of consciousness proceeds through the technique of initiation 
whereby the Red Dragon is stirred into activity through contact with the fructifying 
powers of the elements, invoked through the skill and power of a trained initiator. 
The use of the divine prerogative, brought about by the magic of every-day experi- 
ence, the awakening of Daath, brings disaster at first because the awakened psyche is 
imperfectly understood and so abused for personal ends. But that very disaster and 
that abuse confers the consciousness of self, and is instrumental, at least in part of 
breaking up the primitive participation mystique. Consequently, the realisation of

sorrow as it impinges on the ego, or at least the sense of personal mental and 
<62> emotional discomfort, and an understanding of its causes, invariably con-sorrow as it impinges on the ego, or at least the sense of personal mental and 
<62> emotional discomfort, and an understanding of its causes, invariably con-

stitute the first impetus to perform the Great Work, even as it comprises the 
motive first to seek the services and aid of the analytical psychologist. This impetus 
and this self-consciousness are the prime implications of Daath. Its signification is a 
higher type of consciousness, the beginning of a spiritual rebirth. It acts as a self- 
evolved link between the higher Genius, on the one hand, at peace in its Supernal 
abode, and, on the other hand, the human soul bound by its Fall to the world of illu- 
sion and sense and matter. Not until that self-consciousness and acquired knowledge 
are turned to noble and altruistic ends, so long will sorrow and suffering be the inevit- 
able result. Continually will the Red Dragon, the inverted power of the eros, ravish 
the little kingdom of self until such time as we open ourselves to the deepest levels of 
our unconsciousness, reconciling and uniting them with our conscious outlook, thus 
conquering the foe by driving it back to its proper realm. In such a way may we use, 
but neither ignore nor repress, the experience of life and its fruit to transcend our own 
personal limitations and attain to a participation mystique on a higher and self-con- 
scious level.

Let me quote a few especially appropriate lines from Jung in connection with this 
Fall, when the fundamental basis of the Ruach has been attracted to the kingdom of 
shells and when Malkuth has been disassociated from the other Sephiroth: “Con- 
sciousness thus torn from its roots and no longer able to appeal to the authority of the 
primordial images, possesses a Promethean freedom, it is true, but it also partakes of

the nature of a godless hybris. It soars above the earth, even above mankind, 
<63> but the danger of capsizing is there, not for every individual to be sure, butthe nature of a godless hybris. It soars above the earth, even above mankind, 
<63> but the danger of capsizing is there, not for every individual to be sure, but

collectively for the weak members of such a society, who again Promethean- 
like, are bound by the unconscious to the Caucasus.”

For the Adept to be cut off from his roots, from contact with the vitalising and 
necessary basis of his Unconsciousness, will never do. He must unite and integrate 
the various levels of his entire Tree. His task must be to train and develop the titanic 
forces of his own underworld, so that they become as a powerful but docile beast 
whereon he may ride.

Introduction 35

§

The Adeptus minor grade continues the theme of these two diagrams. Escorted 
into the Vault, the Aspirant is shown the lid of the Tomb of Osiris, the Pastos, wherein 
is buried our Father, Christian Rosenkreutz, and on that lid is a painting which brings 
fulfillment as it were to the narrative of the preceding diagrams. It is divided into two 
sections. The lower half of the painting depicts a figure of Adam, similar to his presen- 
tation in the Practicus grade diagram, though here the heads of the Dragon are falling 
back from the Tree, showing the Justified One, the illuminated adept, by his immola- 
tion and self-sacrifice rescuing the fallen kingdom of his natural self from the clutches 
of an outraged eros. But above this, as though to show the true nature behind the 
deceptive appearance of things is illustrated a noble figure of majesty and divinity

described in the Ritual in these words. “And being turned I saw seven golden 
<64> Light-bearers, and in the midst of the Light-bearers, one like unto the Bendescribed in the Ritual in these words. “And being turned I saw seven golden 
<64> Light-bearers, and in the midst of the Light-bearers, one like unto the Ben

Adam, clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hair were white as snow, and his eyes as flaming fire; his feet like 
unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace. And his voice as the sound of many 
waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars and out of his mouth went the Sword 
of Flame, and his countenance was as the Sun in his strength.”

It is to effect this redemption of the personality, to regenerate the power of the 
dragon, and attempt to bring the individual to some realisation of his potential 
godhead, that is the object of the Adeptus Minor Ceremony.

It is for this reason that I hold that the Golden Dawn magic, the technique of 
initiation, is of supreme and inestimable importance to mankind at large. In it the 
work of academic psychology may find a logical conclusion and fruition, so thatit may 
develop further its own particular contribution to modern life and culture. For this 
psycho-magical technique of ceremonial initiation indicates the psychological solu- 
tion of the anima problem. “Arise! Shine! For thy light is come!”

Between the grade of Philosophus and the Portal, an interval of seven months 
was prescribed, the regimen of the planets. During that period, devised to assist the 
gradual fructification of the seeds planted within, a review was advised of all the pre- 
ceding studies. Such a review certainly was imperative. As one of the Chiefs of the 
Order expressed it:—’Remember that there is hardly a circumstance in the rituals

even of the First Order which has not its special meaning and application, and 
<65> which does not conceal a potent magical formula. These ceremonies haveeven of the First Order which has not its special meaning and application, and 
<65> which does not conceal a potent magical formula. These ceremonies have

brought thee into contact with certain forces which thou hast now to learn to 
awaken in thyself, and to this end, read, study and re-read that which thou hast 
already received. Be not sure even after the lapse of much time that thou hast fully dis- 
covered all that is to be learned from these. And to be of use unto thee, this must be the 
work of thine own inner self, thine own and not the work of another for thee so that 
thou mayest gradually attain to the knowledge of the Divine Ones.”

The Grade of the Portal, which conferred upon the Candidate the title of Lord of 
the Paths of the Portal of the Vault of the Adepti, is not referred to a Sephirah as such. It 
may, however, be considered as an outer court to Tiphareth, exactly as the Adeptus 
Minor ceremony may be considered Tiphareth within. Its technical attribution is the 
element of Akasa, Spirit or Ether which is magically invoked by the usual procedure 
of invoking pentagrams and the vibration of divine names following upon the con- 
juration of the powers of the four subsidiary elements. To this grade, there is attached 
no elemental prayer as in the former grades, but there is one remarkable invocation 
employed which bears quoting here. In full Temple, the English version is not used, 
but it is vibrated in the original Enochian or Angelic tongue — a language which is at 
once sonorous, vibrant and dramatically impressive. The following is the full version 
of which an abridged one was normally used in the Temple: “I reign over you, (here

36 The Golden Dawn

the Order version names the three Archangels of the element) saith the God of Justice

in power exalted above the firmament of wrath. In whose hands the Sunisasa 
<66> sword and the Moon as a through-thrusting fire. Who measureth your gar-in power exalted above the firmament of wrath. In whose hands the Sunisasa 
<66> sword and the Moon as a through-thrusting fire. Who measureth your gar-

ments in the midst of my vestures and trussed you together as the palms of my 
hands. Whose seat I garnished with the fire of gathering. Who beautified your gar- 
ments with admiration. To whom! madea law to govern the holy ones, and delivered 
you a rod with the ark of knowledge. Moreover, ye lifted up your voices and sware 
obedience and faith to him that liveth and triumpheth. Whose beginning is not nor 
end cannot be. Who shineth as a flame in the midst of your palaces and reigneth 
amongst you as the balance of righteousness and truth. Move therefore and show 
yourselves. Open the mysteries of your creation. Be friendly unto me, for lam the ser- 
vant of the same your God, a true worshipper of the Highest.”

This grade, referred to the veil Paroketh, which separates the First and Second 
Orders, is intermediate between the purely elemental grades and the spiritual grade 
of Adeptus Minor. A crown to the four lower elements, this Rite formulates above 
Earth, Air, Water and Fire, the uppermost point of the Pentagram, revealing the 
administration of the Light over and through the kingdom of the natural world. It con- 
cerns itself with the recapitulation of the former grades, co-ordinating and equilibriat- 
ing the elemental self which, symbolically sacrificed upon the mystical altar, is offered 
to the service of the higher Genius. In that grade, too, aspiration to the divine is 
strongly stressed as the faculty by which the veil of the inner sanctuary may be rent. It 
is the way to realisation. The five Paths leading from the grades of the First to the 
Second Orders are symbolically traversed, and their symbols impressed within the

sphere of sensation. 
<67> A gestation period of at least nine months had to elapse prior to initiationsphere of sensation. 
<67> A gestation period of at least nine months had to elapse prior to initiation

to the grade of Adeptus Minor, and since there can be no misunderstanding 
the purpose and nature of this beautiful ceremony it requires the minimum of com- 
ment from my pen. It explains itself completely in one of the speeches: “Buried with 
that Light in a mystical death, rising again in a mystical resurrection, cleansed and 
purified through him our Master, O Brother of the Cross of the Rose. Like him, O 
Adepts of all ages, have ye toiled. Like him have ye suffered tribulation. Poverty, tor- 
ture and death have ye passed through; they have been but the purification of the 
gold. In the alembic of thine heart through the athanor of affliction, seek thou the true 
stone of the wise.”

The form of this ritual is beautiful in its simplicity and warrants a brief descrip- 
tion. First of all, the candidate is led in, arrayed with insignia and badges and calling 
himself by his various titles and mottos. But he is warned that not in any vainglorious 
spirit are the mysteries to be approached, but in simplicity alone. This is the signal for 
him to be divested of all his ornaments and insignia, and by the Temple entrance, just 
prior to being bound upona large upstanding cross of wood, he stands alone, clad ina 
simple unornamented black gown. The reader is earnestly recommended to study 
this Ritual again and again, until almost it becomes a part of his very life, incorporated 
into the fabric of his being, for herein are highly important and significant formulae of 
mystical aspiration and of practical magic. In it is exemplified the technical “Dying 
God” formula about which in The Golden Bough Frazer has written so eloquently.

Examples of this are to be found in every mythology and every mystical 
<68> religion that our world has ever known. But I doubt that it has ever attained toExamples of this are to be found in every mythology and every mystical 
<68> religion that our world has ever known. But I doubt that it has ever attained to

a more clarified and definite espression than in this ceremony of the Adeptus 
Minor grade. For we are clearly taught by precept and by example that we are, in 
essence, gods of great power and spirituality who died to the land of our birth in the 
Garden of Hesperides, and mystically dying descended into hell. And moreover the 
ritual demonstrates that like Osiris, Christ, and Mithra, and many another type of 
god-man, we too may rise from the tomb and become aware of our true divine

Introduction 37

natures. The principal clause of the lengthy Obligation assumed while bound to the 
cross, indicating the trend of its teaching, and the import of its objective, is: “I further 
solemnly promise and swear that, with the Divine permission, I will from this day for- 
ward apply myself unto the Great Work, which is so to purify and exalt my spritual 
nature that with Divine aid I may at length attain to be more than human and thus 
gradually raise and unite myself to my higher and divine Genius, and that in this 
event, I will not abuse the great power entrusted to me.”

The preface to the assumption of the obligation is under these circumstances a 
tremendously impressive occurrence, and few could fail to be even faintly moved by 
it. It consists of an invocation of an Angelic power: “In the divine name IAO, I invoke 
Thee thou great avenging Angel HUA, that thou mayest invisibly place thy hand 
upon the head of this Aspirant in attestation of his obligation. .

It is not difficult to realise that this is a critical and important phase of the 
ceremony. During this obligation, because of the symbolism attached to it and

because of the active aspiration which is induced at this juncture, illumination 
<69> may quite easily occur. In one of the documents describing certain effectsbecause of the active aspiration which is induced at this juncture, illumination 
<69> may quite easily occur. In one of the documents describing certain effects

ensuing from this initiation, one of the Chiefs has written, that the object of the 
ceremony conceived as a whole “is especially intended to effect the change of the con- 
sciousness into the Neschamah, and there are three places where this can take place. 
The first is when the aspirant is on the cross, because he is so exactly fulfilling the sym- 
bol of the abnegation of the lower self and the Union with the higher.”

The Obligation assumed, the candidate is now removed from the cross, and the 
Officers then narrate to him the principal facts in the history of the founder of the 
Order — Christian Rosenkreutz. On a previous page was given a summary of these 
historical facts. When the History lecture mentions the discovery of the Vault wherein 
the Tomb and body of the illustrious Father were discovered, one of the initiating 
adepts draws aside a curtain, admitting the candidate to a chamber erected in the 
midst of the Temple similar to that described in the lecture. A few words roughly de- 
scribing it may not be considered amiss. As a climax to the very simple Temple furni- 
ture of the Outer grades, it comes as a psychological spasm and as a highly significant 
symbol. The vault itself is a small seven-sided chamber, each side representing one of 
the seven planets, with their host of magical correspondences. The mediaeval Rosi- 
crucian manifesto the Fama Fraternitatis, translated in Arthur Edward Waite’s Real His- 
tory of the Rosicrucians, describes it at great length, though I shall here quote but briefly: 
“We opened the door, and there appeared to our sight a vault of seven sides and seven

corners, every side five foot broad and the height of eight foot. Although the 
<70> sun never shined in this vault, nevertheless it was enlightened with anothercorners, every side five foot broad and the height of eight foot. Although the 
<70> sun never shined in this vault, nevertheless it was enlightened with another

Sun, which had learned this from the sun, and was situated in the upper part 
of the centre of the ceiling. In the midst, instead of a tomb-stone, was a round altar... 
Now, as we had not yet seen the dead body of our careful and wise Father, we 
therefore removed the altar aside; then we lifted up a strong plate of brass, and found 
a fair and worthy body, whole and unconsumed. .. .”

Around this fundamental symbolism, the Golden Dawn adepts, displaying a 
genius of extraordinary insight and synthesis, had built a most awe-inspiring super- 
structure. The usual Order symbolism of the Light was represented by a white 
triangle centred by the Rose — this placed upon the ceiling. The floor design was so 
painted as to represent the Red Dragon and the forces of the primitive archetypes 
upon which the candidate trod as emblematic of his conquest. Placed in the centre of 
the Vault was the Pastos of Rosenkreutz — though the Pastos is also referred to as the 
Tomb of Osiris the Justified One. Both of these beings may be considered as the type 
and symbol of the higher and divine Genius. Immediately above this coffin rested the 
circular altar mentioned in the Fama. It bore paintings of the Kerubic emblems, and 
upon these were placed the four elemental weapons and a cross, the symbol of

38 The Golden Dawn

resurrection. At one point in the ceremony, the acting Hierophant, or Chief Adept as

he is now called, is interred in the Pastos as though to represent the aspirant’s higher

Self which is hidden and confined within the personality, itself wandering blindly,

lost in the dark wilderness. The whole concatenation of symbols is an elaborate and 
dramatic portrayal of the central theme of the Great Work. Ina word, it depictslost in the dark wilderness. The whole concatenation of symbols is an elaborate and 
dramatic portrayal of the central theme of the Great Work. Ina word, it depicts

<71> the spiritual rebirth or redemption of the candidate, his resurrection from the 
dark tomb of mortality through the power of the holy Spirit.

In the symbol of the Vault, the psychologist no doubt will see a highly interesting 
and complex array of Mother symbols, traces of which, used in very much the same 
way, may be found in the literary fragments we inherit from the mystery cults of an- 
tiquity. It would be possible, and quite legitimate so to interpret the Vault. For even 
the Order interpretation refers the Vault in its entirety to the Isis of Nature, the great 
and powerful mother of mankind and all that is. And an analysis of the separate parts 
of the Vault — the Venus door, the Pastos, the two Pillars — would subscribe to that 
view. For regeneration and the second birth have always as creative psychological 
states been associated with the Mother. And it may be recalled that the Neschamah or 
that principle in man which constantly strives for the superhuman shining heights, is 
always portrayed as a feminine principle, passive, intuitive and alluring. Whilst the 
universal counterpart of this human principle, represented on the Tree of Life by the 
Supernals, is always described by the mediaeval alchemists as a virginal figure, from 
whose life and substance all things have issued, and through whose agency man is 
brought to the second birth.

The reader is earnestly recommended to study this Ritual again and again until 
almost it becomes a part of his very life, incorporated into the very fabric of his being. 
Very little aesthetic appreciation will be required to realise that in this and the other

rituals are passages of divine beauty and high eloquence. And the least 
<72> learned will find ideas of especial appeal to him, as the scholar and the pro-rituals are passages of divine beauty and high eloquence. And the least 
<72> learned will find ideas of especial appeal to him, as the scholar and the pro-

found mystic will perceive great depth and erudition in what may appear on 
the surface as simple statement. Properly performed, with initiated technique and 
insight, these rituals are stately ceremonies of great inspiration and enlightenment.

The apparent complexity of the above delineated scheme may be thought by 
some individuals to be entirely too complicated for modern man and not sufficiently 
simple in nature. While one can deeply sympathise with the ideas of the extreme sim- 
plicity cult in Mysticism, nevertheless it is evident that the complex and arduous 
nature of the routine is no fault of Magic. Man himself is responsible for this awkward 
situation. To be purified was considered by the alchemists and the Theurgists of a 
bygone day as not nearly enough. That purification and consecration was required to 
be repeated and repeated, again and again. Because of countless centuries of evolu- 
tion and material development — sometimes in quite false directions — man has 
spiritually repressed himself, and thus gradually forgotten his true divine nature. 
Meanwhile, as a sort of compensation for this loss, he has developed a complexity of 
physical and psychic constitution for dealing adequately with the physical world. 
Hence, methods of spiritual development refusing to admit the reality of that many- 
principled organisation may not be recognised as valid, for the sole reason that man is 
not a simple being. Fundamentally and at root he may be simple; but in actuality heis 
not. Having strayed from his roots, and lost his spiritual birthright in a jungle of delu- 
sion, it is not always easy to re-discover those roots or to find the way out from the 
Gates of the Land of Night.<73> In contradistinction to the above mentioned type of amorphous mystical 
doctrine, Magic does recognise the many-faceted nature of man. If that intri-

cate structure so painfully constructed be considered an evil, as some seem to think, it 
is a necessary evil. It is one to be faced and used. Therefore Magic connives by its 
technique to use, develop, and improve each of these several principles to its highest

Introduction 39

degree of perfection. “Thou must prepare thyself” councils Vaughan “till thou art 
conformable to Him Whom thou wouldst entertain, and that in every respect. Fit thy 
roof to thy God in what thou canst, and in what thou canst not He will help thee. When 
thou hast thus set thy house in order, do not think thy Guest will come without invita- 
tion. Thou must tire Him out with pious importunities.

Perpetual knockings at His door,

Tears sullying his transparent rooms,

Sighs upon sighs; weep more and more— 
He comes.

This is the way thou must walk in, which if thou dost thou shall perceive a sudden 
illustration, and there shall then abide in thee fire with light, wind with fire, power 
with wind, knowledge with power, and with knowledge an integrity of sober 
mind!”

Not enough is it to be illuminated. The problem is not quite as simple as that. It is 
in vain that the wine of the Gods is poured into broken bottles. Each part of the soul, 
each elemental aspect of the entire man must be strengthened and transmuted and

brought into equilibrium and harmony with the others. Integration must be 
<74> the rule of the initiate, not pathology. In such a vehicle made consecrate and

truly holy by this equilibriation, the higher Genius may find a worthy and fit 
dwelling. This and this alone, may ever constitute the true nature of initiation.

§truly holy by this equilibriation, the higher Genius may find a worthy and fit 
dwelling. This and this alone, may ever constitute the true nature of initiation.

§

With each of the grades just described, a certain amount of personal work was 
provided, principally ofa theoretical kind. The basic ideas of the Qabalah were impar- 
ted by means of so-called knowledge lectures, together with certain important sym- 
bols and significant names in Hebrew were required to be memorised. The lamens 
— insignia worn over the heart — of the various Officers were referred in divers ways 
to the Tree of Life, thus explaining after a fashion the function of that particular office 
in the Temple of Initiation. Each path traversed, and every grade entered, had a so- 
called Admission Badge. This usually consisted of one of the many forms of the Cross, 
and of symbols of the type of the Swastika, truncated Pyramid, and so forth. To these 
astrological and elemental attributions were referred. Most of these symbols possess 
great value, and since they repeatedly recur under different guises through the stages 
of personal magical work undertaken after the Adeptus Minor grade, they should 
receive the benefit of prolonged brooding and meditation.

Three of the most important items of personal study to be accomplished while in 
the First or Outer Order, apart from the memorisation of the rudiments of the

Qabalah were: (a) The practice of the Pentagram Ritual with the Qabalistic 
<75> Cross, (b) Tattwa Vision, and (c) Divination by Geomancy and the simple 
Tarot method described by Waite in his Key to the Tarot.The Pentagram Ritual was taught to the Neophyte immediately after his initia- 
tion in order that he might “form some idea of how to attract and come into com- 
munication with spiritual and invisible things.” Just as the Neophyte Ceremony of 
admission contains the essential symbolism of the Great Work, shadowing forth sym- 
bolically the commencement of certain formulae of the Magic of Light, so potential 
within the Pentagram Ritual and the Qabalistic Cross are the epitomes of the whole of 
that work. In all magical procedure it is fundamental, for it is a gesture of upraising the 
human consciousness to its own root of perfection and enlightenment by which the 
sphere of sensation and every act performed under its surveillance are sanctified. 
Thus it should precede every phase of magical work, elementary as well as advanced. 
The written rubric has previously appeared in my Tree of Life, and I may now adda 
word or two concerning the further directions which are orally imparted to the Can-

40 The Golden Dawn

didate after his admission.

The prime factor towards success in that exercise is to imagine that the astral 
form is capable of expansion, that it grows tall and high, until at length it has the sem- 
blance ofa vast angelic figure, whose head towers amongst the distant stars of heaven. 
When this imaginative expansion of consciousness produces the sense that the 
height is enormous, with the Earth as a tiny globe revolving beneath the feet, then 
above the head should be perceived or formulated a descending ray of brilliant Light.

As the candidate marks the head and then the breast, so should this brilliance 
<76> descend, even down to his feet, a descending shaft of a gigantic cross of Light.As the candidate marks the head and then the breast, so should this brilliance 
<76> descend, even down to his feet, a descending shaft of a gigantic cross of Light.

The act of marking the shoulders right and left whilst vibrating the Sephirotic 
names, traces the horizontal shaft of the cross, equilibriating the Light within the 
sphere of sensation. Since it has been argued above that the Great Work consists in 
the search for the Light, this ritual truly and completely performed leads to the accom- 
plishment of that Work and the personal discovery of the Light. The Pentagrams trace 
a cleansing and protecting circle of force invoked by the four Names of four letters 
each about the limits of the personal sphere, and the archangels are called, by vibra- 
tion, to act as great stabilising influences.

The study of the different types of divination may seem difficult to understand in 
an Order which purported to teach methods of spiritual development. Many will no 
doubt be rather perplexed by this. Divination usually is said to refer exclusively to the 
low occult arts, to fortune-telling, and the prognostication of the future. Actually, 
however, so far as the Order is concerned, the principal object for these practical 
methods is that they stimulate, as few exercises can, the faculties of clairvoyance, 
imagination, and intuition. Though certain readings or interpretations to the geo- 
mantic and Tarot symbols may be found in the appropriate text books, these rule of 
thumb methods do not conduce to the production of an accurate delineation of the 
spiritual causes behind material events. These interpretations are usual to the begin- 
ner in the art, for he requires a foundation of the principal definitions employed upon

which his own meditations can build. These textual delineations in actual 
<77> practice serve only as a base for the working of the inner faculties, provideswhich his own meditations can build. These textual delineations in actual 
<77> practice serve only as a base for the working of the inner faculties, provides

for them a thrust-block as it were from which they may “kick-off.” In short, the 
effort to divine by these methods calls into operation the intuitive and imaginative 
faculties to a very large extent. Everyone without exception has this faculty of divin- 
ing in some degree, varying only in his ability to make it manifest. In most people it is 
wholly dormant.

Again, while divination as an artificial process may be wholly unnecessary anda 
hindrance to the refined perceptions of a fully developed Adept, who requires no 
such convention to ascertain whence a thing comes and whither it is going, yet these 
aids and stimuli have their proper place for the Neophyte. For those in training they 
are not only legitimate but useful and necessary. It may be interesting for the reader to 
attempt to acquire intuitive knowledge on any matter without the divinatory aids 
first, and it will be seen how extremely difficult it is to get started, to pick uponany one 
fact or incident which shall act as a prompt ora starter of the interior mechanism. Hav- 
ing failed in this way, let him see how much further he really may go by the judicious 
and sensible use of one of the Order methods. There is no doubt that the opening of 
the mind to an intuitive perception is considerably aided by these methods. And this 
is particularly true with regard to the rather lengthy Tarot method which was given to 
the initiate while engaged in the fulfilment of his Adeptus Minor curriculum. Like all 
magical techniques, divination is open to abuse. The fact, however, that abuse is poss- 
ible does not, as again and again must be reiterated, fully condemn the abused tech- 
nique. The application of common sense to the magical art is as necessary as it isto all else. 
<78> There was a movement on foot in one of the Temples a little while ago to

Introduction 41

eliminate the study and practice of Geomancy from the scheme of training of the 
Outer Order. The prevailing tendency is so to simplify the road to Adeptship as to 
reduce the practical requisites to an absolute minimum by eliminating every phase of 
the work which does not come “naturally,” and whose study might involve hard 
work. Most of the newly admitted candidates to this Temple within the past five years 
or more are utterly without any practical acquaintance with this technique.

Originally, Astrology was taught as part of the regular routine. All instruction on 
this subject seems now to have been thoroughly extirpated from the Order papers. 
Perhaps in this particular instance the omission is just as well. For recent years have 
seen a great deal of meticulous attention paid to this study by sincere and honest 
researchers, and there have been published many first-rate books explaining its 
intricacies. All that the Order demands of the Adeptus Minor is that he should be able 
to draw up a map showing the position of Planets and Signs, preparatory to certain 
operations requiring the invocation of Zodiacal forces.

Tattwa vision requires but little mention in this place, for full instructions in this 
technical method of acquiring clairvoyance may be seen in a later volume. They are 
compiled from a number of documents and verbal instructions obtaining within the 
Order. Since these oral “tid-bits” and papers were very scattered, it has been found 
necessary to reorganise the whole matter. In that restatement, however, I have exer-

cised no originality nor uttered personal viewpoints on any phase of the 
<79> technique, confining my labour solely to re-writing the material in my posses-cised no originality nor uttered personal viewpoints on any phase of the 
<79> technique, confining my labour solely to re-writing the material in my posses-

sion. It may be interesting for the psychological critic to reflect upon the fact 
that it was this technique to which most members of the Order devoted the greatest 
attention — the only technique in which, more than any other single branch of the 
work, there is greater opportunity for deception and self-deception. While in many 
ways the Order technique may appear different from the vision method described in 
my Tree of Life, both are essentially the same. For they teach the necessity of an 
imaginative formation of an intellectual or astral form, the Body of Light, for the pur- 
pose of exploring the different regions of the Tree of Life or the several strata of one’s 
own psychic make-up. The simpler aspects of this investigation are taught just after 
the grade of Philosophus, though naturally the full possibilities of this method and 
the complete details on the technical side do not reveal themselves until the teaching 
of the Second Order has been received.

In addition to these technical methods there were meditations on the symbols 
and ideas of the whole system, and it was quite frequently suggested that the student 
go through the ceremonies, after having taken the grades, and build them up in his 
imagination so that he re-lives them as vividly as when he was in the Temple. The 
practical exercise that accompanied the Portal grade was one in which the aspirant 
built up, again in the imagination, a symbolic form of the Qabalistic Tree of Life, pay- 
ing at first particular attention to the formulation of the Middle Pillar in the sphere of

sensation or aura. This latter was conceived to be an ovoid shape of subtle 
<80> matter, and the imaginative formulation of the various Sephiroth thereinsensation or aura. This latter was conceived to be an ovoid shape of subtle 
<80> matter, and the imaginative formulation of the various Sephiroth therein

whilst vibrating the appropriate Divine Names went far towards opening, ina 
safe and balanced way, the psycho-spiritual centres of which the Sephiroth were but 
symbols. This technique, with the so-called Vibratory Formula of the Middle Pillar 
which is a development therefrom, I consider to be one of the most important practi- 
cal systems employed in the Order. Though the documents describe it in a very 
rudimentary and sketchy fashion, nevertheless it is capable of expansion in several 
quite astonishing directions. I have discussed and expanded this technique at con- 
siderable length in my book The Art of True Healing.

So far, I have confined myself to a bird’s eye view of the routine as established in 
the First or Outer Order of the Golden Dawn. The graduated training of the entire 
Outer was intended as a preparation for the practical work to be performed in the

42 The Golden Dawn

Inner or Second Order of the Roseae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis. The assignation of 
personal magical work seems deliberately to have been postponed until after the 
Vault reception. It was held that the Ceremony formulated a link between the 
Aspirant and his Augoeides, that connection serving therefore as a guide and a 
powerful protection which is clearly required in the works of Ceremonial Magic. 
Since at the commencement of each serious operation the Initiate must needs exalt 
himself towards his higher and divine Genius that through him may flow the divine 
power which alone is capable of producing a pure magical work, the initial forging of 
that link is a matter of supreme importance. 
Let me now detail the curriculum of work prescribed in the Second 
<81> Order. The training of the Adeptus Minor consisted of eight separate items, 
and I quote the following from a syllabus “A—General Orders,” now in 
circulation.“Part One. A. Preliminary. Receive and copy: Notes on the Obligation. The Rit- 
ual of the ©@= [5] Grade. The manuscript, Sigils from the Rose. The 
Minutum Mundum. Having made your copies of these and returned the originals 
you should study them in order to prepare to sit for the written examination. You 
must also arrange with the Adept in whose charge you are, about your examination in 
the Temple on the practical work.”

“Part Two. Receive the Rituals of the Pentagram and Hexagram. Copy and learn 
them. You can now sit for the written examination in these subjects and complete ‘A’ 
by arranging to be tested in your practical knowledge in the Temple.

“Part One. B. Implements. Receive the Rituals of the Lotus Wand, Rose Cross, 
Sword, and the Elemental Weapons. Copy and return them. There is a written exam- 
ination on the above subjects — that is on the construction, symbolism, and use of 
these objects, and the general nature of a consecration ceremony and the forming of 
invocations. This can be taken before the practical work of making is begun or at any 
stage during it.

“Part Two. This consists in the making of the Implements which must be passed 
as suitable before the consecration is arranged for, in the presence of a Chief or other 
qualified Adept. The making and consecration are done in the order given above 
unless it is preferred to do all the practical work first, and make arrangements for con-

secration as convenient. 
<82> “Part One. G. Neophyte Formulae. Receive and copy Z. 1. on the symbols 
and formulae of the Neophyte Ritual. Z. 3, the symbolism of the Neophyte in 
this Ceremony. Copy the God-form designs of the Neophyte Ritual. The written 
examination on the Z. manuscripts may now be taken.

“Part Two. To describe to the Chief or other suitable Adept in the Temple the 
arrangement of the Astral Temple and the relative position of the Forms in it. To build 
up any God-form required, using the correct Coptic Name.”The above three sections, A. B. G., completed the course prescribed for the 
Zelator Adeptus Minor, the first sub-grade. The passing of these examinations, con- 
ferred the qualification for holding the office of Hierophant, that is the initiator, in the 
Outer Order of the G. D.

“Part One. C. Psychic. This consists in a written examination in the Tattwa system. 
Its method of use, and an account of any one vision you have had from any card.

“Part Two. This consists in making a set of Tattwa cards, if you have not already 
done so, and sending them to be passed by the Chief or other Adept appointed. To 
take the examiner on a Tattwic journey, instructing him as if he were a student and vi- 
brating the proper names for a selected symbol.

“Part One. D. Divination. Receive and study the Tarot system, making notes of the 
principal attributions of the Inner method.

Introduction 43

<83> “Part Two. Practical. On a selected question, either your own, or the

examiner’s, to work out a Divination first by Geomancy, then by Horary 
Astrology, then by the complete inner Tarot system, and send ina correlated account 
of the result.

“Part One. F. Angelic Tablets. Receive and make copies of the Enochian Tablets, the 
Ritual of the Concourse of the Forces, and the Ritual of the making of the Pyramid, 
Sphinx, and God-form for any square. A written examination on these subjects may 
now be taken.

“Part Two. Make and colour a pyramid for a selected square, and to make the 
God-form and Sphinx suitable to it, and to have this passed by an Adept. To preparea 
Ritual for practical use with this square, and in the presence of a Chief or other Adept 
appointed to build it up astrally and describe the vision produced. To study and play 
Enochian chess, and to make one of the Chess boards and a set of Chessmen.“Part One. E. Talismans. Receive a manuscript on the making and consecrating of 
Talismans. Gather Names, Sigils, etc., for a Talisman for a special purpose. Make a 
design for both designs of it and send it in for a Chief to pass. Make up a special ritual 
for consecrating to the purpose you have in mind and arrange a time with the Chief 
for the Ceremony of Consecration.

“H. Consecration and Evocation. Subject: A ceremony on the formulae of Ritual Z. 
2, Must be prepared before Examiner and must meet with his approval as to method,

execution and effect.” 
<84> In the early Temples there was also issued a catalogue of manuscripts, 
enumerating in alphabetical order the documents circulated amongst the 
Zelatores Adepti Minores.

General Orders. The Curriculum of Work prescribed. 
The Lesser and Supreme Rituals of the Pentagram. 
The Rituals of the Hexagram. 
Description of Lotus Wand, and Ritual of Consecration. 
Description of Rose Cross and the Ritual of Consecration. 
Sigils from the Rose. 
Sword and Four Implements, with Consecration Ritual. 
Clavicula Tabularum Enochi. 
Notes on the Obligation of the Adeptus Minor. 
Consecration Ceremony of the Vault. 
History Lecture. 
Hermes Vision, and Lineal Figures of the Sephiroth. 
O. P.Q. R. Complete Treatise on the Tarot, with Star Maps. 
The Attributions of the Enochian Tablets. 
The Book of The Angelical Keys or Calls. 
Lecture on Man, the Microcosm. 
Hodos Chamelionis, the Minutum Mundum. 
The Egyptian God-forms as applied to the Enochian Squares. 
Enochian Chess. 
Symbolism of the Temple, Candidate, and Ritual of the Neophyte grade.

N< xX SCHOO ZEA TOMMOO DD

<85> All the documents from A to Z listed above will be found reproduced 
in these volumes, though I have not retained that particular order. The sole 
omissions are the documents lettered H. J. L. and part of M.“J” consists simply of an elaborated commentary upon the Adeptus Minor 
Obligation, written in a florid ponderous style reminiscent of Eliphas Levi-cum- 
Arthur Edward Waite.

“H” Clavicula Tabularum Enochi, is a more or less lengthy manuscript, turgid

44 The Golden Dawn

and archaic, for the most part repeating, though not as clearly, the contents of “S, The 
Book of the Concourse of the Forces.” Incidentally, this document is practically a ver- 
batim duplicate of part of a lengthy manuscript to be found in the Manuscript Library 
of the British Museum, Sloane 307. A good deal of the advice given is typically 
mediaeval, and definitely unsound from a spiritual viewpoint, and is certainly not in 
accord with the general lofty tenor of the remaining Order teaching. It explains how 
to find precious metals and hidden treasure, and how to drive away the elemental 
guardians thereof. It is an inferior piece of work — asalso is the document”L”, and sol 
have decided to omit both.

“M” has two sections, the Hermes Vision which I do propose to give, and the 
Lineal Figures of the Sephiroth. Because of the extreme complexity of the latter, and 
because it will be impossible to reproduce the several geometrical drawings in colour 
which accompany that manuscript, the writer has deemed it sufficient to restate itina

general manner as a note to the instruction on Telesmatic Images. 
<86> The whole of the above decribed material I have arranged and classified 
in an entirely different way. The contents of these volumes will be found 
divided up into so many chapters or separate books, each complete by itself. And the 
material in each book will be seen to be consistent and appertain to parts of the magi- 
cal technique which are placed with it. The Table of Contents describes my method 
of arrangement.Clearly from these disclosures there may be drastic results. But the good, I trust, 
will immeasurably and ultimately outweigh whatever evil may come. That some care- 
less people will hurt themselves and burn their fingers experimenting with matters 
not wholly understood seems almost inevitable. Theirs, however, will be the fault. For 
the formulae of Magic require intensive study prior to experimental work. And since 
all the important formulae are given in their entirety, and nothing withheld that is of 
the least value, there should be no excuse for anybody harming himself. No serious 
hurt should come to anyone. On the contrary, the gain to those serious students of 
Magic and Mysticism who have initiative and yet refuse to involve themselves with 
corrupt occult orders, and it is to these that I fain would speak, should be im- 
measurable.

You are being given a complete system of attainment. This you must study and 
develop at your own leisure, appyling it in your own particular way. The system is 
complete and effectual, as well as noble. The grade rituals as I shall reproduce them 
have been tampered with, in some cases unintelligently. Their efficacy, however, is

not impaired, for the principal portion of those grade rituals, which teaches 
<87> the art of invocation, is intact. So that the unwise editing that they havenot impaired, for the principal portion of those grade rituals, which teaches 
<87> the art of invocation, is intact. So that the unwise editing that they have

received in the past several years has not actually damaged them; all that has 
been removed are a few items, more or less important, of Qabalistic knowledge. If the 
reader feels that these might be value to him, and for the sake of tolerable complete- 
ness would like to have them, by studying such Qabalistic texts as the Zohar and the 
Sepher Yetzirah both of which are now in English translation, or some such-work as 
Waite’s Holy Kabvallah, he will be in possession of the fundamental facts. It is in other 
parts of the Order work that injudicious tampering has been at work. Most of this is 
now restored and I believe that this book is an accurate representation of the whole of 
the Order work from Neophyte to Theoricus Adeptus Minor.

Some portions of the manuscripts have required editing, principally from the 
literary point of view. Whole paragraphs have had to be deleted, others shortened, 
sentences made more clear, the redundant use of many words eliminated, and a 
general coordination of the manuscripts undertaken. Certain other sections — those 
dealing at length with Talismans, Sigils, Clairvoyance, Geomancy and the Enochian 
Tablets — have been completely rewritten to render them more coherent. But noth- 
ing that is essential or vital to the magical tenor or understanding of any document

Introduction 45will be omitted, changed or altered. This I avow and publicly swear. Where personally 
I have seen fit to make comment on any matter in order to clarify the issue or to indi- 
cate its antecedents, or connections in other parts of the work, that comment or 
remark is so marked by me with initials. <88> Let me therefore urge upon the sincere reader whose wish it is to study 
this magical system, to pay great attention to the scheme of the grade rituals, to 
obtain a bird’s eye view of the whole, to study every point, its movement and teach- 
ing. This should be repeated again and again, until the mind moves easily from one 
point of the ritual to another. The synthetic outline of those rituals presented in this 
Introduction should be found helpful as assisting in this task. Let him also study the 
diagrams of the Temple lay-out, and build up in his imagination a clear and vivid pic- 
ture of that Temple together with the appropriate officers and their movements. Then 
it will be an easy matter to devise a simple form of self-initiation. It will be simple to 
adapt the text to solo performance. But a careful scrutiny and examination of the 
entire system should long precede any effort to do practical work, if serious harm and 
danger is to be avoided. The language needs first of all to be mastered, and the sym- 
bolic ideas of the whole system assimilated and incorporated into the very fibre of 
one’s being. Intellectual acquaintance with every aspect of the subject is just as 
necessary as personal integrity and selfless devotion to an ideal. Sincerity is indeed 
the most trustworthy shield and buckler that any student may possess, but if he 
neglects the intellectual mastery of the subject, he will soon discover where his heel of 
Achilles is located. But these two combined are the only safeguards, the fundamental 
requisites to an insight into the significance of Magic.Introduction 45

Sincerity is indeed 
the most trustworthy shield and buckler that any student may possess, but if he 
neglects the intellectual mastery of the subject, he will soon discover where his heel of 
Achilles is located. But these two combined are the only safeguards, the fundamental 
requisites to an insight into the significance of Magic. Not only are they the only sure 
foundation, but they conduce to the continual recollection of the goal at the end, 
which understanding arises through penetrating to the root of the matter, without 
which the student may stray but too readily from the narrow way stretching 
<89> before him. No matter how brilliant his intellectual capacity, no matter how 
ardent his sincerity or potent his dormant magical power, always must he 
remember that they matter absolutely in no way unless applied to the Great Work — 
the knowledge and conversation of the Higher and Divine Genius. “Power without 
wisdom,” said a poet, “is the name of Death.” And as Frater D. D.C. F. so rightly said of 
one phase of magical work, but which has its application to the whole scheme, “Know 
thou that this is not to be done lightly for thine amusement or experiment, seeing that 
the forces of Nature were not created to be thy plaything or toy. Unless thou doest thy 
practical magical works with solemnity, ceremony and reverence, thou shalt be like 
an infant playing with fire, and thou shalt bring destruction upon thyself.” In devia- 
tion from these injunctions lie the only actual dangers in the divine science.One of the essentials of preliminary work, is the committing to memory of the 
important correspondences and attributions. And cannot insist too strongly that this 
is fundamental. The student must make himself familiar first of all with the Hebrew 
Alphabet, and learn how to write the names of the Sephiroth and Deity Names in that 
tongue — he will realise their value when he approaches the practical work of invoca- 
tion. Much time should be spent studying and meditating upon the glyph of the Tree 
of Life and memorising all the important attributions — divine Names, names of 
Archangels, Angels and Spheres and elements. All the symbols referred to the

lamens of the officers should be carefully meditated upon, as also the various 
<90> admission badges, and other symbols given in the knowledge lectures. Above

all, a great deal of time and attention should be paid to the Middle Pillar 
technique and the Vibratory Formulae of divine names.

The student can easily adapt any fair-sized room to the exigencies of a Temple. 
The writer has worked in one hardly larger than a long cupboard, about ten feet long 
by six or seven wide. All furniture from the centre should be cleared away, leaving a 
central space in which one may freely move and work. A small table covered witha

46 The Golden Dawnblack cloth will suffice for the Altar, and the two Pillars may be dispensed with but for- 
mulated in the imagination as present. He may find it very useful to paint flashing 
“Angelic Tablets according to the instructions found elsewhere, as well as the Banners 
of the East and West, placing these in the appropriate cardinal quarters of his impro- 
vised Temple. If he is able to obtain small plaster-casts of the heads of the Kerubim — 
the lion, the eagle, bull and man — and place these in the proper stations, they will be 
found together with the Tablets to impart a considerable amount of magical vitality 
and atmosphere to the Temple. What actually they do bestow is rather subtle, and 
perhaps indefinable. They are not absolute essentials, however, and may be dis- 
pensed with. But since Magic works by the intervention of symbol and emblem, the 
surrounding of the student's sphere with the correct forms of magical symbolism, 
assists in the impressing of those symbols within the aura or sphere of sensation, the 
true magical Temple. This may be left to the ingenium and the convenience of the stu- 
dent himself to discover after having made a close examination of the documents 
involved. <91> Another matter upon which brief comment must be made concerns the 
Instruments. It would have given me great pleasure to have had illustrations 
of these reproduced in colour, for only thus can one appreciate their significance and 
the part they play in ceremonial. But this unfortunately has not been possible. Thus 
they are given only in black and white, which obviously cannot impart anything but 
the merest fraction of their actual beauty and suggestiveness. And] impress upon the 
serious student, even implore him, to betake upon himself the trouble of making 
these instruments himself. They are very simple to fashion.46 The Golden Dawn

And] impress upon the 
serious student, even implore him, to betake upon himself the trouble of making 
these instruments himself. They are very simple to fashion. And the results obtained, 
to say little of the knowledge acquired or the intuitive processes that somehow are 
stimulated by that effort, are well worth even a great deal of bother. To adopt tem- 
porarily part, of the terminology now current among analytical psychologists, and 
identify the latent spiritual self of man with what is known as the Unconscious, then 
be it remembered that this vast subterranean stream of vitality and memory and 
inspiration can only be reached by means of a symbol. For the latter, states Jung, “is 
the primitive expression of the Unconscious, while on the other hand itis an idea cor- 
responding to the highest intuition produced by consciousness.” Thus these wea- 
pons and magical instruments are symbolic representations of psychic events, of 
forces inhering within the potentiality of the inner man. By means of their personal 
manufacture, magical consecration and continual employment they may be made to 
affect and stimulate the dormant side of man’s nature. It is an interesting fact that in his 
practice, Jung encouraged his patients to paint symbolic designs which some- 
<92> times were comparable to the Eastern mandalas. It seems that the effort to 
paint these designs had the effect of straightening out stresses and knots in the 
unconscious, thus accomplishing the therapeutic object of the analysis. And not only 
were they thus means of self-expression but these designs produced a counter-effect 
of fascinating, healing and stimulating to renewed activity the hitherto unmani- 
fested psyche.With the exception that the ordinary magical student is not neurotic or psy- 
chopathic, the techniques are rather similar. For the magical tradition has always 
insisted upon the routine to be followed by the aspirant to that art. He was required to 
fashion the implements himself, and the more laborious he found that task, with the 
greater difficulties thrown before him, by so much more were those efforts of spiritual 
value. For not only are these instruments symbols or expressions of inner realities, 
but what is infinitely more of practical worth, their actual projection in this way from 
within outwards, the physical fashioning and painting of these instruments, also 
works an effect. They bring to life the man that was asleep. They react upon their 
maker. They become powerful magical agents, true talismans of power.

Thus, the Lotus Wand is declared in the Ritual to have the colours of the twelve

Introduction 47Thus, the Lotus Wand is declared in the Ritual to have the colours of the twelve

Introduction 47

signs of the Zodiac painted on its stem, and it is surmounted by the Lotus flower of 
Isis. It symbolises the development of creation. The Wand has ever been a symbol of 
the magical Will, the power of the spirit in action. And its description in the instruc- 
tion on the Lotus Wand is such that it is seen to embrace the whole of nature — the 
Sephiroth, the spiritual aspects of the elements, and the action of the Sun 
<93> upon all life by a differentiating process. Even as the whole of nature is the 
embodiment of a dynamic will, the visible form and vehicle of a spiritual con- 
sciousness. The Lotus flower grows from the darkness and gloom of the secret 
depths, through the waters, ever striving to open its blossoms on the surface of the 
waters to the rays of light of the Sun. So is the true magical or spiritual will secreted 
within the hidden depths of the soul of man. Unseen, sometimes unknown and 
unsuspected, it lies latent though the whole of the life. By these rites of Magic, its sym- 
bols and exercises, we are enabled to assist its growth and development, by piercing 
through the outer husks of the restricting shell, until it bursts into full bloom — the 
flower of the human spirit, the Lotus of the higher Soul. “Look for the flower to bloom 
in the silence... It shall grow, it will shoot up, it will make branches and leaves and 
form buds while the storm continues, while the battle lasts . . . It is the flower of the 
soul that has opened.” Note, moreover, the description of and the comment made by 
Jung to a symbolic design brought to him by one of his patients, evidently a design 
like to the Lotus Wand, forhe says: “The plant is frequently a structure in brilliant fiery 
colours and is shown growing out of a bed of darkness and carrying the blossom of 
light at the top, a symbol similar to the Christmas tree.” This is highly suggestive, and 
students both of Yoga and Magic will find in this curious indications of the univer- 
sality of cogent symbols. Magical processes and symbols are, in short, receiving con- 
firmation at the hands of experimental psychology. It remains for the reader to benefit 
thereby. 
<94> The Rose-Cross is a Lamen or badge synthesising a vast concourse of 
ideas, representing in a single emblem the Great Work itself — the har- 
monious reconciliation in one symbol of diverse and apparently contradictory con- 
cepts, the reconciliation of divinity and manhood. It is a highly important symbol to 
be worn over the heart during every important operation. Itis a glyph, in one sense, of 
the higher Genius to whose knowledge and conversation the student is eternally 
aspiring. In the Rituals it is described as the Key of Sigils and Rituals.The Sword is a weapon symbolising the critical dispersive faculty of the mind. It 
is used where force and strength are required, more particularly for banishing than 
for invoking — as though conscious intellection were allied to the power of Will. 
When employed in certain magical ceremonies with the point upwards, its nature is 
transformed into an instrument similar to the Wand. The Elemental weapons of the 
Wand, Cup, Dagger, and Pentacle are symbolical representations of the forces em- 
ployed for the manifestation of the inner self, the elements required for the incarna- 
tion of the divine. They are attributed to the four letters of Tetragrammaton. All of 
these are worth making, and by creating them and continually employing them 
intelligently in the ways shown by the various rituals, the student will find a new 
power developing within him, a new centre of life building itself up from within.

One last word of caution. Let me warn the student against attempting difficult

and complex ceremonies before he has mastered the more simple ones. The syllabus 
provided on a former page for the use of the Minor Adept grades the work

<95> rather well. The consecration ceremonies for the magical implements are, of 
their kind, excellent examples of ceremonial work. Classical in nature, they

are simple in structure and operation, and provide a harmonious and easily flowing 
ritual. A good deal of experience should be obtained with the constant use of these 
and similar types which the student should himself cor:struct along these lines. A

48 The Golden Dawn

variety of things may occur to his mind for which a variety of operations may be per- 
formed. This of course, applies only to that phase of his studies when the preliminary 
correspondences and attributions have been thoroughly memorised and what is 
more, understood, and when the meditations have been performed. This likewise is 
another matter upon which too much emphasis cannot be laid.Above all, the Pentagram and Hexagram rituals should be committed to memory 
so that no effort is required to recall ata moment’s notice the points or angles of these 
figures from which the invocation of a certain force commences. Short ceremonies 
should be devised having as their object the frequent use of these lineal figures so that 
they become a part of the very manner in which the mind works during ceremonial. 
After some time has elapsed, and after considerable experience with the more simple 
consecration formulae, the student feeling more confident of himself and his ritualis- 
tic capacity, let him turn to the complex ceremonies whose formulae are summarised 
in the manuscripts Z. 2. These require much preparation, intensive study, and a great 
deal of rehearsal and experience. Moreover, he must not be disappointed if, at first,

the results fall short of his anticipations. Persistence is an admirable and 
<96> necessary virtue, particularly in Magic. And let him endeavour to penetrate

into the reasons for the apparent worthlessness or puerility of the aims of 
these formulae, such as transformation, evocation, invisibility, by reflection on the 
spiritual forces which must flow through him in order to effect such ends. And let him 
beware of the booby trap which was set up in the Order — of doing but one of these 
ceremonies, or superficially employing any phase of the system as though to pass an 
examination, and considering in consequence that he is the master of the technique.

My work is now done.

“Let us work, therefore, my brethren and effect righteousness, because the Night 
cometh when no man shall labour .. . May the Light which is behind the veil shine 
through you from your throne in the East on the Fratres and Sorores of the Order and 
lead them to the perfect day, when the glory of this world passes and a great light 
shines over the splendid sea.”

BOOK ONE

49

<99> BOOK ONE 
First Knowledge LectureBOOK ONE

49

<99> BOOK ONE 
First Knowledge Lecture

1. The Four Elements of the Ancients are duplicated conditions of:

Heat and Dryness Fire A 
Heat and Moisture Air A 
Cold and Dryness Earth V 
Cold and Moisture Water V

2. The Signs of the Zodiac are twelve: 
. Aries, the Ram

Taurus, The Buil 
Gemini, The Twins

. Cancer, The Crab

-Leo, The Lion

. Virgo, The Virgin

. Libra, The Scales

. Scorpio, The Scorpion

. Sagittarius, The Archer 
10. Capricorn, The Goat

11. Aquarius, The Water-Bearer 
12. Pisces, The Fishes

WONATPWNE 
KPaSxSahsoonaz3

These Twelve Signs are distributed among the Four Triplicities, 
<100> or sets of three Signs, each being attributed to one of the Four 
Elements, and they represent the operation of the elements in

the Zodiac.

Thus to Fire belong

Aries, Leo, Sagittarius: T:V: xX 
Thus to Earth belong

Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus: wo: MW: 
Thus to Air belong

Gemini, Libra, Aquarius: MW: : = 
Thus to Water belong

Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. & :M: ¥

3. To the Ancients, 
six Planets were known, besides THE SUN, which they classed with the 
Planets. They also assigned certain planetary values to the North and

50

First Knowledge Lecture 51

South NODES of the MOON — that is, the points where her orbit touches 
that of the Ecliptic. 
These they named 
Caput Draconis 32 Head of the Dragon and 
Cauda Draconis VU Tail of the Dragon 
Since the discovery of two more distant Planets Neptune and Uranus or 
Herschel, these two terms have been partially replaced by them. 
The effect of Caput Draconis is similar to that of . 
The effect of Cauda Draconis is similar to that of Ht. 
<101> The Old Planets are:

Saturn Rh Sol ©

Jupiter ___ CF Venus g

Mars ___ CS Mercury 2) 
Lung C—<‘COYS The Moon

4. The Hebrew Alphabet 
is given on page 103. Each letter represents a number and has also a 
meaning.

Five letters 
have a different shape when written at the end of a word and also a dif- 
ferent number.Five letters 
have a different shape when written at the end of a word and also a dif- 
ferent number.

Mem 0 (final) Of these finals, Mem is distinguished by being the only

oblong letter.

J: }: |: % The other four—Kaph, Nun, Pe, Tzaddi, have tails which should

come below the line as shown.

Hebrew and Chaldee letters are written from right to left.

The Hebrew Qabalists 
referred the highest and most abstract ideas to the Emanations of Deity or 
Sephiroth. They made them ten in number. Each one is a Sephira, and 
when arranged in a certain manner they form The Tree of Life. 
Hebrew letters are holy symbols. They should be carefully drawn 
and square.

<102> The Sephiroth are:

1. Kether ______—iK-Th-R —The Crown “PMD 
2: Chokmah ____Ch-K-M-H —Wisdom mean 
3. Binah ___B-I-N-H —Understanding Py) 
4, Chesed ____Ch-S-D —Mercy Spon 
5. Geburah ___G-B-U-R-H —Severity mM 
6. Tipareth___ Th-Ph-A-R-Th —Beauty PaSpn 
7. Netzach___N-Ts-Ch —Victory ny) 
8. Hod ___—_——S— H-O-D —Glory a 
9. Yesod____——SCY-S-O-D —The Foundation “ID 
10. Malkuth___M-L-K-U-Th —The Kingdom miso

52 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

The Dagesh or pointing which represents the vowel sounds in mod- 
ern Hebrew script is not given. It was a later invention to standardize 
pronunciation and is described in Hebrew grammars.*

<103> THE HEBREW ALPHABET 
Letter Power Value Final Name Meaning 
s A 1 Aleph Ox 
a B,V 2 Beth House 
P| G,Gh 3 Gimel Camel 
ai D,Dh 4 Daleth Door 
al H 5 He Window 
‘1 0O,U,V 6 Vau Pin or Hook 
? Z 7 Zayin Sword or Armour 
im Ch 8 Cheth Fence, Enclosure 
a) T 9 Teth Snake 
: LY 10 Yod Hand 
> K,Kh 20,500 7] Kaph Fist 
, L 30 Lamed Ox Goad 
‘a M 40,600 O Mem Water 
a] N 50,700 | Nun Fish 
e) S 60 Samekh Prop 
5) Aa,Ngh 70 Ayin Eye 
5 P,Ph 80, 800 Pe Mouth 
x Tz 90, 900 ? Tzaddi Fish-hook 
P Q 100 Qoph Ear. Back of head 
*) R 200 Resh Head 
wv S,Sh 300 Shin Tooth 
ial T,Th 400 Tau Cross 
<105> MEDITATION No.1

Let the NeophyteLet the Neophyte

consider a point as defined in pt iSae eta ame Nt taps ate but 
no magnitude—and let him note the ideas to which this gives rise. 
Concentrating their faculties on this, as a focus, let him endeavour 
to realise the immanance of the Divine throughout Nature, in all 
her aspects.

*Readers of the above who have perused my Tree of Life and Garden of Pomegranates will 
note the difference in Hebrew pronunciation, and in order to avoid any further confu- 
sion an explanatory note must here be added. As is true of every language, in Hebrew 
there are several quite distinct dialects. There are, however, two principal ones which should be 
mentioned. The Ashkenazic, a dialect mostly in employment in Germany, Poland, and Russia; 
and the Sephardic used in Spain, Portugal, and the Mediterrariean generally. Now since the 
Qabalah attained its prominence in Spain, most Qabalists have employed the Sephardic dialect. 
Personally I have found that the Ashkenazic dialect answers more nearly than the other to the 
requirements of transliteration into English, and many problems that have assailed modem 
students would have been non-existent had they known of the pronunciation which I employed 
in my former works. Actually, however, students must discover which of these two suits his 
own personal predilection and answers to the necessity imposed by the results of study and 
experience. The Order teaching employs the Sephardic pronunciation, and I have not ventured 
to interfere with that in any way atall. I simply mention the matter hereto render impossible the 
likelihood of confusion arising. LR.

<104>

First Knowledge Lecture 53<104>

First Knowledge Lecture 53

Begin by finding a position, balanced, but sufficiently comfortable. 
Breathe rhythmically until the body is still and the mind quiet. Keep this state 
for a few minutes at first—and for longer as you get more used to preventing 
the mind from wandering. Think now of the subject for meditation in a 
general way—then choose out one thought or image and follow that to 
its conclusion.

The simplest rhythm for the beginner is the Fourfold Breath.

1. Empty the lungs and remain thus while counting 4. 
2. Inhale, counting 4 so that you feel filled with breath to the throat. 
3. Hold this breath while counting 4. : 
4. Exhale, counting 4 till the lungs are empty.

This should be practised, counting slowly or quickly till you obtain a 
rhythm that suits you—one that is comforting and stilling.

Having attained this, count the breath thus for two or three minutes, till 
you feel quiet, and then proceed with the meditation.

<106> THE QABALISTIC CROSS AND 
LESSER RITUAL OF THE PENTAGRAM

Take a steel dagger in the right hand. Face East. 
Invoking

Touch thy forehead 
and say ATEH (thou art)

;” Touch thy breast 
and say MALKUTH (the Kingdom)

Touch thy right shoulder 
and say VE-GEBURAH (and the Power)

Touch thy left shoulder 
and say VE-GEDULAH (and the Glory)

Clasp thy hands before thee 
and say LE-OLAM (for ever)

Dagger between fingers, point up 
and say AMEN.

Make in the Air toward the East the invoking PENTAGRAM as shown 
and, bringing the point of the dagger to the centre of the Pentagram, vibrate 
the DEITY NAME —YOD HE VAU HE— imagining that your voice carries 
forward to the East of the Universe.

Holding the dagger out before you, go to the South, make the Pen- 
tagram and vibrate similarly the deity name—ADONAI.

Go to the West, make the Pentagram and vibrate EHEIEH. 
Go to the North, make the Pentagram and vibrate AGLA.

54 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book OneGo to the West, make the Pentagram and vibrate EHEIEH. 
Go to the North, make the Pentagram and vibrate AGLA.

54 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<107> Return to the East and complete your circle by bringing the dag- 
ger point to the centre of the first Pentagram.

Stand with arms outstretched in the form of a cross and say:—

BEFORE ME RAPHAEL 
BEHIND ME GABRIEL 
AT MY RIGHT HAND MICHAEL 
AT MY LEFT HAND AURIEL

BEFORE ME FLAMES THE PENTAGRAM— . 
BEHIND ME SHINES THE SIX-RAYED STAR 
Again make the Qabalistic Cross as directed above, saying ATEH, etc.

For Banishing use the same Ritual, but reversing the direction of the 
lines of the Pentagram.

<108> THE USES OF THE PENTAGRAM RITUAL

1. As a form of prayer the invoking ritual should be used in the morning, 
the banishing in the evening.

Invoking

here

The NAMES should be pronounced inwardly in the breath vibrating it as 
much as possible and feeling that the whole body throbs with the sound 
and sends out a wave of vibration directed to the ends of the quarter.

2. As a protection against impure magnetism, the Banishing Ritual can be 
used to get rid of obsessing or disturbing thoughts. Give a mental image 
to your obsession and imagine it formulated before you. Project it out of 
your aura with the Saluting Sign of a Neophyte, and when it is about 
three feet away, prevent its return with the Sign of Silence.

Now imagine the form in the East before you and do the Banishing Rit- 
ual of the Pentagram to disintegrate it, seeing it, in your mind's eye, dis- 
solving on the further side of your ring of flame.

3. It can be used as an exercise in concentration. Seated in meditation or 
lying down, formulate yourself standing up in robes and holding

<109> a dagger. Put your consciousness in this form and go to the East. 
Make yourself “feel” there by touching the wall, opening your 
eyes, stamping on the floor, etc.

First Knowledge Lecture 55<109> a dagger. Put your consciousness in this form and go to the East. 
Make yourself “feel” there by touching the wall, opening your 
eyes, stamping on the floor, etc.

First Knowledge Lecture 55

Begin the Ritual and go round the room mentally vibrating the words and 
trying to feel them as coming from the form.

Finish in the East and try to see your results in the Astral Light, then walk 
back and stand behind the head of your body and let yourself be re- 
absorbed.

(In the introduction, page 106, I have given instructions for the per- 
formance of the Qabalistic Cross. When tracing the Pentagrams, the imagina- 
tion should be exerted to visualize them as flaming stars all about one. The 
impression should be of a fire ring studded in four places with stars of 
flame.

Likewise, when vibrating the angelic names, the student should 
endeavour to imagine four vast towering figures about him. But see further 
in my book “The Middle Pillar.” LR.)

<110> THE PILLARS

In the explanation of the Symbols of the Grade of Neophyte, your atten- 
tion has been directed to the general mystical meaning of the Two pillars 
called in the Ritual the “Pillars of Hermes” of “Seth” and of “Solomon.” In the 
9th chapter of the Ritual of the Dead they are referred to as the “Pillars of 
Shu,” the “Pillars of the Gods of the Dawning Light,” and also as “the North 
and Southern Columns of the Gate of the Hall of Truth.” In the 125th Chap- 
ter, they are represented by the sacred gateway, the door to which the 
aspirant is brought when he has completed the negative confession. The 
archaic pictures on the one Pillar are painted in black upon a white ground, 
and those on the other in white upona black ground, in order to express the 
interchange and reconciliation of opposing forces and the eternal balance of 
light and darkness which gives force to visible nature.The black cubical bases represent darkness and matter wherein the 
Spirit, the Ruach Elohim, began to formulate the Ineffable NAME, that Name 
which the ancient Rabbis have said “rushes through the universe,” that 
Name before which the Darkness rolls back at the birth of time.

The flaming red triangular capitals which crown the summit of the 
Pillars represent the Triune manifestation of the Spirit of Life, the Three 
Mothers of the Sepher Yetsirah, the Three Alchemical Principles of Nature, 
the Sulphur, the Mercury and the Salt.

Each Pillar is surmounted by its own light-bearer veiled from the 
material world.

At the base of both Pillars rise the Lotus flowers, symbols of regener-

ation and metempsychosis, The archaic illustrations are taken from 
<111> vignettes ofthe 17th and 125th chapter of the Ritual of the Dead, the

Egyptian Book of the Per-em-Hru or the Book of Coming Forth into the 
Day, the oldest book in the world as yet discovered. The Recension of the 
Priests of ON is to be found in the walls of the Pyramids of the Kings of the 5th 
and 6th Dynasties at Sakarah, the recension of the 11th and 12th Dynasties 
on the sarcophagi of that period, and the Theban recension of the

56 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

18th Dynasty and onward is found on papyri, both plain and illuminated. No 
satisfactory translation of these books is available, none having been yet 
attempted by a scholar having the qualifications of mystic as well as 
Egyptologist.The Ritual of the Dead, generally speaking, is a collection of hymns and 
prayers in the form of a series of ceremonial Rituals to enable the man to 
unite himself with Osiris the Redeemer. After this union he is no longer 
called the man, but Osiris, with whom he is now symbolically identified. 
“That they also may be One of us,” said the Christ of the New Testament. “T 
am Osiris” said the purified and justified man, his soul luminous and washed 
from sin in the immortal and uncreated light, united to Osiris, and thereby 
justified, and the son of God; purified by suffering, strengthened by opposi- 
tion, regenerate through self-sacrifice. Such is the subject of the great Egyp- 
tian Ritual.

The 17th Chapter of the Theban recension consists of a very ancient text 
with several commentaries, also extremely old, and some prayers, none of 
which come into the scheme of the original text. It has, together with the 12th 
chapter, been very carefully translated for the purpose of this lecture by the

V. H. Frater M. W. T., and the V. H. Soror S. S. D. D. has made many 
<112> valuable suggestions with regard to the interpretation. The Title 
and Preface of the 17th Chapter reads:

“Concerning the exaltation of the Glorified Ones, of Coming and Going 
forth in the Divine Domain, of the Genies of the Beautiful land of Amentet. Of 
coming forth in the light of Day in any form desired, of Hearing the Forces of 
Nature by being enshrined as a living Bai.”

And the rubric is:

“The united with Osiris shall recite it when he has entered the Harbour. 
May glorious things be done thereby upon earth. May all the words of the 
Adept be fulfilled.”And the rubric is:

“The united with Osiris shall recite it when he has entered the Harbour. 
May glorious things be done thereby upon earth. May all the words of the 
Adept be fulfilled.”

Owing to the complex use of symbols, the ritual translation of the Chap- 
ter can only be understood by perpetual reference to the ancient Egyptian 
commentaries, and therefore the following paraphrase has been put to- 
gether to convey to modern minds as nearly as possible the ideas conceived 
by the old Egyptians in this glorious triumphal song of the Soul of Man made 
one with Osiris, the Redeemer.

“I am TUM made One with all things.

“IT have become NU. Iam RA in his rising ruling by right of his Power. I 
am the Great God self-begotten, even NU, who pronounced His Names, and 
thus the Circle of the Gods was created.

“Tam Yesterday and know Tomorrow. I can never more be overcome. I 
know the secret of Osiris, whose being is perpetually revered of RA. I have 
finished the work which was planned at the Beginning, I am the Spirit made 
manifest, and armed with two vast eagle’s plumes. Isis and Nephthys are 
their names, made One with Osiris.

“] claim my inheritance. My sins have been uprooted and my 
<113> passions overcome. Iam Pure White. I dwell in Time. I live through 
Eternity, when Initiates make offering to the Everlasting Gods. I

First Knowledge Lecture 57

have passed along the Pathway. I know the Northern and the Southern 
Pillars, the two Columns at the Gateway of the Hall or Truth.

“Stretch unto me your hands, O ye Dwellers in the centre. For I am 
transformed to a God in your midst. Made One with Osiris, I have filled the 
eye socket in the day of the morning when Good and Evil fought 
together.“Thave lifted up the cloud-veil in the Sky of the Storm. Till lsaw RA born 
again from out the Great Waters. His strength is my strength, and my 
strength is His strength. Homage to you, Lords of Truth, chiefs who Osiris 
rules. Granting release from Sin, Followers of Ma where rest is Glorious. 
Whose Throne Anubis built in the day when Osiris said:

“Lo! A man wins his way to Amentet. I come before you, to drive away 
my faults. As ye did to the Seven Glorious Ones who follow their Lord Osiris. 
Iam that Spirit of Earth and Sun.

“Between the Two Pillars of Flame. Iam RA when he fought beneath the 
Ashad Tree, destroying the enemies of the Ancient of Days. Iam the Dweller 
in the Egg. 1am he who turns in the Disc. I shine forth from the Horizon, as 
the gold from the mine. I float through the Pillars of SHU in the ether. 
Without a peer among the Gods. The Breath of my mouth is asa flame. I light 
upon the Earth with my glory. Eye cannot gaze on my daring beams, as they 
reach through the Heavens and lick up the Nile with tongues of flame. ]am 
strong upon Earth with the strength of RA. I have come into Harbour as

Osiris made perfect. Let priestly offerings be made to me as one in 
<114> the train of the ancient of Days. | brood as the Divine Spirit. move in

the firmness of my Strength. I undulate as the Waves that vibrate 
through Eternity. Osiris has been claimed with acclamation, and ordained to 
rule among the Gods. Enthroned in the Domain of Horus where the Spirit 
and the Body are united in the presence of the Ancient of Days. Blotted out 
are the sins of his body in passion. He has passed the Eternal Gate, and has 
received the New Year Feast with Incense, at the marriage of Earth with 
Heaven.

“TUM has built his Bridal Chamber. RURURET has founded his shrine. 
The Procession’s completed. HORUS has purified, SET has consecrated, 
SHU made one with OSIRIS, has entered his heritage.“TUM has built his Bridal Chamber. RURURET has founded his shrine. 
The Procession’s completed. HORUS has purified, SET has consecrated, 
SHU made one with OSIRIS, has entered his heritage.

“As TUM he has entered the Kingdom to complete union with the Invis- 
ible. Thy Bride, O Osiris, is Isis, who mourned Thee when she found Thee 
slain. In Isis, thou art born again. From Nephthys is thy nourishment. They 
cleansed thee in thy Heavenly Birth. Youth waits upon thee, ardour is ready 
at thy hand. And their arms shall uphold thee for millions of years. Initiates 
surround Thee and Thine enemies are cast down. The Powers of Darkness 
are destroyed. The Companions of Thy Joys are with Thee. Thy Victories in 
the Battle await their reward in the Pillar. The Forces of Nature obey Thee. 
Thy Power is exceeding great. The Gods curse him that curseth Thee. Thine 
Aspirations are fulfilled. Thou art the Mistress of Splendour. They are de- 
stroyed who barred Thy way.”

The 125th Chapter is concerned with the entry of an Initiate into the Hall 
of the Two Columns of Justice, and commenced with a most beautiful and

58 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

symbolic description of Death, as a journey from the barren 
<115> wilderness of Earth, to the Glorious Land which lies beyond. The 
literal translation of the opening lines is as follows:

“T have come from afar to look upon thy beauties. My hands salute Thy 
Name of Justice. I have come from afar, where the Acacia Tree grew not. 
Where the tree thick with leaves is not born. Where there come not beams 
from herb or grass. I have entered the Place of Mystery. I have communed 
with Set. Sleep came upon me, I was wrapped therein, bowing down before 
the hidden things. I was ushered into the House of Osiris. I saw the marvels 
that were there, The Princes of the Gates in their GloThe illustrations in this chapter represent the Hall of Truth as seen 
through the open leaves of its door. The Hall is presided over by a God who 
holds his right hand over the cage of a hawk, and his left over the food of eter- 
nity. On each side of the God is a cornice crowned by a row of alternate 
feathers and Uraei symbolising justice and fiery power. The door leaf which 
completes the right hand ofa stall is called “Possessor of Truth controlling the 
Feet,” while that on the left is “Possessor of strength, binding the male and 
female animals.” The 42 Judges of the Dead are represented as seated ina 
long row, and each of them has to be named, and the Sin over which he pre- 
sided has been denied.

This chapter describes the introduction of the initiate into the Hall of 
Truth by ANUBIS, who, having questioned the aspirant, receives from him 
an account of his initiation, and is satisfied by his right to enter. He states that

he has been taken into the ante-chamber of the Temple and there 
<116> stripped and blind-folded, he had to grope for the entrance of the

Hall, and having found it, he was reclothed and anointed in the pres- 
ence of the Initiated. He is then asked for the Pass-words and demands that 
his Soul should be weighed in the Great Balance of the Hall of Truth, 
whereupon ANUBIS again interrogates him concerning the symbolism of 
the door of the Hall, and his answers being found correct, ANUBIS says: 
“Pass on, thou knowest it.”Among other things the Initiate states that he has been purified four 
times, the same number of times that the Neophyte is purified and conse- 
crated in the ceremony of the Neophyte. He then makes the long Negative 
Confession, stating to each Judge in turn that he is innocent of that form of 
Sin over which he judges. Then he invokes the Judges to do him justice, and 
afterwards describes how he had washed in the washing place of the South, 
and rested in the North, in the place called “Son of the Deliverers” and he 
becomes the Dweller under the Olive Tree of Peace, and how he was givena 
tall flame of fire and a sceptre of cloud which he preserved in the salting tank 
in which mummies were swathed. And he found there another sceptre 
called “Giver of Breath” and with that he extinguished the flame and shat- 
tered the sceptre of cloud, and made a lake of it. The initiate is then brought to 
the actual Pillars, and has to name them and their parts under the symbol of 
the Scales of a Balance. He also has to name the Guardian of the Gateway, 
who prevents his passage, and when all these are propitiated, the plea of the 
Halil itself cries out against his steps, saying “Because I am silent, because lam 
pure,” and it must know that his aspirations are pure enough and high

First Knowledge Lecture 59

enough for him to be allowed to tread upon it. He is then allowed to 
<117> announce to Thoth that he is clean from all evil, and has overcome 
the influence of the planets, and THOTH says to him: “Who is He 
whose Pylons are of Flame, whose walls of Living Uraei, and the flames of 
whose House are streams of Water?” And the Initiate replies “Osiris!” 
And it is immediately proclaimed: “Thy meat shall be from the Infinite, 
and thy drink from the Infinite. Thou art able to go forth to the sepulchral 
feasts on earth, for thou hast overcome.”Thus, these two chapters, which are represented by their illustrations 
upon the Pillars, represent the advance and purification of the Soul and its 
union with Osiris, the Redeemer, in the Golden Dawn of the Infinite Light, in 
which the Soul is transfigured, knows all, and can do all, for it is made One 
with the Eternal God.

KHABS AM PEKHT 
KONX OM PAX 
LIGHT IN EXTENSION!

<119> SECOND KNOWLEDGE LECTURE

The Names and Alchemical Symbols of the Three Principles of Nature are:—

SULPHUR 4 MERCURY ¥% SALT © 
The Metals Attributed to the Planets in Alchemy are:— 
LEAD h GOLD © 
TIN 4 COPPER or BRASS 9 
IRON ot QUICKSILVER s 
SILVER )

The following terms are used in books about Alchemy. They have the 
meanings given below.

Sol Philosophorum 
The Pure Living Alchemical Spirit of Gold—the Refined 
Essence of Heat and Dryness.

Luna Philosophorum 
The Pure Living Alchemical Spirit of Silver—the Refined 
Essence of Heat and Moisture.

<120> The Green Lion 
The Stem and Root of the Radical Essence of Metals.

The Black Dragon 
Death—Putrefaction—Decay.

The King 
Red—The Qabalistic Microprosopus. 
Tiphareth—analogous to Gold and the Sun.

The Queen 
White—The Qabalistic Bride of Microprosopus. 
Malkah—analogous to Silver and the Moon.

The Four Orders of the Elementals Are:

1. The Spirits of the Earth Gnomes

2. The Spirits of the Air Sylphs

3. The Spirits of the Water Undines

4. The Spirits of the Fire Salamanders

60

Second Knowledge Lecture 61

These are the Essential Spiritual Beings called upon to praise God in the 
‘Benedicite Omnia Opera.’

The Kerubim are the Living Powers of Tetragrammaton on the Material Plane 
and the Presidents of the Four Elements.

They operate through the Fixed or Kerubic Signs of the Zodiac and are thus

symbolised and attributed:— 
Kerub of Air—Man— Aquarius nar 
Kerub of Fire—Lion—Leo 2 
Kerub of Earth—Bull—Taurus coi 
Kerub of Water—Eagle—Scorpio Tor Asymbolised and attributed:— 
Kerub of Air—Man— Aquarius nar 
Kerub of Fire—Lion—Leo 2 
Kerub of Earth—Bull—Taurus coi 
Kerub of Water—Eagle—Scorpio Tor A

Tetragrammaton means Four-Lettered Name and refers to the 
<121> Unpronounceable Name of God symbolised by Jehovah.

The Laver of Water of Purification refers to the Waters of Binah, the Female 
Power reflected in the Waters of Creation.

The Altar of Burnt Offering for the sacrifice of animals symbolises the Qlippoth 
or Evil Demons of the plane contiguous to and below the Material Universe. 
It points out that our passions should be sacrificed.

The Qlippoth are the Evil Demons of Matter and the Shells of the Dead.

The Altar of Incense in the Tabernacle was overlaid with gold. Ours is Black to 
symbolise our work which is to separate the philosophic Gold from the Black 
Dragon of Matter.

This altar diagram (page 123) shows the Ten Sephiroth with all the 
<122> connecting Paths numbered and lettered, and the Serpent winding

over each Path. Around each Sephirah are written the Names of the 
Deity, Archangel and Angelic Host attributed to it. The Twenty Two Paths are 
bound together by the Serpent of Wisdom. It unites the Paths but does not 
touch any of the Sephiroth, which are linked by the Flaming Sword.

The Flaming Sword is formed by the natural order of the Tree of Life. It 
resembles a flash of Lightning.

Together the Sephiroth and the Twenty Two Paths form the 32 Paths of 
the Sepher Yetzirah or Book of Formation.

The Two pillars either side of the Altar represent:

Active: The White Pillar on the South Side. 
Male. 
Adam. 
Pillar of Light and Fire. 
Right Kerub. 
Mefatron.

<123>

THE SERPENT ON THE TREE OF LIFE

Second Knowledge Lecture 63

Passive: The Back Pillar on the North Side. 
Female. 
Eve. 
Pillar of Cloud. 
Left Kerub. 
Sandalphon.

<124> THE SECOND MEDITATIONTHE SERPENT ON THE TREE OF LIFE

Second Knowledge Lecture 63

Passive: The Back Pillar on the North Side. 
Female. 
Eve. 
Pillar of Cloud. 
Left Kerub. 
Sandalphon.

<124> THE SECOND MEDITATION

LET THE ZELATOR meditate on a straight line. Let him take a ruler ora pen- 
cil and by moving it a distance equal to its length, outline a square.

Having done this, let him, after quieting his mind with the rhythmic breath- 
ing taught in the first meditation, mentally formulate a cube, and 
endeavor to discover the significance of this figure and its corre- 
spondences.

Let him meditate upon minerals and crystals, choosing especially a crystal of 
SALT, and entering into it, actually feel himself of crystalline forma- 
tion.

Looking out on the Universe from this standpoint, let him identify himself 
with the EARTH SPIRITS in love and sympathy, recalling as far as he 
can their prayer as said in the closing of the Zelator Grade.

Let him meditate upon the EARTH TRIPLICITY, visualising the symbols of 
a BULL—a VIRGIN—a GOAT—which stand for KERUBIC EARTH— 
MUTABLE EARTH—CARDINAL EARTH.

For the above terms consult a simple astrology manual. Make notes of 
the ideas and pictures which arise in your mind.

The Four Worlds of the Qabalah are:

<125> ATZILUTH, Archetypal—Pure Deity. mORN 
BRIAH, Creative—Archangelic. mv 
YETZIRAH, Formative—Angelic. X? 
ASSIAH, Action—Matter, Man, Shells, Demons. wy 
The Ten Houses, or Heavens, of Assiah, the Material World are: 
1. Primum Mobile, Rashith ha Gilgalim. oon wT 
2. Sphere of the Zodiac, Mazloth. mown 
3. Sphere of Saturn, Shabbathai. "Shlw 
4. Sphere of Jupiter, Tzedek. pis 
5. Sphere of Mars, Madim. ov 
6. Sphere of the Sol, Shemesh. Wi) 
7. Sphere of Venus, Nogah. mi 
8. Sphere of Mercury, Kokab. a>D1D 
9. Sphere of Luna, Levanah. mas 
10. Sphere of the Elements, Olam Yesodoth*. momo oy*This is sometimes rendered Cholem Yesodoth, and translated “The Breaker of Foundations.” 
Iam pretty certain that this is a mistake no doubt due toa printer's error in reproducing “Ch” 
in place of “Gh,” the latter being intended for “Ayin,” according to some older systems of 
transliteration.)

THE DIVINE NAMES ATTRIBUTED TO THE SEPHIROTH

No. or 
SEPHIRAH

1. Kether 
2. Chokmah 
3. Binah

4, Chesed 
5. Geburah 
6. Tiphareth 
7. Netzach 
8. Hod

9. Yesod

10. Malkuth

Note:

DivinE NAME 
(Atziluth)

Eheieh 
paint 
Yah 
nm 
Yhvh Elohim 
os19s8 mn 
E] 
oN 
Elohim Gibor 
W133 DTIN 
Yhvh Eloah Vedaath 
nyt M98 7 
Yhvh Tzabaoth 
MS3¥ TT 
Elohim Tzabaoth 
NI83¥ DAIS 
Shaddai El Chai 
MON Ste 
Adonai ha-Aretz 
PANT ASIN

ARCHANGELIC NAME

_(Briab) 
Metatron

Raziel 
Tzaphaiel 
Tzadqiel 
Kamael 
Raphael 
Haniel 
Michael 
Gabriel

Sandalphon

www 
O77 
ON PES 
OM DTS 
INDD 
ORD 
ONINT 
ONDD 
oNI33

PBITID

Cuoir oF ANGELS

( Yetsirah) 
Chayoth ha-Qadesh 
wipn Ayn 
Auphanim 
DID IN 
Aralim 
DONIN 
Chashmalim 
pvown 
Seraphim 
mp Ww 
Melekim 
jab) a) 
Elohim 
DUTIN 
Beni Elohim 
DT? 33 
Kerubim 
p35

Ashim 
DYN

The student should himself draw several Trees of Life, and upon them place the above names 
in proper order. Only by doing this will he learn of their significance.

IR.

<9CI>

59

aUuQ Yoog | aunjo, :umnq uapjoy ay]

Name of Planet 
in Hebrew

Shabbathai 
Tzedek 
Madim

Shemesh 
Nogah 
Kokab

Levanah

PLANETARY NAMES 
$<

Angel

Cassiel 
Sachiel 
Zamael 
Michael 
Hanael 
Raphael

Gabriel

Intelligence Spirit 
Agiel Zazel 
2NIN OTNT 
Tophiel Hismael 
IMD ONDON 
Graphiel Bartzabel 
PDN IND 
Nakhiel Sorath 
IN DS nvp 
Hagiel Kedernel 
ONUT IRD TP 
Tiriel Taphthartharath 
Syssty AANA 
Malkah be Tarshisim ve-ad Schad Barschemoth 
Ruachoth Schechalim ha-Shartathan 
DD WAND NDI nyowss iw 
pyene MAN Ty) wmNweH

<L7I>

adnqoa] aSpajmouy puoras

$9

66 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One<L7I>

adnqoa] aSpajmouy puoras

$9

66 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

The traditional Tarot consists of a pack of 78 cards made up of 
<128> Four Suits of 14 cards each, together with 22 Trumps, or Major 
Arcana, which tell the story of the Soul.

Each suit consists of ten numbered cards, as in the modern playing 
cards, but there are four instead of three honours: King or Knight, Queen, 
Prince or Emperor, Princess or Knave.

The Four Suits Are: 
1. Wands or Sceptres comparable to Diamonds. 
2. Cups or Chalices comparable to Hearts. 
3. Swords comparable to Spades. 
4. Pentacles or Coins comparable to Clubs.

<129> THIRD KNOWLEDGE LECTURE

THE SOUL is divided by the Qabalists into three Principal Parts:— 
1. NESCHAMAH The Highest Part, answering to the Three Supernals. 
2. RUACH The Middle Part, answering to the six Sephiroth from CHESED 
to YESOD, inclusive. 
3. NEPHESCH The lowest, answering to MALKUTH. 
NESCHAMAH answers to the higher aspirations of the Soul. 
RUACH answers to the mind and reasoning powers. 
NEPHESCH answers to the animal instincts. 
CHIAH answers to CHOKMAH, YECHIDAH TO KETHER, while NES- 
CHAMAH itself is referred to BINAH.

The Sepher Yetzirah divides the Hebrew Letters into three Classes of Three, 
Seven, and Twelve.

Three Mothers YW: DB: BR 
Seven Double Letters PAbAA 
Twelve Single Letters DSYDIONNA

The Holy Place embraces the symbolism of the 22 Letters. 
<130> The Table of Shew-Bread, the Single Letters. 
The Altar of Incense the Three Mothers. 
Astral Spirits are those belonging to the Astral Plane. Such are false and 
illusionary forms, shells of the dead, and Ghosts and Phantoms. 
Elemental Spirits are those belonging to the nature of the Elements; 
some are good and some are evil. 
An Angel is a pure and high Spirit of unmixed good in office and 
operation. , 
In the Tarot, the ten small cards of each suit refer to the Sephiroth. The 
four suits refer to the Letters of Tetragrammaton thus:—Sceptres or Wands to ‘Yod 
Cups Heh 
Swords Vau 
Pentacles Heh (final) 
The Four Suits also refer to the Four Worlds of the Qabalists thus:— 
Sceptres to Atziluth 
Cups Briah 
Swords Yetzirah 
Pentacles Assiah

67

68 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

The Honours of the Tarot Pack are, as it were, the Vice-gerants of the 
Great Name, in the Qabalistic World to which each suit is referred. They also 
symbolise Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection.

<131> 
THE FYLFOT CROSS

The 17 Squares out of a square of 
lesser squares, refer to the Sun in the 
twelve Signs of the Zodiac and the 
Four Elements:

This form of the Caduceus of . 
Hermes is that of the Three Mother 
Letters placed on one another thus:

The Caduceus has another 
meaning on the Tree of Life. The 
upper part wings touch Chokmah and 
Binah: These are the Three Su- 
pernals.

The Seven lower Sephiroth are 
embraced by the twin Serpents 
whose heads rest upon Chesed and 
Geburah.

<132> The meaning of Luna on the 
Tree of Life is thus:

In its increase it embraces the 
side of Mercy; in its decrease the side 
of Severity, and at the full, it reflects 
the Sun of Tiphareth.

<133> MEDITATION

Let the Theoricus practise the Moon Breath, while saying mentally the 
word AUM: (Moon breath is through the left nostril only.)

Let him meditate upon the waxing and waning crescents, while visualis- 
ing a silver crescent upon an indigo background.

Let him now call before his mind the Signs of the Airy Triplicity 1 = ~~ 
and enclosed in these, let him meditate upon the numbers nine and five and 
therewith the forms of the Pentagram and Pentangle.

Let him now rise in imagination above the mineral world into the world 
of trees and flowers and identify himself in love and sympathy with the 
Powers of the Elements behind these.

Let him realise the mental world where mind rules over matter, and let 
him meditate upon the ideas of appearance and reality.

<133> FOURTH KNOWLEDGE LECTURELet him realise the mental world where mind rules over matter, and let 
him meditate upon the ideas of appearance and reality.

<133> FOURTH KNOWLEDGE LECTURE

The Figures of Geomanc 
and Their Zodiacal Attributions

Acquisitio

Tristitia

Caput, 
inor Draconis

69

70 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<136> The numbers and lineal figures appropriate to the planets are:

Saturn __ CCS CTriangle 
Jupiter __ CG CCC*SCSS quae 
Mars — Pentagram 
Sun Ge xagpram 
Venus__CCCC“‘(OUOCNC*C#WYeptagram 
Mercury__.__———SCCO ctagram 
Moon OD CrEneagram

THE MAGICAL SQUARES OF THE PLANETS are formed of the squares of 
the number of the planet, arranged so as to yield the same number each way. 
The number of the sum of each column of figures and the number of the total 
of all the numbers of the square, are also numbers especially attached to the 
Planet. Thus the number of the Planet SATURN is 3, square 9, sum of all 
columns vertical, horizontal and diagonal 15; total sum of all numbers, 
45.

These numbers are then formed into Divine and Spirit Names, as is 
demonstrated in that section of this book dealing with sigils.

THE SOLID GREEK CUBI- 
<137> CAL CROSS, the Admission 
Badge for the Path of Tau, is 
composed of 22 squares, answering to 
the 22 letters of the Hebrew Alphabet.

THE SOLID TRIANGLE OR TET- 
RAHEDRON, or Pyramid of Fire, the 
Admission Badge for the Path of Shin, 
represents the Simple Fire of Nature 
and the Latent or Hidden Fire.

The three upper triangles refer to Fire 
— Solar, Volcanic and Astral, while the 
lowest or basal triangle represents the 
latent heat.

THE GREEK CROSS of 13 Squares, the 
Admission Badge for the Path of Resh, 
is referred to the Sun in the Twelve 
Signs of the Zodiac, and also in the 
midst of the Four Elements.

THE CUP OF STOLISTES, the 
<138> Admission Badge to the Grade

of © = [8], is thus referred to 
the Tree of Life. It embraces nine of the 
Sephiroth, exclusive of Kether.

Fourth Knowledge LectureTHE CUP OF STOLISTES, the 
<138> Admission Badge to the Grade

of © = [8], is thus referred to 
the Tree of Life. It embraces nine of the 
Sephiroth, exclusive of Kether.

Fourth Knowledge Lecture

Yesod and Malkuth are referred to the triangle be- 
low, the former to the apex, the latter to the base. 
Like the Caduceus, it further represents the Three 
Elements: Water, Fire and Air. The Crescent refers 
to the Waters Above the Firmament, the sphere to 
the Firmament, and the basal triangle to the con- 
suming Fire, which is opposed to the Fire sym- 
bolised by the upper part of the Caduceus.

THE SYMBOL of MERCURY on the Tree of Life 
Enbraces all but Kether. The horns spring from 
Daath (Knowledge) which is not, properly speak- 
ing, a Sephira, but rather a conjunction of Chokmah 
and Binah.

<139> 
ATTRIBUTION OF THE TAROT TRUMPS 
Path No. Tarot Trump Letter 
11 0 The Foolish Man XN 
12 1 The Juggler 2 
13 2 The High Priestess a 
14 3 The Empress 4 
15 4 The Emperor a 
16 5 The Hierophant } 
17 6 The Lovers } 
18 7 The Chariot n 
19 8 Strength (Justice) 6 
20 9 The Hermit (Prudence) ‘ 
21 10 The Wheel of Fortune 2 
22 11 Justice (Strength) y) 
23 12 The Hanged Man a) 
24 13 Death P| 
25 14 Temperance D 
26 15 The Devil Dv 
27 16 Tower Struck by Lightning 5 
28 17 The Star 3 
29 18 The Moon P 
30 19 The Sun 4 
31 20 Last Judgment 4 
32 21 The Universe. n

Symbol

A 
8 
») 
g 
T 
v 
q 
& 
Q 
Wi 
a 
Vv 
mm 
x 
V8 
fe) 
x 
© 
A 
h

71

72 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<140> MEDITATION

Let the Practicus meditate upon the Symbols of the Rhomboid and the 
Vesica.

Let him seek out their meanings and correspondences

Let him contemplate the Symbol Mercury and the Number 8.Let the Practicus meditate upon the Symbols of the Rhomboid and the 
Vesica.

Let him seek out their meanings and correspondences

Let him contemplate the Symbol Mercury and the Number 8.

Let him now learn to control his emotions, on no account giving way to 
anger, hatred and jealousy, but to turn the force he hitherto expended in these 
directions towards the attainment of perfection, that the malarial marsh of his 
nature may become a clear and limpid lake, reflecting the Divine Nature truly 
and without distortion.

Let him identity himself with the Powers of Water, considering the Water

Triplicity in all its aspects, with its attributions and correspondences. 
<141> NOTES ON THE TAROT 
by Frater S.R.M.D.

In the Tree of Life in the Tarot, each path forms the connecting link 
between two of the Sephiroth. The King and the Queen are the correlations of 
the Abba and the Aima in that suit; the Knight or Prince answers to Micro- 
prosopus, and the Knave or Princess which was anciently a female figure, is 
referred to the Bride, Kallah or Malkah.

Combining, then, the material attributions of the Sephiroth and the Path, 
it results that:

0. Fool=The Crown of Wisdom, the Primum Mobile acting through the Air 
on the Zodiac.

1, The Juggler=The Crown of Understanding, the beginning of material 
production, the Primum Mobile acting through the Philosophic Mercury 
on Saturn.

2. High Priestess-The Crown of Beauty, the beginning of Sovereignty and 
Beauty, the Primum Mobile acting through the Moon on the Sun.

3. Empress=The Wisdom of Understanding, the Union of the powers of 
Origination and Production; the Sphere of the Zodiac acting through 
Venus upon Saturn.

4. Emperor=The Wisdom of Sovereignty and Beauty, and the originator of 
them; the Sphere of the Zodiac acting through Aries upon the Sun, and 
initiating Spring.

<142> 5, Hierophant=The Wisdom and fountain of Mercy, the Sphere of the 
Zodiac acting through Taurus upon Jupiter.<142> 5, Hierophant=The Wisdom and fountain of Mercy, the Sphere of the 
Zodiac acting through Taurus upon Jupiter.

6. The Lovers=The Understanding of Beauty and Production of Beauty and 
Sovereignty. Saturn acting through Gemini upon Sol.

7. Chariot=Understanding acting upon Severity. Saturn acting through Can- 
cer upon Mars.

8. Strength=Fortitude. Mercy tempering Severity. The Glory of Strength. 
Jupiter acting through Leo upon Mars.

'9, Hermit=The Mercy of Beauty, the Magnificence of Sovereignty, Jupiter 
acting through Virgo upon Sol.

10. Wheel of Fortune=The Mercy and Magnificence of Victory. Jupiter acting 
through Jupiter direct upon Venus.

11. Justice=The Severity of Beauty and Sovereignty. Mars acting through 
Libra upon Sol.

Fourth knowledge Lecture 73

12. The Hanged Man=The Severity of Splendour. Execution of Judgment. 
Mars acting through Water upon Mercury.

13. Death=The Sovereignty and result of Victory. Solacting through Scor- 
pio upon Venus, or Osiris under the destroying power of Typhon

icting Isis.

<143> 14, Temperance=The Beauty of a firm Basis. The Sovereignty of

Fundamental Power. Sol acting through Sagittarius upon Luna.

15. The Devil=The Sovereignty and Beauty of Material (and therefore 
false) splendour. Sol acting through Capricorn upon Mercury.

16. The Tower=The Victory over Splendour. Venus acting through Mars 
upon Mercury. Avenging force.

17. Star=The Victory of Fundamental Strength. Venus acting through 
Aquarius upon Luna. Hope.

18. Moon=The Victory of the Material. Venus acting through Pisces upon 
the Cosmic Elements, deceptive effect of the apparent power of 
Material Forces.

19. Sun=The Splendour of the Material World. Mercury acting through 
the Sun upon the Moon.

20. Judgment=The Splendour of the Material World. Mercury acting 
through Fire upon the Cosmic Elements.

21. Universe=The Foundation of the Cosmic Elements and of the Material 
World. Luna acting through Saturn upon the Elements.21. Universe=The Foundation of the Cosmic Elements and of the Material 
World. Luna acting through Saturn upon the Elements.

<144> THE GARDEN OF EDEN BEFORE THE FALL

This diagram is described in the Practicus Ritual. It shows ina glyph the 
teaching proper to the Practicus on entering the Sephirah HOD which he has 
reached by the Paths of SHIN and RESH from MALKUTH and YESOD 
respectively.

At the summit are the THREE SUPERNAL SEPHIROTH summed up 
into ONE—AIMA ELOHIM, the Mother Supernal—The Woman of the 
Apocalypse (Chap. 12) clothed with the SUN, the MOON under her feet, 
and on her head the Crown of Twelve Stars.

Itis written ‘So the Name JEHOVAH is joined to the Name ELOHIM, for 
JEHOVAH planted a Garden Eastward in Eden.’

From the Three Supernals follow the other Sephiroth of THE TREE OF 
LIFE. Below the TREE, proceeding from MALKUTH is THE TREE OF 
KNOWLEDGE of GOOD AND of EVIL which is between the Tree of Life and 
the World or Assiah or Shells, represented by the Coiled Up DRAGON with 
Seven Heads and Ten Horns—being the Seven Infernal Palaces and the Ten 
Averse Sephiroth. (These are described in the text of the Rituals but are not 
read to the Candidate at his Grade. When studying this diagram, these de- 
scriptions should be looked up, but they are not required for the exam.)

The River NAHER flows forth from the Supernal Eden and in DAATH 
it is divided into Four Heads:—

PISON: Fire—flowing to GEBURAH where there is Gold. 
<145> GIHON: Water—the Waters of Mercy, flowing into CHESED. 
HIDDIKEL: Air—flowing into TIPHARETH. 
PHRATH (Euphrates): Earth — flowing into MALKUTH.

74 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

It is written “In DAATH the Depths are broken up and the Clouds drop 
down dew.”

The word Naher has the meaning ‘perennial stream’—‘never failing 
waters’ as opposed to other words meaning Torrent or Brook.The word Naher has the meaning ‘perennial stream’—‘never failing 
waters’ as opposed to other words meaning Torrent or Brook.

The River going out of Eden is the River of the Apocalypse, the Waters of 
Life, clear as crystal proceeding from the Throne, on either side of the Tree of 
Life, bearing all manner of Fruit.

Thus the Rivers form a Cross and on it The GREAT ADAM, the SON 
who is to rule the Nations, was extended from TIPHARETH and his arms 
stretch out to GEBURAH AND GEDULAH, and in MALKUTH is EVE, sup- 
porting with her hands the TWO PILLARS.

<146> ON THE GENERAL GUIDANCE AND 
PURIFICATION OF THE SOUL

Learn first, O Practicus of our Ancient Order, that true Equilibrium is the 
basis of the Soul. If thou thyself hast not a sure foundation, whereon wilt thou 
stand to direct the forces of Nature?

Know then that as Man is born into this world amidst the darkness of 
Nature and the strife of contending forces, so must his first endeavour be to 
seek the Light through their reconciliation. Thus, thou who hast trial and 
trouble of this life, rejoice because of them, for in them is strength, and by 
their means is a pathway opened unto that Light Divine.

How should it be otherwise, O man, whose life is but a day in Eternity, a 
drop in the Ocean of Time? How, if thy trials were not many, couldst thou 
purge thy soul from the dross of Earth?How should it be otherwise, O man, whose life is but a day in Eternity, a 
drop in the Ocean of Time? How, if thy trials were not many, couldst thou 
purge thy soul from the dross of Earth?

Is it but now that the higher life is beset with dangers and difficulties; 
hath it not been ever thus with the Sages and Hierophants of the Past? They 
have been persecuted and reviled, they have been tormented of men, yet 
through this has their glory increased. Rejoice, therefore, O Initiate, for the 
greater thy trial, the brighter thy triumph. When men shall revile thee and 
speak against thee falsely, hath not the Master said “Blessed art thou.” Yet,O 
Practicus, let thy victories bring thee not vanity, for with increase of knowl- 
edge should come increase of wisdom. He who knows little, thinketh he 
knows much; but he who knoweth much hath learned his own ignorance. 
Seest thoua Man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope ofa fool than of

Be not hasty to condemn other’s sin. How knowest thou that in

<147> their place thou couldst have resisted the temptation? And even

were it so, why shouldst thou despise one who is weaker than

thyself? Be thou well sure of this, that in slander and self-righteousness is sin.

Pardon therefore the sinner, but encourage not the sin. The Master con-

demned not the adulterous woman, but neither did he encourage her to 
commit the sin.

Thou therefore who desirest magical gifts, be sure that thy soul is firm 
and steadfast, for it is by flattering thy weakness that the Evil One will gain 
power over thee. Humble thyselk before thy God, yet fear neither man nor 
spirit. Fear is failure and the forerunner of failure; and courage is the begin- 
ning of virtue. Therefore fear not the Spirits, but be firm and courteous with 
them, for thou hast no right either to despise or to revile them, and this too 
may lead thee into sin. Command and banish the Evil ones. Curse them by

Fourth knowledge Lecture 75Fourth knowledge Lecture 75

the Great Names of God, if need be; but neither mock nor revile them, for so 
assuredly thou wilt be led into error.

A man is what he maketh himself within the limits fixed by his inherited 
destiny; he is a part of mankind. His actions affect not himself only, but also 
those with whom he is brought into contact, either for good or for evil.

Neither worship nor neglect the physical body, which is thy temporary 
connection with the outer and material world. Therefore let thy mental 
equilibrium be above disturbances by material events. Restrain the animal 
passions and nourish the higher aspirations; the emotions are purified by 
suffering.

Do good unto others for God’s sake, not for reward, not for gratitude

from them, not for sympathy. If thou art generous, thou wilt not long 
<148> for thine ears to be tickled by expressions of gratitude. Remember

that unbalanced force is evil, that unbalanced severity is but cruelty 
and oppression, but that also unbalanced Mercy is but weakness which 
would allow and abet evil.

True prayer is as much action as Word; it is Will. The Gods will not do for 
man what his Higher Powers can do for himself, if he cultivate Will and Wis- 
dom. Remember that this Earth is but an atom in the Universe, and thou 
thyself but an atom thereon. And that even couldst thou become the God of 
this Earth whereon thou crawlest and grovellest, thou wouldst even then be 
but an atom and one among many. Nevertheless, have the greatest self- 
respect, and to that end sin notagainst thyself. The sin which is unpardonable 
is knowingly and wilfully to reject spiritual truth, but every sin and act 
leaveth its effect.To obtain magical Power, learn to control thought. Admit only true ideas 
which are in harmony with the end desired, and not every stray and con- 
tradictory idea that presents itself. Fixed thought is a means to an end; 
therefore pay attention to the power of silent thought and meditation. The 
material act is but the outward expression of the thought, and therefore it 
hath been said that “the thought of foolishness is sin.” Thought therefore is 
the commencement of action, and if a chance thought can produce much 
effect, what cannot fixed thought do? Therefore, as has been already said, es- 
tablish thyself firmly in the Equilibrium of Forces, in the centre of the cross of 
the elements, that Cross from whose centre the creative word issued in the 
birth of the dawning universe.

As it was said unto thee in the Grade of Theoricus: “Be thou 
<149> therefore prompt and active as the Sylphs, but avoid frivolity and 
caprice. Be energetic and strong like the Salamanders, but avoid 
irritability and ferocity. Be flexible and attentive to images like the Undines, 
but avoid idleness and changeability. Be laborious and patient like the 
Gnomes, but avoid grossness and avarice.” So shalt thou gradually develop 
the powers of thy Soul and fit thyself to command the spirits of the 
elements.

For wert thou to summon the Gnomes to pander to thy avarice, thou 
wouldst no longer command them, but they would command thee. Wouldst 
thou abuse the pure creatures of God’s creation to fill thy coffers and to 
satisfy thy lust for Gold? Wouldst thou defile the Spirits of driving Fire to

76 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

serve thy wrath and hatred? Wouldst thou violate the purity of the Souls of 
the Water to pander to thy lust and debauchery? Wouldst thou force the 
Spirits of the evening breeze to minister to thy folly and caprice?

Know that with such desires thou canst but attract the evil and not the 
good, and in that can the evil will have power over thee.Know that with such desires thou canst but attract the evil and not the 
good, and in that can the evil will have power over thee.

In true religion there is no sect. Therefore take heed that thou blas- 
pheme not the name by which another knoweth his God for if thou doest this 
thing in Jupiter, thou wilt blaspheme YHVH; and in Osiris YEHESHUAH.

“Ask of God and ye shall have, 
Seek and ye shall find. 
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”

<150> THE GARDEN OF EDEN AFTER THE FALL

This diagram is described in the Philosophus Ritual. It shows ina glyph 
the teaching proper to a Philosophus on entering the Sephirah NETZACH 
which he has reached by the Three Paths of QOPH, TZADDI, AND PEH 
from the SEPHIROTH—MALKUTH, YESOD and HOD respectively.

The Great Goddess EVE, being tempted by the fruits of the TREE OF 
KNOWLEDGE whose branches tend upwards to the seven lower Sephiroth, 
but also downward to the Kingdom of Shells, reached down to them and the 
two pillars were left unsupported.

Then the Sephirotic Tree was shattered. She fell and with her fell the 
Great ADAM. And the Great Red Dragon arose with his seven heads and ten 
horns, and EDEN was desolated—and the folds of the Dragon enclosed 
MALKUTH and linked it to the Kingdom of the Shells.

And the heads of the Dragon rose into the seven lower Sephiroth, even 
up to DAATH at the feet of Aima Elohim.

Thus were the four Rivers of EDEN desecrated and the Dragon Mouth 
gave forth the Infernal Waters in DAATH—and this is LEVIATHAN, The 
Piercing and Crooked Serpent.

But TETRAGRAMMATON ELOHIM placed the Four Letters YHVH of 
the NAME and the Flaming Sword of the Ten Sephiroth between the devas- 
tated Garden and the Supernal Eden, that this should not be involved in the 
Fall of ADAM.

And it became necessary that a Second Adam should arise to

<151> restore the System, and thus, as ADAM had been spread on the

Cross of the Four Rivers, so the Second ADAM should be crucifiedAnd it became necessary that a Second Adam should arise to

<151> restore the System, and thus, as ADAM had been spread on the

Cross of the Four Rivers, so the Second ADAM should be crucified

on the infernal Rivers of the four armed Cross of DEATH—yet to do this He

must descend into the lowest, even MALKUTH the Earth, and be born of her. 
(Psalm 74. ‘Thou breakest the Heads of Leviathan in pieces.’)

And on the Dragon Heads were the names of the eight Kings of EDOM 
and on his horns the names of the Eleven Dukes of EDOM, for DAATH hav- 
ing developed in the Dragon a new Head, the Seven Headed Dragon with 
Ten Horns became Eight Headed and Eleven Horned. (Genesis, 36:31 to 43. 
Chronicles 1; 43 to 54.)

NOTE: The Edomites were the descendants of Esau who sold his 
birthright. Their Kings came to symbolise unlawful and chaotic forces.

<1s3> FIFTH KNOWLEDGE LECTURE

AZOTH is a word formed from the initial and final letters of the Greek, 
Latin and Hebrew Alphabets thus:—A and Z, Aleph and Tau, Alpha and 
Omega. It is used with various meanings by different writers but generally 
signifies Essence. ,

The following names occur in Qabalistic writings:—

AJN—the Negative DS (Nothing—Not) 
AIN SOPH AID PS (Limitless) 
AIN SOPH AUR “IS FID PS (The Limitless Light)

These are the Veils of the Negative Existence depending from Kether. 
ARIK ANPIN }‘BIN J*AS—MACROPROSOPUS or The Vast Countenance 
is a title of Kether, and another of its titles is the Ancient of Days, AATIK 
YOMIN }‘S1° ny

Kether or the Vast Countenance emanates first as ABBA, the Supernal 
Father, and AIMA the Supernal Mother.

ABBA NIN The Supernal Father is referred to YOD of Tetragram- 
maton, and

AIMA NN The Supernal Mother is referred to HEH.

ELOHIM B‘MS is a name given to these two Persons united.

As Elohim they become the parents of THE SON ZAUIR 
<155> ANPIN [B38 “Nt, also called MICROPROSOPUS or the LESSER 
COUNTENANCE.ELOHIM B‘MS is a name given to these two Persons united.

As Elohim they become the parents of THE SON ZAUIR 
<155> ANPIN [B38 “Nt, also called MICROPROSOPUS or the LESSER 
COUNTENANCE.

ABBA is referred to YOD and the Sephira CHOKMAH. AIMA is re- 
ferred to HEH and the Sephirah BINAH. ZAUIR ANPIN is referred to the six 
Sephiroth—Chesed, Geburah, Tiphareth, Netzach, Hod, and Yesod, and of 
these especially to TIPHARETH.

MALKAH 3° The Queen, and KALAH M5 The Bride are titles of 
MALKUTH considered as the Spouse of Zauir Anpin, the Microprosopus.

The Letters of the Name YHVH contain these meanings, thus:—

YOD is referred to ABBA. HEH to AIMA.

VAU to ZAUIR ANPIN. HEH (final) to MALKAH.

These Letters are also referred to the Four Worlds and the Four Suits of 
the Tarot thus:—

YOD ATZILUTH WANDS 
HEH BRIAH CUPS

VAU YETZIRAH SWORDS 
HEH (f) ASSIAH _ PENTACLES

In each of the Four Worlds are the Ten Sephiroth of that World, and each 
Sephirah has its own ten Sephiroth, making 400 Sephiroth in all — the num- 
ber of the letter TAU, The Cross, The Universe, the Completion of all 
Things.

77

78 The Golden Dawn: Volume I

<154> 
TETRAGRAMMATON ON THE TREE

1

The Tarot is thus referred to The Tree of Life: 
The Four Aces are placed on the Throne of Kether — the 
<156> remaining small cards of the suit desired on the respective 
Sephiroth, 2 on Chokmah, 3 on Binah, etc. The 22 Trumps are then

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 79

arranged on the Paths between them, according to the Letters to which 
they correspond.

The King and Queen of the suit are placed beside Chokmah and Binah 
respectively; the Knight and Knave by Tiphareth and Malkuth.

The Tarot Trumps thus receive the equilibrium of the Sephiroth they 
connect.

The Admission Badges used in the grade of Philosophus are as follows: 
The Calvary Cross of Twelve Squares, admitting to the Path of Qoph, the 
29th Path, refers to the Zodiac and to the Eternal River of Eden divided into

Four Heads: -Four Heads: -

Ir 
Nahar — The River__—C—sSSCS BESS 
1. Hiddikel Span Te 
2. Pison [es 
3. Gihon ym 2 
4, Phrath 3a) >) 3

The Pyramid of the Four Elements admits to 
the Path of Tzaddi, the 28th Path.

On the sides are the Hebrew Names of the 
Elements. On the apex is the word Eth — Essence, 
and on the base the word Olam meaning World.

3/65 
9°3/Mya3

6. 
fat ay

4 2 
TOA IANT

The Calvary Cross of Ten

<157> Squares admits to the Path of

Peh, Mars — the 27th Path.

The Ten Squares are referred to the Ten

Sephiroth in balanced disposition. It is

also the opened out form of the double 
Cube of the Altar of Incense.

The Cross of the Hegemon’s Badge admits to 
the Grade of Philosophus. This cross embraces 
Tiphareth, Netzach, Hod and Yesod, and rests ome) 
upon Malkuth. The Calvary Cross of Six Squares fe) 
also refers to the six Sephiroth of Microprosopus - 
and is the opened out form of the cube.

The Symbol of. Venus on the Tree 
<158> of Life embraces the whole Ten

Sephiroth. It is a fitting emblem of the Isis 
of Nature. As it contains all the Sephiroth its circle 
should be made larger than that of Mercury.

80

The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

NAMES especially connected with the Four Elements:—

EARTH: 
Hebrew Name Aretz or Ophir VOD: 7S 
Great Name Adonai ha-Aretz Pos 8 
Cardinal Point North. Tzaphon pes 
Archangel Auriel NTIS 
Angel Phorlakh FNoT 
Ruler Kerub an 
King Ghob : 
Elementals Gnomes

AIR: 
Hebrew Name Ruach mr 
Great Name Shaddai El Chai TOS TW 
Cardinal Point East. Mizrach ny 
Archangel Raphael 857] 
Angel Chassan jen 
Ruler Ariel WAN 
King Paralda 
Elementals Sylphs

<159> WATER: 
Hebrew Name Maim jaya) 
Great Name Elohim Tzabaoth PISay OTN 
Cardinal Point West. Maarab ale ho/a) 
Archangel Gabriel AN?) 
Angel Taliahad ae 
Ruler Tharsis owin 
King Nichsa 
Elementals UndinesFIRE: 
Hebrew Name Asch OS - 
Great Name Yhvh Tzabaoth MSZ TT 
Cardinal Point South. Darom ia 
Archangel Michael SD°2 
Angel Aral SSIs 
Ruler Seraph FW 
King Djin 
Elementals Salamanders

<160> MEDITATION

LET THE PHILOSOPHUS meditate upon the symbol of the Fire Trian- 
gle in all its aspects.

Let him contemplate the symbol of the Planet VENUS until he realises the 
Universal Love which would express itself in perfect service to all: 
mankind and which embraces Nature both visible and invisible.

Let him identify himself with the powers of FIRE, consecrating himself 
wholly until the Burnt Sacrifice is consummated and the Christ is 
conceived by the Spirit.

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 81

Let him meditate upon the Triplicity of Fire—its attributes and corre- 
spondences.

<161> THE DIAGRAMS

As confusion is found to exist with regard to the Right and Left Pillars of 
the Sephiroth on the Tree of Life in relation to the right and left sides ofaman, 
and as to the phases of the Moon—you must note:

That in every diagram and picture, the right hand side of the observer is 
next to the Pillar of Mercy—Chokmah, Chesed, and Netzach; while the Pillar 
of Severity is on the observer's left hand. Yet when you apply the Tree of Life 
to yourself, your right side, arm, and leg represent the side of Strength and 
Severity, Binah, Geburah and Hod, and your left side refers to the Pillar of 
Mercy. So that when you look at a diagram, you are looking, as it were, at a 
man facing you, that your right side faces his left. His Merciful side forms the 
right hand Pillar in front of you, so that it is as if you looked at yourself in 
a mirror.

Just as the man looks at you, so does the Moon look at youand so you say 
that the Moon in her increase is on the side of Mercy, the right hand pillar of 
the Sephiroth; and in her decrease, the crescent is on the left hand Pillar 
of Severity.

A Diagram, then, is a picture of a Man or the Moon facing you. The Tem- 
ple Pillars are similar:A Diagram, then, is a picture of a Man or the Moon facing you. The Tem- 
ple Pillars are similar:

Black Pillar Severity Left North

White Pillar Mercy Right South 
Black Pillar Boaz Stolistes 
White Pillar Jachin Dadouchos

That is, the white Mercy or Jachin Pillar is on your right hand as 
<162> you approach the Altar from the West and from the Hiereus. (See 
Chronicles II. iii, 17.) “And call the Name on the right hand (of him

who enters) Jachin, and the Name of that on the left, Boaz.”

Now Boaz=Strength, Severity, Binah, Black Pillar, and Jachin= White 
Pillar of Mercy.

So in making the Qabalistic Cross on your breast it is correct to touch the 
Forehead and say Ateh—Thou art; the Heart—Malkuth; Right Shoulder, ve- 
Geburah; left shoulder ve-Gedulah, and with the fingers clasped on the breast 
say, Le, olahm, amen!

(Note: The following items and attributions are those which were for- 
merly eliminated from the so-called knowledge lectures and rituals. They 
have been assembled here and added as an appendix since this was assumed 
to be more satisfactory than inserting them once again into the knowledge 
lectures. I. R.)

82 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<163> TWO FURTHER ALCHEMICAL ATTRIBUTIONS

TO THE TREE OF LIFE 
1. Kether Mercury The Metallic Root 
2, Chokmah Salt Lead 
3. Binah Sulphur Tin 
4. Chesed Silver Silver 
5. Geburah Gold Gold 
6. Tiphareth Iron Iron 
7. Netzach Copper Hermaphroditical Brass 
8. Hod Tin Brass 
9. Yesod Lead Mercury 
10. Malkuth Mercury Philosophorum Medicina Metallorum 
THE QLIPPOTH ON THE TREE OF LIFE 
1. Kether Thaumiel—The two contending Forces 
2. Chokmah Ghogiel—The Hinderers 
3. Binah Satariel—The Concealers 
4. Chesed Agshekeloh—The Breakers in Pieces 
5. Geburah Golohab—The Burners 
6. Tiphareth Tagiriron—The Disputers 
7. Netzach Gharab Tzerek—The Ravens of Death 
8. Hod Samael—The Liar or Poison of God 
9. Yesod Gamaliel—The Obscene Ones 
10. Malkuth Lilith— Queen of the Night and of Demons 
<164>

CRSCRS

The Seven Palaces attributed to the 
Ten Sephiroth

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 83

<165> THE ASTROLOGICAL SYMBOLS 
OF THE PLANETS

These are derived from the three primary forms of the Cross, the Cres- 
cent and the Circle, either singly or in combination.

The Circle denotes Sun and Gold; the Crescent the Moon and Silver, 
respectively analogous to the Red and White Alchemical natures.

The Cross is the symbol of corrosion. The corrosion of metals is usually 
of the complementary colour to that to which they naturally approximate. 
Thus Copper, which is reddish, becomes green in its corrosion of 
verdigris, etc.

Mercury is the only planet which unites these three primary forms in 
one symbol. Saturn is composed of the cross and the crescent showing that 
Lead is corrosive internally and Luna externally. Jupiter is the reverse. Mars 
is Solar internally but corrosive externally.

Venus is opposite. Copper is externally of the nature of Gold, but inter- 
nally corrosive. Hence the name of the Sphere of Venus is Nogah—denoting 
External Splendour but internal corruption.

The Serpent Nehushtan, which Moses made when the Children of Israel 
were bitten by Serpents of Fire in the Wilderness, is the Serpent of the Paths 
of the Tree. And he set it on a pole—that is, twined it round the middle Pillar 
of the Sephiroth. And the word used in the passage in Numbers 21 for Fiery 
Serpents is the same as the Name of the Angels of Geburah, the same spell- 
ing, the same pointing, Seraphim. Round the Middle Pillar of the Sephiroth, 
because that is the Reconciler between the Fires of Geburah or Severity, and

the Waters of Chesed or Mercy—and hence it is said in the New 
<166> Testament that it is a type of Christ, the Reconciler. And the serpentthe Waters of Chesed or Mercy—and hence it is said in the New 
<166> Testament that it is a type of Christ, the Reconciler. And the serpent

is of Brass, the Metal of Venus, whose Sphere is called Nogah, or 
External Splendour, as shewn further by the Alchemical Symbol of Venus, 
wherein the Circle of the Sun is exalted above the Cross of Corrosion. And 
therefore it is said in the Zohar that “Alone of the Shells is the Serpent Nogah 
found in Holiness” and he is called the Balance of Justice. Why, then, is he 
called the External or False Splendour? Because he indeed uniteth the Paths, 
but comprehendeth not the Sephiroth. Nevertheless, he is also the Celestial 
Serpent of Wisdom. But the Serpent of the Temptation is the Serpent of the 
Tree of Knowledge of Good and of Evil, and not that of the Tree of Life.

Here is a method of writing Hebrew words by the Yetsiratic attribution 
of the Alphabet, whence results some curious hieroglyphic symbolism. Thus 
Tetragrammaton will be written by Virgo, Aries, Taurus, Aries. Eheieh, by Air, 
Aries, Virgo, Aries. From Yeheshua, the Qabalistic mode of spelling Jesus, 
which is simply the Tetragrammaton with the letter Shin placed therein, we 
obtain a very peculiar combination—Virgo, Aries, Fire, Taurus, Aries. Virgo 
born of a Virgin, Aries the Sacrificial Lamb, Fire the Fire of the Holy Spirit, 
Taurus the Ox of the Earth in whose Manger He was laid, and lastly Aries the 
flocks of sheep whose Herdsmen came to worship Him. Elohim yields Air, 
Libra, Aries, Virgo, Water—the Firmament, the Balanced Forces, the Fire of 
the Spirit (For Aries is a fiery Sign), operating in the Zodiac, the Fire God 
dess, and the Waters of Creation.

84 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<167> The terms Raven or Crow, Lion and Eagle have various Al- 
chemical significations. Generally

Raven—Initiation through blackness

Lion—Heat and sulphurous action

Eagle—Sublimation<167> The terms Raven or Crow, Lion and Eagle have various Al- 
chemical significations. Generally

Raven—Initiation through blackness

Lion—Heat and sulphurous action

Eagle—Sublimation

One great difference between Chemical and Alchemical processes is that 
Alchemy only employs a gradual heat continually but carefully increased, 
and does not commence with violent heat.

The Cucurbite is a glass boiler attached to the lower part of the Alembic. It 
consists of a tube, a head, and a receiver added thereto for purposes of 
distillation. ;

The Athanor or Philosophical Furnace is to produce a graduated heat.

The Balneum Mariae is the modern water bath—a vessel of hot water in 
which was placed the vessel to be heated.

The Balneum Arenae or sand bath is a vessel of sand in which is placed the 
vessel to receive a dry heat.

The Philosophic Egg is an oval glass vessel in which is placed the water or 
liquid to be acted upon, and which may be hermetically sealed.

This represents the Alchemical Symbol of 
<168> Sulphur on the Tree of Life. It does not 
touch the four lower Sephiroth. The Cross 
terminates in Tiphareth, whereby, as it were, the 
Supernal Triangle is to be grasped, and Tipharethis fe) ce) 
the purified Man. 5 
The Hexagram of Tiphareth is formed from the Pillars on each side. In 
Chesed is the Water triangle, in Geburah the Fire triangle. And Tiphareth 
unites and reconciles them 80 as to form a reconciliation between them in the 
form of the hexagram.

The Symbol of Salt on the Tree of Life embraces all 6° Ss 
the Sephiroth but Malkuth, and is as it were, the 240 
Reconciler between the Sulphur and Mercury. The | 7) 
horizontal dividing line implies the precept of 
Hermes “as above so below.” AThe drawing rep- 
<169> resents the Trinity op- 
erating through the 
Sephiroth and reflected down- 
wards in the four triangles of 
the Elements. Air is reflected 
from Kether through Tiphareth a v 
to Yesod. Water is reflected 
from Binah through Chesed to 
Hod; Fire is reflected from 
Chokmah through Geburah to

Netzach; while Earth is Mal- Vv A 
kuth, the receptacle of the 
other Three.

A

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 85

(Note: The following Angelic Names have been assembled and 
<170> tabulated systematically from a Philosophus manuscript entitled

“The Lecture on the Shemhamphoresch.” This document deals 
principally with the traditional modes of forming Angelic Names. It describes 
how various verses are taken from the book of Exodus, and by methods of 
permutation, are formed into seventy-two names of three letters each. To 
each of these names is added the suffix Yeh or El, thus yielding angelic names 
and formulae. These seventy-two Angels are allotted to each quinary, or 
division of 5°, in the celestial heavens, so that with the other names a very 
complete hierarchy is given. Thus every Sign of the Zodiac has an Archangel, 
Angel, Angel of its corresponding house, and a vast sub-hierarchy.

Too much space would have been consumed to detail the methods by 
which these names are given. So I have contented myself to list, simply, all 
the Archangelic and Angelic Names of the twelve Zodiacal Signs, and state 
that they are very important names, and their arrangement should be care- 
fully studied. The documents on Tarot attribute two of these Angels to each 
of the 36 small cards, and the anglicised transliteration of their names will 
there be found. But I have thought it advisable here to give the Hebrew letters 
and spelling so that the student may have them at his hand when dealing 
with the matters of Sigils and Telesmatic Images, which are, as elsewhere 
explained, formed from the Hebrew spellings. I. R.)86 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One 
Divine and Angelic Names

Name Angel ruling Angel Angel

in Divine Arch- the House ruling ruling

Sign Hebrew Name angel Angel corresponding Decan Decan Quinance 
<171> oN 
3 a D3

T non mm ONS TDD SON mmw SSN mwnrnn 
© ‘onAS Mppy

D833

2 335 SNM

HvVIID

9 “D123 ONE

cot “Ww AP ONTIDON ONAN SSID MDD 
» ®WANID OND

. SNM

h 77330" SRIPD

SN3D!

; at wrap SN

Bae BDDIsn RAY OSMIDN ON NID ON’ ONISY 
3 saaw pra hint =)

maa

© “WN YNPID

<172> INN 
g atl ala) man

& 7D A SSD = ONNDD SNPS SNANT 
i) Panini mops

ONY

»y “33°58 MEI

rapa tmd

R “mip oN

§) mas min SND ONION SRIY SRD 
3 wht macy

PPYnp

3 mASAb ONDDD

TP SIS

© MUNIIN ONAN

TY moana MBA Ssoom ONnow > ha SSI 
Q TSA TON

MN?

.e] "DDD Myr

<173> OND 
»») ‘JE ONMID

= D'stxD nm Ss SSspsn ONT Osan 
h yOIND Mmapn

TN?

a Ww 38D

my

3 Vib rahe inl =)

™ spy fata} SesD79 ONIN SIDID IND93 
iO) ATT oN

ONT

g SIN tabeintn}

mrAns

fo} rw MNT

x nwp may OSSIAN ONPDD ORDYND oONm 
» mam Mrs

. oe

h NTMIS IRDIN

<174> 58359 
ce pp Awe

v3 “A mn Nan ORD mys mim 
3 Mop mnns

Mpia

So) ONT AID* OND

, SSIs

9 BROD Mpyvn

aay oT Av SNSDEND UN PDD YSIDIN SRA 
eg M738 osm

SNA

>» OMNI SNDID

mon

Rh ‘Don mono

* ass PAR ONS IDR OND SS wD MOND 
3 ys OND

mewy

ro} FAD OND

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 87

<175> ON THE WORK TO BE UNDERTAKEN 
BETWEEN PORTAL AND ©@—E[E]

The work comes under six headings as follows:

1. A Thesis on the Rituals.

2. A meditation on the crosses which have been used as admission 
badges in the Grades, This is a preparation for the meditation which 
precedes the © —[6] Grade and should be applied for when you 
have been a Portal Member for seven months.

. Acomplete diagram of The Tree of Life.

. The practice of control of the Aura.

. The placing of The Tree of Life in the Aura. 
. Tattwas—Astrology—Divination.

an Oe Ww

r. Acomplete diagram of The Tree of Life.

. The practice of control of the Aura.

. The placing of The Tree of Life in the Aura. 
. Tattwas—Astrology—Divination.

an Oe Ww

r

. The Thesis. Read the rituals. Build them up.in imagination. Compare 
the Opening and Closing in the various Grades. Note the general underlying 
scheme for each Elemental Grade—and note where the differences occur. 
Follow the careers of the various Officers. Note at what Grade an Officer 
disappears.

Make a precis of each Ritual so that the general scheme becomes 
apparent. This is of the greatest assistance when you are called on to take 
Office because you will not then need to follow everything in the Ritual but 
need only turn to the page where your Office is mentioned and when you 
have no more to say, you can turn to the Closing and put the Ritual aside till

required for that. Ability to do this and to move correctly in the 
<176> Temple adds greatly to the harmony and repose of the whole 
Ceremony.

Note the positions of the various officers—what mathematical shapes 
they make among themselves from time to time as they take up their places in 
the Temple. It may be a triangle, a cross, a pentagram, etc.

Read the speeches carefully, and read them sometimes aloud so that you 
get familiar with the sound of your own voice in saying the words. Note that 
some speeches are designed to create atmosphere by their archaic form and 
should be read rhythmically and sonorously, while others are informative 
and should be read in such a way as to make their points clear.

Examples of archaic passages are challenges of Gods: “Thou canst not 
pass the Gate of the Western Heaven unless thou canst tell me my Name.” 
And the speeches of the Kabiri in the Grades of Practicus and Philosophus. 
Information is given in speeches about Tarot Keys and diagrams.Note the technique for traversing the various Paths—the words, and the 
badges with which the Path is entered, the length of the circumambulation 
and the special symbolism described therein.

Let all these things soak into your mind, make notes as ideas occur to 
you—and presently your personal reaction to the Grades will crystallise out 
and you will be able to write your thesis.

88 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

2. Makea list and drawings of the crosses which have been given youas 
Admission Badges throughout the Grades, from the Swastika of the 
<177> Zelator to the Five-squared cross which you put on as you stood at 
the Altar at the second point of the Portal Grade. Read what is said of

them in the Rituals and knowledge lectures, and make notes about them.

3. The Tree of Life. This should be done fairly large in order that the 
writing and symbols should be clear. It is essential to show the Deity Names, 
Names of Archangels and Angels in Hebrew in the Sephiroth, and to num- 
ber the Paths and give their attributions. Apart from this, the Tree should be 
your personal synthesis of the Order symbolism as it applies to the Tree of 
Life. Colours may be used.

4. Control of the Aura. If you are not already familiar with the parts of 
your own body such as nervous system, respiratory system, digestive sys- 
tem, get some simple text-book such as is used in ambulance work, or attend 
a course of first-aid lectures so that, before starting to work on your subtle 
body, you may know something about your physical body.Your physical body is interpenetrated by a subtle body or aura which 
also surrounds the physical body like an 88 of light. You should now begin 
to practise controlling this aura or Sphere of Sensation. This means that you 
must first try to get your emotional reactions under conscious control. 
Instead of automatically liking this, disliking that, you must try to understand 
the mechanism which underlies these feelings. To assist you in this, the study 
of psychology is recommended. There are many books on the subject, of 
which the following are easy to understand and clearly stated.

Psychology by Wm. McDougall (Home University Library). 
<178> Psychoanalysts for Normal People by Geraldine Coster. 
Psycho-Synthesis by the Dean of Chester Cathedral.

Machinery of the Mind by Violet Firth.

Having built up some idea of the mechanism of your mental processes, 
you should now try to make yourself negative or positive at will towards peo- 
ple or ideas. If you are likely to meet someone who always makes you 
argumentative and irritable, decide that your aura is closed to their power of 
irritating you and that your mind will not be disturbed by what they say. It is 
good sometimes to listen to views with which you disagree to teach you not 
only to make no verbal response, but to keep your feelings in abeyance also. 
In this way you come to learn how much of your disagreement is due to preju- 
dice or personal factors, and how much to your regard for abstract truth.

Again, sometimes practise opening your aura to people or ideas in an 
endeavour to see things from another’s point of view.

The practice of deep breathing is also of help in establishing poise and in 
controlling nervousness. It is good to expand the chest to its fullest extent 
and then to expand the diaphragm below the ribs as well and then to let the 
breath out slowly and steadily on a vowel sound such as ah or ‘O’.

If you are nervy, you will find that your breathing is shallow and thatIf you are nervy, you will find that your breathing is shallow and that

your muscles are tense. You tend to clench your hands and tighten 
<179> up the abdominal muscles. To cure this, take a deep breath to full 
capacity, hold it while tensing and relaxing alternately the ab- 
dominal muscles. Do this (i.e. the tensing and relaxing of the muscles) three

90 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

times and then relax completely into a chair. Allow all your muscles to go 
limp and let your breath out to the last gasp. Do the whole process three 
times, if necessary. It is designed to stimulate the solar plexus which is the 
heart of the nervous system which governs emotion.

Another good exercise is to say the Deity Names aloud. Take a deep 
breath and say them softly, smoothly and slowly, imagining the while that 
your voice travels out to the confines of the Universe. This can be done in 
conjunction with the Pentagram Ritual.

5. The Tree of Life in the Aura. In the aura which interpenetrates and 
surrounds our physical bodies, we are to build up a replica of the Tree of Life. 
The Pillar of Severity is on our right side, the Pillar of Mercy on our left, and

‘the Pillar of Benificence in our midst.

THE MIDDLE PILLAR EXERCISE

It is best to build up the Middle Pillar first. To do this stand up and raise 
yourself in imagination to your Kether—a brilliant light above your head. 
Imagine this light descending to Daath, at the nape of your neck, and thence 
to Tiphareth in your heart where it glows like sunlight and whence it radiates 
into the other Sephiroth. From Tiphareth the light goes to Yesod in the 
region of the hips, and thence to Malkuth in which your feet are planted. 
Having made a clear image of the Middle Pillar, you can then establish the

other Sephiroth by vibrating the Deity Names. This can be done as 
<181> an alternative to the Pentagram Ritual as a preparation for 
meditation.other Sephiroth by vibrating the Deity Names. This can be done as 
<181> an alternative to the Pentagram Ritual as a preparation for 
meditation.

1. Imagine yourself standing in the Temple, facing West. The Black 
Pillar of Severity will be on your right—the White Pillar of Mercy on your 
left. You will make the Middle Pillar as you stand between them.

2. Imagine now that the Black Pillar is reflected in your right side—the 
White Pillar in your left.

3. Take a deep breath and raise your consciousness to your Kether 
above your head and vibrate the Name EHEIEH—which means J am. Imag- 
ine the Light flowing down through Daath (at the nape of your neck) to 
Tiphareth.

; 4. In the same manner, establish Yesod in the name SHADDAI EL 
CHAI, and Malkuth in the Name ADONAI HA-ARETZ.

5. Make the Qabalistic Cross to indicate that you have called down the 
Light of your Kether and balanced it in your aura. Then let your imagination 
dwell on the aura and see it oval and clear, pulsating with the glow from 
Tiphareth.

If you are called to see anyone who is ill, who is depressed, or who has a 
depressing effect on you, you should do this exercise beforehand. In the case 
of the person who has a depressing effect on you, you may also imagine that 
your aura is hardened at the edge so that they are unable to penetrate it, and 
so deplete you of vitality (which is generally what such sensations mean).

In all these practices it is well to remember that ‘Strength is in Silence.’ If

you talk about them, save to your Chief, or if you try to analyse their 
<182> effects, you will not benefit by them. Try them with simple faith and

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 91

in silence for a year before rationalising them.Fifth Knowledge Lecture 91

in silence for a year before rationalising them.

It is better at first to keep your aura to yourself, rather than to try to flow 
out towards others. Unless you are particularly vital and well-balanced, you 
will only waste energy. So-called modes of healing and of ‘doing good to 
others’ should be eschewed for a time. Such methods have a technique of 
their own and required trained and balanced minds and bodies to carry them 
out. Get yourself right first before you attempt to interfere with others in any 
way but the ordinary ways of kindly decent society.

When you have practised the exercise of the Middle Pillar for some time 
and can visualise it easily, you can establish the other Sephiroth.

6. Tattwas—Astrology—Divination. The Tattwas are designed to assist 
you in your researches into the Soul of Nature. They are at first done with a 
senior member, and later can be done alone or with a companion of your 
own Grade. They should never be allowed to become uncontrolled day- 
dreams. The method taught should be strictly adhered to—a definite time, 
preferably in the morning being set aside—and they should not be at- 
tempted when you are feeling tired or when your mind is too occupied with 
other things to let you ‘get away.’ They should not be done too frequently— 
once in three weeks or a month is enough, once a week if time and cir- 
cumstances permit. Notes of the pictures and symbols seen should be kept 
together in a book.

Astrology. This should be done as time permits. The subject is

<183> vast and highly technical, and can be studied fully through the

various schools and correspondence classes if you are interested in

it. From the Order Lectures you should be able to set up a true birth horo-

scope for any place and any time. You can practise setting up horoscopes for

the cases given in Alan Leo’s little book 1001 Notable Nativities and see

whether you can tell for what the horoscope was remarkable. You shouldthe cases given in Alan Leo’s little book 1001 Notable Nativities and see

whether you can tell for what the horoscope was remarkable. You should

attempt the reading of a horoscope for someone you know and then get the

data for someone about whom you know nothing, and see whether you can 
give a reading which satisfies their friends.

The Order requires only that you should be able to set up an accurate 
horoscope and that you should know how to work out the aspects and how to 
make a simple assessment of the good and bad factors in a horary figure. If 
Astrology interests you further, it is a very fascinating field of research.

Divination. You may try to develop your intuition by the use of horary 
and natal astrology, geomancy, and the reading of the Tarot Cards by the 
method given in the small book by Mr. A. E, Waite.

You are advised to attempt only questions in which you are not 
emotionally involved because methods of divination can be a fruitful source 
of self-deception to those who are psychic but not self-knowing. If you are 
given to having intuitions you must learn to say not only ‘I was right about 
that’ but also ‘I was quite wrong about that,’ and if you advertise only suc- 
cesses (as is usual) at the bar of your own conscience, learn to assess 
them honestly.

The interval of time between Portal and © —[&] should be given 
<184> tothe study ofthe whole make-up of yourself. All these methods are 
designed to assist you to get as far as you can along the road to self-

92 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

knowledge.

You are to realise the different layers of your being—some of which you 
have been led through symbolically in the Outer Grades—’Which in one 
sense quitteth not Malkuth”—the Kingdom of yourself.You are to realise the different layers of your being—some of which you 
have been led through symbolically in the Outer Grades—’Which in one 
sense quitteth not Malkuth”—the Kingdom of yourself.

This line of thought, coupled with the study of the Rituals, may lead you 
to realise what it was you gathered together in the first point of the Portal 
Ritual, and what it is you are trying to perfect to lay on the Altar of the 
Spirit.

(Note: The reader or student who is interested particularly in this sub- 
ject of the Sphere of Sensation, or auraas it is called, would be well-advised to 
study very carefully the Order Tarot teaching. There is much in that set of 
documents which concerns the application of the idealogy of the Qabalistic 
Tree of Life to a sphere. In that case the Pillar arrangement becomes slightly 
altered or extended so as to produce 4 Pillars about an invisible axis, the Mid- 
die Pillar. There is also much profound wisdom in the very skeletal at- 
tributions of the five divisions of the Tarot Pack to the surface or parts of the 
solid sphere. The Aces to the North pole, and the 36 decanate Cards to the 
South pole up to the Ecliptic, while in between range the Princess cards 
which are the Thrones of the Aces, the other Court cards, and the Trumps. 
The studied application of this intricate scheme to the extended arrangement

of the Tree of Life, and thence to the human personality and sphere 
<185> in all its branches will yield a wealth of significant material. 
I have also elaborated this scheme in two books. In The Art of 
True Healing I have dealt with the Aura and the Middle Pillar solely from the 
therapeutic point of view. My other book, The Middle Pillar, considers the 
technique froma considerably wider view. Moreover it attempts to associate 
the results of training with the terminology of Analytical Psychology. I. R.)We are told in the Portal that the nine months’ wait which must inter- 
vene before the Portal is again opened for the Aspirant has a correspondence 
to the nine months of gestation before birth. As the unborn child, stage by 
stage, grows through the ancestral history of the race so the Candidate in the 
Portal by a single circumambulation for each, recalls his past Grades and, at 
the end of the first point regards their symbols upon the Altar as parts of his 
body, and contemplates them as coming together in one place—the unity of 
his person.

In the second point, he sacrifices his name—symbol of his idea of him- 
self in order that the idea of a new self and a new consciousness may be 
attained.

This has a correspondence in the birth of a child. It emerges from the 
membranes and placenta which hitherto have been its body and source of 
life and finds itself not ‘dead’ after the dread change, but translated to a 
larger consciousness.

Thus the Portal foreshadows the kind of change and development 
necessary for understanding the symbolism of the =

We do not know what consciousness the unborn child has—how far it

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 93

<186> has choice in its development—through what agency it unfolds the

potencies of its tiny seed and draws to itself the necessary materials 
for growth. The miracle happens—and gives us courage to believe that a 
similar miracle is even now enacting whereby a body will be ready for us 
when this, which seems so real to us, shall share the same fate as the placenta 
and membranes which ‘die’ at our birth.But tradition, as embodied in our Order and shown somewhat less 
directly in the revealed religions, teaches that this development can be assist- 
ed by conscious effort—indeed, that there comes a time when this effort 
must be made through the body and mind we are now endowed with. And 
realising that we are indeed in a Path of Darkness groping for Light, we must 
feel our way to an understanding of the meaning of life—the reason for 
death.

To those who feel the call to make this effort, comes the Order with a 
series of pictures, symbolic of the growth of the soul to new life. The 
meditations given with each Grade are designed to lead the mind towards 
ideas which will assist in self-knowledge—universal impersonal ideas which 
each must find in his own way—‘the secrets which cannot be told save to 
those who know them already.’

The Aspirant is led to look backwards. First he must acknowledge his 
debt to evolution through which has been perfected the instrument wherein 
his mind works and gathers material. Then, through meditation, he is led to 
see himself as not only self-conscious—as one who receives impressions—

one who criticises and watches—one whose will is interfered 
<187> with—one who is misunderstood—one to whom others are ‘per-

sons’ or masks (from Latin Persona, a mask) —but, standing outside 
himself, he now becomes one who endeavours to sense how his mask 
appears to others—sees himself as part of the consciousness of others, as one 
who impresses, one who is criticised and watched, one who interferes with 
the will of others, one who misunderstands.

He may recall periods in his life when his convictions were sure, his 
judgments fark and unjust, his actions shameful, and view himself in that 
picture dispassionately as an entity operative in the give and take of life, 
something growing and as outside the category of blame as is the bitterness 
of unripe fruit.As the knowledge of his place and relative importance in the Universe 
matures, he will attain strength to be honest with himself—ashamed of noth- 
ing he finds in his mind—one watching the antics of his personality with 
tolerant amusement—yet always learning.

He will reflect on words, and the power of words. He will catch himself 
weaving them—twisting their meaning—deceiving himself and others with 
them. He will catch himself under obsession to them—he will see how they 
fix and make possible the recall of events and emotions, and with this knowl- 
edge he will become aware of how his words affect other people.

As he begins to realise the tremendous miracle of words, the magic both 
good and evil of human communion by words, he will begin to grasp why the 
Order reiterates the importance of silence. The true Magician must under- 
stand his tools and, in periods of silence, he must contemplate words as one

94 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

of them. 
As he thus traverses the long road to dispassionate self- 
<188> knowledge, and no longer has to waste energy in doing battle for 
and indulging wounded feelings in defence ofa totally false idea of 
himself, he is led to meditate on the varied symbols of the cross, and from this 
to contemplate the Crucified One, revealed to the West as Jesus of 
Nazareth.

This life and the sayings of Jesus given in the Meditation should be 
studied and pictured in the mind.

The mind must be taught to die to useless churnings over past things 
and vain apprehensions about future things. This is difficult, for human 
phantasies die hard, but once the effort is made, however transient the result, 
it becomes easier with time to replace wasteful thoughts with those that clus- 
ter round a powerful symbol of eternal truth.

As the time for the © =[8] Ceremony approaches, the Aspirant should 
withdraw as far as may be from externals that these symbols may work in 
his mind.As the time for the © =[8] Ceremony approaches, the Aspirant should 
withdraw as far as may be from externals that these symbols may work in 
his mind.

He will find them waiting on the threshold of his mind ready to tell their 
story as he walks about or is occupied in mechanical tasks. Once a place has 
been made for them no ‘time’ is required to develop them. They grow in the 
waste places.

Definite times, too should be set aside for Meditation wherein ideas may 
be formulated as far as possible.

Before going to sleep, the Aspirant should do the Pentagram

<189> Ritual and impress on his mind that he must recall on waking any

teaching that has been given him in dream or vision. This may be

assisted, if on waking, he calls before his mind the Sun rising, thinly 
veiled in clouds.

This should be done at least the week preceding the Grade.

The Ceremony will be a true initiation for the Aspirant only in so far as 
he has prepared himself to receive it.

Like a word, it is a symbol, the communication of whose essence 
depends on the understanding and experience of the recipient.

<190> MEDITATION

LET THE ASPIRANT meditate upon the Cross in its various forms and 
aspects as shown in the Admission Badges throughout the Grades.

Let him consider the necessity and prevalence of sacrifice throughout nature 
and religion.

Let him realise the saying of the Master ‘Whosoever shall save his life shall 
lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life shall save it.’

‘Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone, but if it 
die, it bringeth forth much fruit.’

Let him endeavour to realise his own place and relative importance in the 
Universe, striving to stand outside himself and allowing only such 
claims as he would allow to another.

Let him carefully abstain from talking of himself, his feelings or

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 95

experiences that he may gain continence of speech, and learn to control 
the wasteful activities of his mind.Fifth Knowledge Lecture 95

experiences that he may gain continence of speech, and learn to control 
the wasteful activities of his mind.

Let him contemplate the Sun as thinly veiled in clouds. 
<191> CONCERNING THE TREE OF LIFE

This is the Book of the Path of the Chameleon—the knowledge of the 
colours of the forces which lie beyond the physical universe. Study thou well 
that saying of Hermes ‘that which is below is like that which is above,’ for if 
that which is below is conformed according to the Law of the Concealed 
One—Great is his Name—be thou well assured that the closer thou adherest 
unto the Law of the Universe in thy working, by so much the more is thy 
Magical working just and true.

Recall what was said unto thee in the Ritual of the Paths of the Portal of 
the Vault of the Adepti. ‘Therefore, by the straight and narrow path of 
Samekh, let the Philosophus advance like the arrow from the Bow of 
Qesheth.’ Now Qesheth the Bow is the Rainbow of Promise stretched above 
the earth, whose name is formed from the letters of the Paths leading from 
Malkuth. If then it be by the Path of Samekh that the Philosophus should 
advance to the knowledge of the Adept, turning aside neither unto the right 
hand nor unto the left, whereon are the evil and threatening symbols of 
Death and the Devil, he must have a perfect and absolute knowledge of the 
Bow, ere he can follow the Path of the Arrow. But the Bow is of brilliant and 
perfect colour, whose analysis and synthesis yield others of the same scale, 
and hence is this book entitled “The Book of the Path of the Chameleon” — 
that Path, namely which ascendeth alone through the force of Qesheth,

the Bow, 
And if thy knowledge and application of the outer knowledge, which

thou hast already learned, be faulty and incorrect how wilt thou be 
<192> able to keep thyself from turning aside unto thy hurt? Therefore,thou hast already learned, be faulty and incorrect how wilt thou be 
<192> able to keep thyself from turning aside unto thy hurt? Therefore,

learn not knowledge by rote only as an unreasoning child, but medi- 
tate, search out and compare, and to the end, see that thou think but little of 
thyself—for only he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. Magical know]- 
edge is not given unto thee to tickle thy vanity and conceit, but that by its 
means, thou mayest purify and equilibriate thy spiritual nature and honour 
the Vast and Concealed One.

This is the explanation of the first diagram of the Paths—the Sephiroth 
being in the feminine scale and the Paths in the masculine or King’s scale. It is 
the Key of the Forces which lie in Qesheth the Bow. Treasure it in thy heart 
and mark it well, seeing that therein is the key of nature. Meditate on it and 
reveal it not unto the profane, for many and great are its mysteries.

NOTE: There are four scales of colour which correspond to the Four 
Worlds. They are:

The King Scale Atziluth Wands Yod Fire 
The Queen Scale Briah Cups Heh — Water 
The Prince Scale Yetzirah Swords Vau Air

The Princess Scale Assiah Pentacles Heh Earth

96 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

The Colors differ according to the World or aspect of the Great Name they 
represent:

Thus Samekh in:

The King Scale is Deep Blue 
The Queen Scale is Yellow 
The Prince Scale is Green 
The Princess Scale is Grey Blue

<193> Tiphareth in:

The King Scale is Rose 
The Queen Scale is Gold 
The Prince Scale is Pink 
The Princess Scale is Tawny Yellow

The Tree of Life for the use of an Adeptus Minor is compounded of the 
first two scales. The Sephiroth are in the feminine, passive, or Queen Scale. 
The paths are in the masculine, active, or King Scale. It thus represents the 
forces of Atziluth in the Paths uniting the Sephiroth as reflected in the Briatic 
World, one of the possible arrangements of the powers inherent in Yod He of 
the Great Name.First are the Feminine colours of the Sephiroth, the Queen’s Scale. In 
Kether is the Divine White Brilliance, the scintillation and corruscation of the 
Divine Glory—that Light which lighteth the universe—that Light which sur- 
passeth the glory of the Sun and beside which the light of mortals is but dark- 
ness, and concerning which it is not fitting that we should speak more fully. 
And the Sphere of its Operation is called Rashith Ha-Gilgalim—the beginning 
of whirling (or whirls, or whorls), the Primum Mobile or First Mover, which 
bestoweth the gift of life in all things and filleth the whole Universe. And 
Eheieh is the Name of the Divine Essence in Kether; and its Archangel is the 
Prince of Countenances—Metatron or Metraton, He who bringeth others 
before the face of God. And the Name of its Order of Angels is called Chaioth 
ha-Qadesh, the Holy Living Creatures, which are also called the Order of 
Seraphim.

In Chokmah is a cloud-like grey which containeth various

<194> colours and is mixed with them, like a transparent pearl-hued mist,

yet radiating withal, as if behind it there was a brilliant glory. And

the Sphere of its influence is in Masloth, the Starry Heaven, wherein it dis-

poseth the forms of things. And Yah is the Divine Ideal Wisdom, and its

Archangel is Ratziel, the Prince or Princes of the knowledge of hidden and

concealed things, and the name of its Order of Angels is Auphanim, the

Wheels or the Whirling Forces which are also called the Order of 
Kerubim.

In Binah is a thick darkness which yet veileth the Divine Glory in which 
all colours are hidden, wherein is mystery and depth and silence, and yet, itis 
the habitation of the Supernal Light. There is the Supernal Triad completed. 
And the Sphere of its Operation is Shabbathai, or rest, and it giveth forms and 
similitudes unto chaotic matter and it ruleth the sphere of action of the planet

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 97Fifth Knowledge Lecture 97

Saturn. And Jehovah Elohim is the perfection of Creation and the Life of the 
World to Come. And its Archangel is Tzaphgiel, the Prince of the Spiritual 
Strife against Evil, and the Name of the Order of Angels is Aralim, the Strong 
and Mighty Ones who are also called the Order of Thrones. The Angel 
Jophiel is also referred unto Binah.

In Chokmah is the Radix of blue and thence is there a blue colour pure 
and primitive, and glistening with a spiritual Light which is reflected unto 
Chesed. And the Sphere of its Operation is called Tzedek or Justice and it fash- 
ioneth the images of material things, bestowing peace and mercy; and it ruleth 
the sphere of the action of the planet Jupiter. And Al is the title of a God strong 
<195> and mighty, ruling in Glory, Magnificence and Grace. And the 
Archangel of Chesed is Tzadkiel, the prince of Mercy and Beneficence, 
and the Name of the Order of Angels is Chashmalim Brilliant Ones, 
who are also called the Order of Dominions or Dominations. The Sephira 
Chesed is also called Gedulah or Magnificence and Glory.

In Binah is the Radix of Red, and therein is there a red colour, pure and 
scintillating and flashing with flame which is reflected unto Geburah. The 
Sphere of its Operation is called Madim or violent rushing Force and it 
bringeth fortitude, and war and strength and slaughter, as it were, the flam- 
ing Sword of an avenging God. And it ruleth the Sphere of Action of the 
Planet Mars. And Elohim Gibor is the Elohim, Mighty and Terrible, judg- 
ing and avenging evil, ruling in wrath and terror and storm, and at whose 
steps are lightning and flame. And its Archangel is Kamael the Prince of 
Strength and Courage and the Name of the Order of Angels is Seraphim the 
Flaming Ones who are also called the Order of Powers. The Sephira Chesed 
is also called Gedulah or Magnificense and Glory, and the Sephira Geburah 
is also called Pachad Terror and Fear.In Kether is the Radix of a Golden Glory and thence is there a pure, 
primitive and sparkling, gleaming golden yellow which is reflected unto 
Tiphareth. Thus is the first reflected Triad completed. And the sphere of its 
operation is that of Shemesh, the Solar Light, and bestoweth Life, Light and 
Brilliancy in metallic matter, and it ruleth the sphere of action of the Sun. And 
Yhvh Eloha va-Daath is a God of Knowledge and Wisdom, ruling over the 
<196> Light of the Universe; and its Archangel is Raphael, the Prince of 
Brightness, Beauty and Life. And the Name of the Order of Angels is 
Melechim or Malakim, that is Kings or Angelic Kings, who are also 
called the Order of Virtues, Angels and Rulers. The Angels Peniel and Pelial 
are also referred unto this Sephira. It especially rules the Mineral world.

The beams of Chesed and of Tiphareth meet in Netzach and thence in Net- 
zach arises a green, pure, brilliant, liquid, and gleaming like an emerald. And the 
Sphere of its operations is that of Nogah or External Splendour, producing zeal, 
love, harmony, and it ruleth the Sphere of Action of the Planet Venus and the 
nature of the vegetable World. And Jehovah Tzabaoth is a God of Hosts and of 
Armies, of Triumph and of Victory, ruling the Universe in Justice and Eterni- 
ty. And its Archangel Hanial is the Prince of Love and Harmony, and the Name 
of the Order of Angels is Elohim or Gods who are also called the Order of Prin- 
cipalities. The Angel Cerviel is also referred unto this Sephira.

98 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One98 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

The beams of Geburah and Tiphareth meet in Hod and thence arises in Hod 
a brilliant pure and flashing orange tawny. And the Sphere ofits Operation is 
that of Kokab, the stellar light, bestowing elegance, swiftness, and scientific 
knowledge and art, and constancy of speech, and it ruleth the sphere of the 
action of the planet Mercury. And Elohim Tzabaoth is also a God of Hosts and 
of Armies, of Mercy and of Agreement, of Praise and Honour, ruling the 
Universe in Wisdom and Harmony. And its Archangel is Michael, the Prince 
of Splendour and of Wisdom, and the Name of Order of Angels is Beni Elohim, 
or Sons of the Gods, who are also called the Order of Archangels.

The beams of Chesed and Geburah meet in Yesod and thence 
<197> ariseth in Yesod a brilliant deep violet-purple or puce, and thus is the 
third Triad completed. And the sphere of its operation is that. of 
Levanah, the Lunar beam, bestowing change, increase and decrease upon 
created things and it ruleth the Sphere of Action of the Moon and the nature 
of mankind. And Shaddai is a God who sheddeth benefits, Omnipotent and 
Satisfying, and Al Chai is the God of Life, the Living One. Its Archangel is Gab- 
riel the Prince of Change and Alteration. And the name of the Order of An- 
gels is Kerubim or Kerubic ones who are also called the Order of Angels.And from the rays of this Triad there appear three colours in Malkuth 
together with a fourth which is their synthesis. Thus from the orange tawny 
of Hod and the green nature of Netzach, there goeth forth a certain greenis 
‘citrine’ colour, yet pure and translucent withal. From the orange tawny of 
Hod mingled with the puce of Yesod there goeth forth a certain red russet 
brown, ‘russet’ yet gleaming with a hidden fire. And from the green of Net- 
zach and the puce of Yesod there goeth forth a certain other darkening green 
‘olive’ yet rich and glowing withal. And the synthesis of all these is a black- 
ness which bordereth upon the Qlippoth.

Thus are the colours of the Sephiroth completed in their feminine or 
Rainbow scale.

Moreover, though the Tree of Life operates through all the Ten 
Sephiroth, yet it is referred ina special manner to Tiphareth. Also, though the 
branches of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil stretch into the seven

lower Sephiroth and downwards into the Kingdom of Shells, yet it 
<198> is referred especially unto Malkuth. Similarly with Netzach and 
Hod, the right and left columns of the Sephiroth are referred respec- 
tively thereto. 
n Malkuth, Adonai ha-Aretz is God, the Lord and King, ruling over the 
Kingdom and Empire which is the Visible Universe.

And Cholem Yesodoth the Breaker of Foundations, (or Olam Yesodoth—the 
World of the Elements) is the Name of the Sphere of Operation of Malkuth 
which is called the Sphere of the Elements from which all things are formed, 
and its Archangels are three:—Metatron, the Prince of Countenance reflected 
from Kether, and Sandalphon, the Prince of Prayer (feminine), and Nephesch 
ha Messiah, the Soul of the Reconciler for Earth. And the Order of Angels is 
Ashim or Flames of Fire, as it is written ‘Who maketh his Angels Spirits and 
his Ministers as a flaming Fire,’ and these are also called the Order of Blessed 
Souls, or of the Souls of the Just made Perfect.(Note the Three Archangels attributed to Malkuth with reference to 
Christian symbolism in regard to Our Father, Our Lady, and Our Lord.)

The following table consists of a classification of the scales of colour in 
each of the Four Worlds. The numbers 1-10 refer to the Sephiroth, and those 
from 11-32 inclusive to the Paths.

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 
<199-200-201-202>

YOD—FIRE

King Scale 
(Atsiluth)

Wands

Brilliance 
Soft Blue

Crimson 
Deep Violet

Orange

Clear pink rose 
Amber 
Violet-purple

Indigo 
Yellow

ow DNA mo Ne

= oe 
am

Bright-pale 
yellow

Yellow

Blue

Emerald Green

ao 
m ON

ay 
a

Scarlet 
Red Orange 
‘Orange

re 
SION

mR 
oo

Amber 
Greenish-

Yellow 
Yellowish-Green 
Violet 
Emerald-Green 
Deep blue

_ 
‘oO

NNNN 
WNrR Oo

nN 
>

Green-blue

N 
a

Blue 
Indigo 
Scarlet

NW 
“SIN

N 
ao

Violet

Ultra Violet 
Crimson

Orange

Glowing scarlet- 
Orange

Indigo

Citrine, olive, 
russet black

White, merging 
Grey

Daath Lavender

N 
xo

wo 
PS

wo 
news)

32

99NW 
“SIN

N 
ao

Violet

Ultra Violet 
Crimson

Orange

Glowing scarlet- 
Orange

Indigo

Citrine, olive, 
russet black

White, merging 
Grey

Daath Lavender

N 
xo

wo 
PS

wo 
news)

32

99

THE FOUR COLOUR SCALES 
HEH—WATER VAU—AIR HEH (final) EARTH 
Queen Scale Emperor or Prince Empress or Knave 
(Briah) (Yetsirah) (Assiah) 
Cups Swords Pentacles 
White Brilliance White Brilliance White flecked gold 
Grey Bluish Mother of pearl White flecked red, blue, 
yellow 
Black Dark Brown Grey flecked pink 
Blue Deep Purple Deep azure flecked 
yellow 
Scarlet-red Bright Scarlet Red flecked black 
Yellow (gold) Rich Salmon Gold amber 
Emerald Bright Yellow Green Olive flecked gold 
Orange Red Russet Yellow-brown flecked 
white 
Violet Very Dark purple Citrine flecked azure 
Citrine, olive, 4 colours fl. gold Black rayed yellow 
russet, black 
Sky-blue Blue-emerald green _—_ Emerald flecked gold 
Purple Grey Indigo-rayed violet 
Silver Cold Pale Blue Silver rayed sky-blue 
Sky Blue Early Spring Green Bright rose of cerise 
rayed pale yellow 
Red Brilliant Flame Glowing Red 
Deep Indigo Deep warm olive Rich Brown 
Pale Mauve New yellow Reddish grey inclined 
to mauve 
Maroon Rich bright Russet Dark greenish-brown 
Deep Purple Grey Reddish-amber 
Slate Grey Green Grey Plum Colour 
Blue Rich Purple Bright blue rayed Yellow 
Blue Deep blue green Pale Green 
Sea-Green Deep olive green White flecked purple like 
mother of pearl 
Dull brown Very dark Brown Livid Indigo brown- 
black-beetle 
Yellow Green Dark vivid-blue 
Black Blue black Cold-dark-grey near black 
Red Venetian Red Bright red rayed azure 
or emeral 
Sky blue Bluish Mauve White tinged purple 
Buff flecked Light translucent Stone Colour 
silver-white Pinkish brown 
Gold yellow Rich amber Amber rayed red 
Vermillion Scarlet flecked gold —- Vermillion flecked crimson 
and Emerald 
Black Blue black Black rayed blue 
Amber Dark Brown Black and yellow 
Deep purple 7 prismatic colours. White, red, yellow, blue 
(nearly black) violet outside black (outside) 
Grey White Pure Violet Grey flecked gold100 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One 
<203> THE MICROCOSM—MAN

Thou shalt know that the whole Sphere of Sensation which sur- 
roundeth the whole physical body of a man is called “The Magical Mirror 
of the Universe.” For therein are represented all the occult forces of the Uni- 
verse projected as on asphere, convex to the outer, but concave to man. This 
sphere surroundeth the physical body of a man as the Celestial Heavens 
do the body of a Star or a Planet, having their forces mirrored in its atmos- 
phere. Therefore its allotment or organization is the copy of that Greater 
World or Macrocosm. In this “Magical Mirror of the Universe,” therefore, 
are the Ten Sephiroth projected in the form of the Tree of Life as in a solid 
sphere. (See also the Astronomic view of the Tarot in Part Eight.)

A man’s physical body is within the Ten Sephiroth projected in a 
sphere. The divisions and parts of the body are formed from the Sephi- 
roth of the Tree of Life, thus.

Kether is above the Crown of the Head, and represents a crown 
which indeed is powerful, but requires one worthy to wear it. In the crown 
of the head is placed the faculty of Neschamah, which is the power of Aspi- 
ration unto that which is beyond. This power of Neschamah is especially 
attributed unto the Supernal Triad in Assiah, of which there are three man- 
ifestations which are included in the general concept, Neschamah.

From Chokmah and Binah are formed the sides of the brain and 
head. Therein exist the intellectual faculties of Wisdom and Under- 
standing, shining into and illuminating their inferior, the Ruach. They are 
the mansions of the practical administration of the intellect, whose phys- 
ical shewing forth is by reflection in Ruach, In the Magical Mirror of the 
Universe, or the Sphere of Sensation, Man is placed between four pillars 
of the Tree of Life as projected in a sphere. These keep their place andmove not. But the Man himself places in his Sphere of Sensation 
<204> that point of the Zodiac which ascended at the moment of his birth 
and conception (for the same degree of the Zodiac ascendeth at 
both, otherwise the birth could not take place). That is to say that at those 
times the same degree of the Zodiac is ascending in the East of the Heav- 
ens of the Star whereon he is incarnated. Thus doth he remain during that 
incarnation facing that particular point in his sphere of sensation. That 
is to say, this sphere doth not revolve about the physical body. 
From Chesed and Geburah are formed the arms. Therein exist 
the faculties of operative action, wherefore at their extremities are the 
symbols of the Four Elements and the Spirit, thus:—

Thumb, 0.0.0... cece eee e cece cece nee Spirit 
3rd Finger. .... 0... ce ces cee cneeeeeeeees Fire 
Index Finger....ssseecrecessevceeveves Water 
Little Finger. ........ 0... cece cece eee e es Air 
Second Finger. .......cccsesseccereeees Earth

The arms are the manifestors of the executive power of the Ruach, and 
therein are the faculties of touch strongly expressed.

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 101

From Tiphareth is formed the trunk of the body, free from the 
<205> members, and therein as in a receptacle of influences are situated 
the vital organs.

The blood is Spirit mingled with and governing the watery princi- 
ple. The lungs are the receptacles of Air which tempereth the blood as 
the wind doth the waves of the sea—the mephitic impurities of the blood 
in its traversal of the body requiring the dispersing force of the Air, even 
as the sea, under a calm, doth putrify and become mephitic.

The heart is the great centre of the action of Fire, lending its ter- 
rible energy as an impulse unto the others. Thence cometh from the 
fiery nature the red colour of the blood.The heart is the great centre of the action of Fire, lending its ter- 
rible energy as an impulse unto the others. Thence cometh from the 
fiery nature the red colour of the blood.

The part above the heart is the chief abode of the Ruach, as there 
receiving and concentrating the other expressions of its Sephiroth. This 
part is the central citadel of the body and is the particular abode of the 
lower and more physical will. The higher will is in the Kether of the 
body. For the higher will to manifest, it must be reflected into the lower 
will by Neschamah. This lower will is immediately potent in the lower 
membranes and thus, in the region about the heart, is the lower will seat- 
ed like the King of the body upon its throne.

The concentration of the other faculties of the Ruach in and under 
the presidency of the Will, at the same time reflecting the administrative 
governance of Chokmah and Binah, is what is called the human con-

sciousness. That is, a reflection of two creative Sephiroth under 
<206> the presidency of the Four Elements, or the reflection of Aima and

Abba as the parents of the human Jehovah. But the human 
Neschamah exists only when the higher Will is reflected by the agency 
of aspiration from Kether into the lower body, and when the flaming let- 
ter Shin is placed like a crown on the head of Microprosopus. Thus only 
doth the human will become the receptacle of the higher Will and the 
action of Neschamah is the link therewith. The lower will is the human 
Jehovah—an angry and jealous God, the Shaker of the Elements, the 
manifestor in the life of the body. But illuminated by the higher Will, he 
becometh Yeheshuah, no longer angry and jealous, but the self-sacrificer 
and the Atoning and Reconciling One.

This as regards the action of the more physical man.This as regards the action of the more physical man.

Unto this Ruach also are presented the reflections of the Macrocos- 
mic Universe in the Sphere of Sensation. They surround the Ruach 
which, in the natural man, feeleth them but vaguely and comprehendeth 
them not. The faculties of the Earth are shown forth in the organs which 
digest and putrify, casting forth the impurities, even as the Earth is 
placed above the Qlipoth.

Thou wilt say, then, that the Ruach cannot be the reasoning 
mind, seeing that it reflecteth its reason from Chokmah and Binah— 
but it is the executive faculty which reasoneth, which worketh with 
and combineth the faculties reflected into it. The reasoning mind, 
therefore, is that which useth and combineth the Principia of Chokmah 
and Binah so that the parts of Chokmah and Binah which touch 
the Ruach are the initiators of the reasoning power. The reason itself 
is a process and but a simulacrum of the action of the higher 
Wisdom and Understanding. For the Air is not the Light—only the

102 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

<207> translator of the Light. Yet without the Air, the operations of the

Light could not so well be carried out. The word Ruach, Spirit, also 
meaneth Air. It is like a thing that goeth out thou knowest not whither, and 
cometh in thou knowest not whence. |

‘The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, 
but canst not tell whence it cometh nor whither it goeth. So is every one that 
is born of the Spirit.’

This Air, the Ruach, permeateth the whole physical body but its concen- 
trated influence is about the heart. Yet, were it not for the boundary force of 
Chokmah and Binah above, of the sphere of sensation surrounding it, and of 
Malkuth below, the Ruach could not concentrate under the presidency of the 
Name, and the life of the body would cease.

Thus far concerning the Ruach as a whole, that is, the action of the 
Will in Tiphareth.Thus far concerning the Ruach as a whole, that is, the action of the 
Will in Tiphareth.

From Netzach and Hod are formed the thighs and legs, and they ter- 
minate in the symbols of five, as do the arms; but they are not so moveable, 
owing to the effect of Malkuth. In them are placed the faculties of support and 
firmness and balance; and they show the more physical qualities of the 
Ruach. In them is the sustaining force of the Ruach. They are the affirmation of 
the Pillars of the Sephiroth, as answering to the Passive, the arms more 
answering to the two pillars which are Active. They are the columns of the 
Human Temple.

From Yesod are formed the generative and excretory organs, 
<208> and therein is the seat of the lower desires, as bearing more on the 
double nature of, on the one hand, the rejection of the Qlippoth, and 
onthe other hand the simulacrum of the vital forces in Tiphareth. It is the spe- 
cial seat of the automatic consciousness. That is, not the Will, but the simulac- 
rum of the Will in Tiphareth. Yesod is the lowest of the Sephiroth of the 
Ruach, and. representeth “Fundamental Action.” It therefore governeth 
generation. In Yesod is therefore the automatic consciousness or simulac- 
rum of the Will. This automatic consciousness is to the Nephesch what the 
Daath action is to the Ruach. Thus, therefore, there being a simulacrum or 
reflection of the heart and vital organs in the parts governed by Yesod, if the 
consciousness of the Tiphareth be given unto this wholly, it shall pave the 
way for disease and death. For this will be a withdrawing of the vital forces of 
the Name, which are in the citadel of Tiphareth, to locate them in Yesod, 
which is a more easily attacked position. For the automatic consciousness is 
the translator of the Ruach unto the Nephesch.From Malkuth is formed the whole physical body under the command 
and presidency of the Nephesch. The Nephesch is the subtle body of refined 
astral Light upon which, as on an invisible pattern, the physical body is extend- 
ed. The physical body is permeated throughout by the rays of the Ruach, of 
which it is the material completion. The Nephesch shineth through the 
Material body and formeth the Magical Mirror or Sphere of Sensation. This 
Magical Mirror or Sphere of Sensation is an imitation or copy of the Sphere

of the Universe. The space between the physical body and the 
<209> boundary of the sphere of Sensation is occupied by the ether of the 
astral world; that is to say, the container or recipient of the Astral

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 103

Rays of the Macrocosm.

The Nephesch is divided into its seven Palaces, combining the 
Sephirotic influences in their most material forms. That is, the world of 
passions dominated by the Ruach, or by the world which is beyond. That 
is, its Sephiroth are passionate, expressing a passionate dominion. Thus, 
its three Supernal Sephiroth, Kether, Chokmah and Binah, are united in 
a sense of feeling and comprehending impressions. Its Chesed is 
expressed by laxity of action. Its Geburah by violence of action. Its 
Tiphareth is expressed by more or less sensual contemplation of beauty, 
and love of vital sensation. Its Hod and Netzach, by physical well-being 
and health. Its Yesod, by physical desires and gratifications. Its Malkuth, 
by absolute increase and domination of matter in the material body..

The Nephesch is the real, the actual body, of which the material 
body is only the result through the action of Ruach, which by the aid of 
the Nephesch, formeth the material body by the rays of Ruach, which do 
not ordinarily proceed beyond the limits of the physical body. That is to 
say, in the ordinary man the rays of Ruach rarely penetrate into the sphere 
of Sensation.Shining through infinite worlds, and darting its rays through the

confines of space, in this Sphere of Sensation is a faculty placed 
<210> even as a light is placed within a lantern. This is a certain sense

placed in an aperture of the upper part of the Ruach wherein act

the rays from Chokmah and Binah which govern the reason— 
Daath. This faculty can be thrown downwards into the Ruach, and 
thence can radiate into the Nephesch. It consists of seven manifestations 
answering to the Hexagram, and is like the Soul of Microprosopus or the 
Elohim of the human Tetragrammaton. Therefore in the head, which is 
its natural and chief seat, are formed the seven apertures of the head. This 
is the Spiritual Consciousness as distinct from the human consciousness. 
It is manifested in 7 as just said or in 8 if Daath be included. The Father 
is the Sun (Chokmah). The mother is the Moon (Binah). The wind 
beareth it in his bosom (Ruach). Its Nurse is the Earth (Nephesch). The 
power is manifested when it can be vibrated through the Earth.

The following is the true attribution of the seven apertures of the 
head:

Right Ear....... Saturn Left Ear........ Jupiter 
Right Eye...... Sol Left Eye........ Luna 
Mouth......... Mercury (who is the messenger of the Gods)

Right Nostral.. .Mars Left nostral.... Venus

These latter represent here the sonoriferous sense. The right and left eye, 
the luminous sense, as the Sun and Moon are the luminaries of-the 
Macrocosm. The right and left nostrils through which the breath pass- 
es, giving strength to the physical body, are under Mars and Venus. The 
mouth is under Mercury, the messenger and the Speaker.

This spiritual consciousness is a focus of the action of Neschamah. The 
lower will-power should control the descent of this spiritual consciousness

104 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book OneThis spiritual consciousness is a focus of the action of Neschamah. The 
lower will-power should control the descent of this spiritual consciousness

104 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

into the Ruach, and thence into the Nephesch, for the consciousness must 
<211> descend into the Nephesch before the images of the Sphere of Sensation

can be perceived. For it is only the rays of this consciousness permeat- 
ing the Ruach that can take cognizance thereof, This faculty of the spiritual con- 
sciousness is the seat of Thought. Thought is a Light proceeding from the 
radiation of this spiritual consciousness, traversing the Ruach as Light traver- 
seth Air, and encountering thereafter the symbols reflected in the sphere of Sen- 
sation, or magical mirror of the Universe. These symbols are by its radiation (i.e. 
that of the Thought) reflected again into the Spiritual Consciousness where they 
are subjected unto the action of the Reasoning Mind and of the Lower Will. That 
is, in the ordinary natural man when awake, the thought acteth through the 
Ruach, subject when there to the action of the Lower Will, and submitted to the 
reasoning power derived as aforesaid from Chokmah and Binah. But in the ordi- 
nary man when sleeping, and in the madman, the idiot, and the drunkard, the 
process is not quite the same. In the sleeping man, the concentration of the Ruach 
in his heart during the waking time hath produced a weakening of the action of 
the Ruach in its subsidiary Sephiroth in the Physical Body. To preserve the salu- 
tary conjunction of the Ruach with the Nephesch in the physical body (whose lim- 
its are fixed by the Sephiroth of the Ruach) it is necessary to weaken the 
concentration in Tiphareth to repair the strain which is produced by the concen- 
tration of the Ruach therein during the waking state. This reflux of the Ruach intoits subsidiary Sephiroth produceth naturally a weakening of the Lower 
<212> Will; and the Ruach, therefore, doth not reflect so clearly the Reasoning

Faculty. Wherefore, the thought of the spiritual consciousness reflecteth 
the image in a confused series, which are only partially realised by the lower will. 
(This is as regards the ordinary natural man in sleep.)

In the madman, as considered apart from obsession (thought-obsession is 
frequently the accompaniment of mania, and still more frequently its cause) the 
thought and lower will are very strongly exercised to the detriment of the rea- 
soning faculty. That is, that there is an alliance between the two former which 
overpowereth the action of Chokmah and Binah in the latter.

Monomania is shown in the consideration of only one certain symbol 
which is too attractive to the Will. A chain of thought is therefore simply a grad- 
uated vibration arising from the contact of a ray of thought with a symbol. If con- 
trolled by the reasoning power and licensed by the Will, such vibrations will be 
balanced and of equal length. But if uncontrolled by the lower Will and the Rea- 
son, they will be unbalanced and inharmonious. (That is, of uneven length.)

In the case of the drunkard, the equilibrium of the Sphere of Sensation 
and consequently of the Nephesch, is disturbed. In consequence the thought 
rays are shaken at each vibration, so that the sphere of sensation of the Neph- 
esch is caused to rock and waver at the extremities of the Physical Body where 
the Ruach action is bounded. The thought therefore is dazzled by the sym- 
bols of the Sphere of Sensation, in the same way as the eyes can be dazzled 
in front of a mirror if the latter be shaken or waved. The sensation

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 105

<213> therefore then conveyed by the thoughts is that of the Sphere ofFifth Knowledge Lecture 105

<213> therefore then conveyed by the thoughts is that of the Sphere of

Sensation oscillating and almost revolving about the physical body, 
bringing giddiness, sickness, vertigo and the loss of idea of place and posi- 
tion. Nearly the same may be said of Seasickness, and the action of cer- 
tain drugs.

Restoration of the equilibrium of the Sphere of Sensation after this 
naturally produceth a slackening of the concentration of the Ruach in 
Tiphareth, whence sleep is an absolute necessity to the drunkard. This is so 
imperative that he cannot fight against the need. If he does so, or if this condi- 
tion be constantly repeated, the thought rays are launched through the 
Sphere of Sensation so irregularly and so violently that they pass its bound- 
ary without either the lower Will or the Reasoning Power or even the 
Thought itself consenting thereto; and the latter is therefore without the pro- 
tection of the will. Thence arise the conditions of delirium tremens, and an 
opening is made in the Sphere of Sensation which is unguarded, and 
through which hostile influences may enter. But this latter cometh under the 
head of obsession.

All thought action in the spiritual consciousness originateth in radia- 
tion, and radiation is as inseparable from the spiritual consciousness as it is 
from Light.

This Spiritual Consciousness is the focus of the action of Neschamah. The 
spiritual consciousness is, in its turn, the Throne or Vehicle of the Life of the 
Spirit which is Chiah; and these combined form the Chariot of that Higher 
Will which is in Kether. Also it is the peculiar faculty of Neschamah to aspire 
unto that which is beyond. The Higher Will manifests itself through Yechidah.

The Chigh is the real Life Principle, as distinct from the more 
<214> illusionary life of the Physical Body. The Shining Flame of theThe Chigh is the real Life Principle, as distinct from the more 
<214> illusionary life of the Physical Body. The Shining Flame of the

Divine Fire, the Kether of the Body, is the Real Self of the Incarnation. 
Yet but few of the sons of men know it or feel its presence. Still less do they 
believe in or comprehend those Higher Potencies—Angelic, Archangelic or 
Divine, of which the manifestation directly touching Yechidah is the 
Higher Genius.

This Yechidah in the ordinary man can butrarely act through the spiritual 
consciousness, seeing that for it to do so the King of the Physical Body, that is 
the Lower Will, must rise from his Throne to acknowledge his superior. That 
is the reason why, in some cases, in sleep only doth the Higher Will manifest 
itself by dream unto the ordinary man. In other cases it may be manifested; at 
times through the sincere practice of religious rites, or in cases where the 
opportunity for self-sacrifice occurreth. In all these cases the Lower Will hath 
for a moment recognised a higher form of itself, and the YHVH of the man 
hath reflected from the Eternal Lord of the Higher Life. This Yechidah is the 
only part of the man which can truly say—EHEIEH, lam. This is then but the 
Kether of the Assiah of the Microcosm, that is, it is the highest part of man as 
Man. It is that which toucheth, or is the manifestation ofa higher and greater 
range of Being. This Yechidah is at the same time the Higher Human Selfand 
the Lower Genius, the God of the Man, the Atziluth of his Assiah, even as 
Chiah and Neschamah form his Briah, and Ruach his Yetzirah. This is the 
Higher Will and the Divine Consciousness, as Daath is the Spiritual Con-

106 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One106 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

sciousness, Tiphareth the Human Consciousness, and Yesod the Auto- 
matic Consciousness. 
Itis the Divine Consciousness because it is the only part of man 
<215> whichcan touch the All-potent forces. Behind Yechidah are Angelic 
and Archangelic Forces of which Yechidah is the manifestor. It is 
therefore the Lower Genius or Viceroy of the Higher Genius which is 
beyond, an Angel Mighty and Terrible. This Great Angel is the Higher 
Genius, beyond which are the Archangelic and Divine.

Recall the Tiphareth clause of an Adeptus Minor: “I further solemnly 
promise and swear that with the divine permission I will from this day for- 
ward apply myself unto the Great Work which is so to purify and exalt my 
spiritual nature, that with the Divine Aid I may at length attain to be more 
than Human, and thus gradually raise and unite myself to my Higher and 
Divine Genius, and thatin this event, I will not abuse the great power entrust- 
ed unto me.”

Note that this clause answereth unto Tiphareth, seeing that it is the 
Lower Will that must apply itself unto this work, because it is the King of the 
Physical Man. All the Shining Ones (whom we call Angels) are microcosms 
of the Macrocosm Yetzirah, even as Man is the microcosm of the Macrocosm 
of Assiah. All Archangelic forms are microcosms of the Macrocosm of Briah, 
and the Gods of the Sephiroth are consequently the Microcosms of the Mac- 
rocosm of Atziluth, Therefore apply this perfecting of the Spiritual Nature as 
tne preparation of the Pathway oe the Shining Light, the Light Divine.

The evil persona of a man isin the Sphere of the Qlippoth, and the devils

are the Microcosms of the Macrocosm of the Qlippoth. This evil per- 
<216> sona hath its parts and divisions, and of it the part which touchethare the Microcosms of the Macrocosm of the Qlippoth. This evil per- 
<216> sona hath its parts and divisions, and of it the part which toucheth

the Malkuth of the Nephesch is its Kether. Tremble therefore at the 
evil forces which be in thy own evil persona. And as above the Kether of a 
Man are his Angelic and other forms, so below the Malkuth of the Evil Per- 
sona are awful forms, dangerous even to express or think of.

<217> TASK UNDERTAKEN BY THE 
ADEPTUS MINOR

This, then, is the task to be undertaken by the Adeptus Minor. To expel 
from the Sephiroth of the Nephesch the usurpation by the evil Sephiroth; to 
balance the action of the Sephiroth of the Ruach in those of the Nephesch. To 
prevent the Lower Will and Human Consciousness from falling into and 
usurping the place of the Automatic Consciousness. To render the King of 
the Body, the Lower Will, obedient to and anxious to execute the commands 
of the Higher Will, that he be neither a usurper of the faculties of the Higher, 
nor a sensual despot—but an Initiated Ruler, and an anointed King, the 
viceroy and representative of the Higher Will, because inspired thereby, in 
his Kingdom which is man. Then shall it happen that the Higher Will, i.e. the 
Lower Genius, shall descend into the Royal Habitation, so that the Higher 
Will and the Lower Will shall be as one, and the Higher Genius shall descend 
into the Kether of the Man, bringing with him the tremendous illumination 
of his Angelic Nature. And the Man shall become what is said of Enoch. “And

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 107

Chanokh made himself to walk with God, and he was not, for God took him.” 
(Genesis, V. v. 24.)Fifth Knowledge Lecture 107

Chanokh made himself to walk with God, and he was not, for God took him.” 
(Genesis, V. v. 24.)

Then also this shalt thou know, that the Nephesch of the Man shall 
become as the Genius of the Evil Persona, so that the evil persona itself shall 
be as the power of the Divine in the Qlippoth, as it is said: “Whither shall I go 
from thy Spirit, or whither from thy Presence shall I flee? If J ascend up to 
Heaven, thou art there. If I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there.” 
(Ps. cxxxix.)

Therefore even the Evil Persona is not so evil when it fulfileth 
<218> its work. For it is the beginning of a dim reflection of the Light unto 
the Qlippoth, and this is what is hidden in the saying that “Typhon is 
the brother of Osiris.” Hear thou, then, a mystery of the knowledge of evil. 
The © =[6] Ritual of the Adeptus Minor saith that even the “Evil helpeth for- 
ward the Good.” When the evil Sephiroth are expelled from the Nephesch 
into the Evil Persona, they are, in a sense, equilibriated therein. The evil per- 
sona can be rendered as a great and strong, yet trained, animal whereupon 
the man rideth, and it then becometh a strength unto his physical base of 
action. This Mystery shalt thou keep from the knowledge of the First Order, 
and still more from that of the Outer World, that is as a formula, seeing that it 
is a dangerous secret.

Now then shalt thou begin to understand the saying “He descended into 
Hell,” and also to comprehend in part this strength, and thus begin to under- 
stand the necessity of evil unto the material creation. Wherefore, also, revile 
not overmuch the evil forces, for they have also a place and a duty, and in this 
consisteth their right to be. But check their usurpation, and cast them down 
unto their plane. Unto this end, curse them by the mighty names if need be, 
but thou shalt not revile them for their condition, for thus also shalt thou be 
led into error.There is also a great mystery that the Adeptus Minor must know, 
viz.:

How the spiritual consciousness can act around and beyond the sphere 
of Sensation. “Thought” is a mighty force when projected with all the 
strength of the lower Will under the guidance of the reasoning faculty and

illuminated by the Higher Will. Therefore, it is that, in thy occult 
<219> working, thou art advised to invoke the Divine and Angelic Names,

so that thy Lower Will may willingly receive the influx of the Higher 
Will, which is also the Lower Genius behind which are the all-potent forces. 
This, therefore, is the magical manner of operation of the Initiate when “skry- 
ing” in the spirit vision. Through his own arcane wisdom, he knows the dis- 
position and correspondences of the Forces of the Macrocosmos. Selecting 
not many, but one symbol, and that balanced and with its correlatives, then 
sendeth he a thought-ray from his Spiritual Consciousness, illuminated by 
his Higher Will, directly unto the part of his Sphere of Sensation which is 
consonant with the symbol employed. There, as ina mirror, doth he perceive 
its properties as reflected from the Macrocosmos, shining forth into the 
Infinite Abyss of the Heavens. Thence can he follow the ray of reflection 
therefrom, and while concentrating his united consciousness at that point of 
his sphere of sensation, can receive the direct reflection of the ray from the

108 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One108 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

Macrocosmos. Thus receiving the direct ray as then reflected into his 
Thought, he can unite himself with the ray of his Thought so as to make one 
continuous ray from the corresponding point of the Macrocosmos unto the 
centre of his consciousness. If, instead of concentrating at that actual point of 
the sphere of Sensation he shall retain the thought-ray only touching the 
sphere of sensation at that point, he shall, it is true, perceive the reflection of 
the Macrocosmic Ray answering to that symbol in the sphere of his Con- 
sciousness. But he shall receive this reflection tinctured much by his own

nature, and therefore to an extent untrue, because his united con- 
<220> sciousnesses have not been able to focus along the thought-ray at

the circumference of the Sphere of sensation. And this is the reason 
why there are so many and multifarious errors in untrained spirit visions. For 
the untrained seer, even supposing him free from the delusions of obsession, 
doth not know or understand how to unite his consciousnesses and the har- 
monies between his own sphere of sensation, and the universe, the mac- 
rocosmos. Therefore is it so necessary that the Adeptus Minor should 
correctly understand the principia and axiomata of our secret knowledge, 
which are contained in our Rituals and Lectures.

OF TRAVELING IN THE SPIRIT VISIONOF TRAVELING IN THE SPIRIT VISION

The symbol, place, direction, or Plane being known whereon it is 
desired to act, a thought-ray as before is sent unto the corresponding part of 
the Sphere of Sensation of the Nephesch. The Thought-Ray is sent like an 
arrow from the bow, right through the circumference of the Sphere of Sensa- 
tion direct unto the place desired. Arrived there, a sphere of astral Light is 
formed by the agency of the Lower Will, illuminated by the Higher Will, and 
acting through the spiritual consciousness by reflection along the Thought- 
Ray. This sphere of Astral Light is partly drawn from the surrounding atmos- 
phere. This sphere being formed, a simulacrum of the person of the Skryeris 
reflected into it along the thought-ray, and this united consciousness is then 
projected therein. This Sphere is then a duplicate, by reflection, of the 
Sphere of Sensation. As it is said: “Believe thyself to be ina place and thou art 
there.” In this Astral Projection, however, a certain part of the consciousness

must remain in the body to protect the Thought-Ray beyond the 
<221> Sphere of Sensation (as well as the Sphere itself at that point of

departure of the Thought-Ray) from attack by any hostile force, so 
that the consciousness in this projection is not quite so strong as the con- 
sciousness when concentrated in the natural body in ordinary life. The 
return taketh place with a reversal of this process, and save to persons whose 
Nephesch and physical body are exceptionally strong and healthy, the whole 
operation of skrying and traveling in the Spirit Vision is of course fa- 
tiguing.

Also there is another mode ofastral projection which can be used by the 
more practised and advanced Adept. This consisteth in forming firsta sphere 
from his own Sphere of Sensation, casting his reflection therein, and then 
projecting this whole sphere to the desired place, as in the previous method.

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 109Fifth Knowledge Lecture 109

But this is not easy to be done by any but the practised operator.

Thus far, regarding Skrying and Travelling in the Spirit Vision.

(These instructions are considerably amplified with practical examples 
in a later volume dealing with Astral vision and clairvoyance. I. R.)

<222> CONCERNING THE MICROCOSMS 
OF MACROCOSM

As thou well knowest there be many and numberless other inhabitants 
of the Macrocosmos besides Man, Angels, and Devils. The animals are 
microcosms in a sense, yet not so complete as man. In them are many and 
great mysteries. They also have their magical mirror or sphere of sensation. 
But its polarisation is usually horizontal rather than perpendicular, and this is 
owing to the Sephiroth not being shown therein. This Sphere, then, is not 
bounded by the Sephirothic columns, but they are especially governed by 
the Stellar System without the Sephiroth. They are therefore ruled by the 
Paths, rather than by the Sephiroth, and are consequently classed each under 
an Element or a Planet, anda Sign. Thus each followeth a formula which may 
be translated into letters, and these again forma vibratory name. As it is writ- 
ten: “And Adam gave names unto all the cattle and to the fowl of the air, and 
to every beast of the field.” (Gen. II, v. 20.) Yet they are ruled by the name 
YHVH, though classed rather by one or more of its letters:

Thus, Fish, etc., are under the influence of Water 
Birds are under the influence of Air 
Quadrupeds are under the influence of Fire 
Creeping things and insects are under the influence of Earth

There are some which partake of two elements, but in them one element 
is usually chief, and besides the Elements, each is under a Planet and a 
Sign.

The vegetable kingdom is again under a somewhat different 
<223> Law. These are undera Planet anda Sign, a planet first differentiated 
by a Sign.The vegetable kingdom is again under a somewhat different 
<223> Law. These are undera Planet anda Sign, a planet first differentiated 
by a Sign.

The Mineral Kingdom is under the Signs only. Vegetables have a Sphere 
of Sensation, but corresponding only to the Planets and Zodiacal Signs. The 
Minerals have also a Sphere which correspondeth unto the Signs only. But 
the metals are under the Planets only, and therein is the difference between 
them and the Minerals, wherefore also are they stronger. Shining Stones are 
especially under the Light; and they are, as it were, centres for the action 
thereof in the darkness of matter, as it is said: “My lightis concealed in all that 
shineth.” (This passage is believed to be from the Zend-Avesta.) They are 
therefore under the rule of the three active elements with an earthy base.

Shining through all things as a whole, are the rays of the Macrocosmos. 
Besides these classes of life there be multitudinous existences representing 
Forces of the Macrocosm, each with its own microcosm. Such are Elemental 
Spirits, Planetary Spirits, Olympic Spirits, Fays, Arch-Fays, Genii, and many 
other potencies which cannot be classed under these forms.

110 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book One

Thus the Macrocosmic Universe is one vast infinite sphere contain- 
ing so many and diverse infinite microcosmic forms, of which the perfect 
knowledge is only known unto the advanced Adept.

Also it shall here suffice to say that thou shalt make a distinction 
between the Four-handed race (the quadrumana, Apes and monkeys) which

be midway between Man and Beast and other animals. For they be 
<224> neither the one or the other, but are the fallen and debased resultbe midway between Man and Beast and other animals. For they be 
<224> neither the one or the other, but are the fallen and debased result

of a most ancient magical effect to formulate a material and imme- 
diate link between the human and animal microcosms. This is elsewhere 
treated of, and it shall here be sufficient to say that they are not an ascent, 
from the beast unto the Man, but a mistaken magical fall from a man unto 
a beast. Anciently they were a terrible power upon this planet, as then hav- 
ing more of the man than of the animal, whereas now they have more of the 
animal than of Man. The ancient traditions of their primal conditions are 
preserved unto this day in the legends of ogres and, in certain records, can- 
nhibalism and its rites. __

Regarding the beasts, they are, for the most part, easily obsessed, 
and they have not the spiritual responsibility of the man. Their nature is 
not evil, but, following a natural law—seeing that man is head of the Assi- 
atic creation—so the animal is higher than the vegetables or mineral. Also 
bear thou well in mind that the race of the transformers are given unto cru- 
elty. Such are above all the race of creeping things. As Man hath his Ruach 
which is upright in the Tree of Life, so hath the beast his Ruach which is 
horizontal; as it is said: “The Ruach of a man which goeth upwards (i.e, 
directeth itself upwards), and the Ruach of the beast which goeth down- 
wards (or crosswise) in the Earth.” The Neschamah in the Beast is not. The 
beast consisteth of a Ruach and a Nephesch with a rudimentary Daath or 
Spiritual Consciousness. This Daath ever seeketh that which is beyond it 
and thence are beasts not responsible, but are submitted unto obsession, 
and herein is a great mystery. Man, therefore, is placed at the head of the 
beasts. Woe, woe, unto him if he teacheth their elementary Daath cruel-ty and injustice instead of mercy and justice. For the Man is a God 
unto the Beast, and the aspiration of the Beast is toward the Man, 
and great is the office of the Beast, for he prepareth the foundation 
for the man. Man is responsible for creation, and since he was orig- 
inally placed in creation to be its Lord, as he is, so will the creation fol- 
low him. And thus it is possible for the Genius of a Nation to change the 
climate of a country, and the nature of the beasts therein. Men fell from 
primal estate, and then they who were formless became imaged in form, 
deformed. And this is a mystery of the Demonic Plane which entereth not 
into this section.

The Elemental Spirits and others of their kind are an organisation not 
quite so complete as man. In spiritual consciousness more keen, and yet in 
some ways his spiritual superior though organically his inferior. They are 
the formers of the primal Man, that is the Elementary Man, and they have 
other and greater offices, for in them are many worlds and ranks and 
spheres. They are as the younger man (i.e. child) and towards them also is 
Man responsible, and he hath wrought them much injustice.

<225>

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 111 
<226> OF OBSESSION, TRANCE, DEATH<225>

Fifth Knowledge Lecture 111 
<226> OF OBSESSION, TRANCE, DEATH

Obsession always entereth through a cutting off of the Higher from the 
Lower Will, and it is ordinarily first induced bya Thought-Ray of the Spiritual 
consciousness (whence one danger of evil thoughts) ill-governed, penetrat- 
ing the Sphere of Sensation and admitting another potency, either human 
embodied, or human disembodied, elemental or demonic. The first action of 
such a force is to flatter the lower will, until he shall have established firmly 
an entrance into the Sphere of Sensation, and thus shall cause a strain on the 
Nephesch which shall render the Ruach less concentrated. As soon as the 
Ruach is sufficiently dispersed to repair the strain on the physical body, the 
lower will is weakened, and is soon seized upon and bound by the invader. 
Whence arise the sensations of chill and drowsiness which are the usual 
forerunners of obsession. Now to yield the force necessary to overpower the 
lower will from any chance of communication with the higher the obsessing 
idea proceeds by seizing upon the Daath, and this consequently is the great 
point of attack, especially the part in the physical body which is at the back of 
the head about the junction with the Spine. Now unless the lower Will shall 
voluntarily endeavour to restore the connection, it is impossible for the 
Higher Will to intervene, seeing that the Lower Will is King of the Physical 
Body. Remember that no obsessing force can overpower the lower will, if 
rat shall bravely and in spite of all opposition aspire unto the Higher 
Will.

Trance may arise from the action of obsession, or from the ac- 
<227> tion of the Higher Will, therefore its aspects are varied.Trance may arise from the action of obsession, or from the ac- 
<227> tion of the Higher Will, therefore its aspects are varied.

Death superveneth in the natural man, when the mental action 
of the Ruach and the Nephesch is definitely and thoroughly interrupted in 
the physical body. In the Adept death can only supervene when the Higher 
aegonsemteth thereto, and herein is implied the whole Mystery of the Elixir 
of Life.

End of Volume One

The Lid of the Pastos

112

BOOK TWO

RITUALS OF THE FIRST ORDER 
THE STELLA MATUTINA 
OR 
GOLDEN DAWN

113

114 The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

INTRODUCTION TO THE NEOPHYTE CEREMONY 
GOD FORMS AND STATIONS IN THE@= fo]

The Opening of the Hall of the Neophytes and the Ceremony of Initi- 
ation into the @)= [0] Grade describe the essential formula of the Outer 
Order work and set in motion the energies necessary for the aspirant's 
spiritual growth. The setting is Ancient Egyptian, particularly based upon 
the 125th Chapter of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, and the © = [O)Hall is 
also called “The Hall of Maat,” the “Hall of Two Truths”, and the “Hall 
of Dual Manifestation.” The Hall of Maat is the scene for the weighing 
of the Soul where the crucial judgment of the deceased is made. Just as 
the deceased Ani's soul hangs in the balance, the soul and aspiration of 
the candidate for @ = [0] Grade of Neophyte hang between light and 
dark, evolution or devolution.

The numerous gods of the Egyptian judgment are represented in the 
©) = [aby the stations of the officers, their functions and movements in 
the temple. These stations and the god-forms attributed are fully 
described in the “Z” documents (later chapters in this book).! All are 
well worth the time to read carefully—”’. .. therefore learn not as an 
unreasoning child, but meditate, search out and compare,.. .”*Besides the seven officers and their corresponding god-forms, there 
are Invisible Stations, with associated deities, which do not move in the 
temple and are very significant as representing the balance of opposing 
forces in the Hall of Two Truths. The Invisible Station corresponding to 
the Yesod, the 9th Sephirah on the Tree of Life, immediately East of the 
Altar which is in the upper region of Malkuth in the © = [0] temple, is the 
abode of a Set-like god-form associated with the Evil Triad and at the 
same time with a dark reptilian god associated with Typhon (see descrip- 
tion of three in one, in “Z. 3.” He is the Accusor, the Evil Genius, who 
would bind the candidate’s soul in darkness with forces of the Qlippoth. 
In the Neophyte Initiation the Accusor rises from the base of the Altar at 
the time of the soul’s greatest danger. During this vulnerable time, four 
Invisible Stations attributed to the Sons of Horus® protect the vital 
organs, symbolic of the essential life forces, until after the Oath has been 
taken and judgment has been passed.

Before the Hierophant administers the Oath he leaves the Throne 
of the East. The god-form of Osiris, represented by the Hierophant on 
the Throne, remains there maintaining the balance of forces in the 
temple. As the Hierophant passes between the Pillars on the way to 
the Altar, he assumes a second form of his Office which is having 
consented to take the obligation, is unprepared for this most delicate

hase of initiation. Thrice bound and hoodwinked, the seeker is 
raver than he knows, uninitiated and in ignorance, totally depen- 
dent on the surrounding balance of forces. The Hierophant’s Office 
now represents the candidate’s Higher and Divine Genius, which in 
his blindness he cannot realize himself. Standing upon the Station of 
Typhon/Set during the weighing of the soul, the Hierophant, as theVol. 3 Book 5, pages 81 and 152. 
2Quoted from Vol. 1 Book 1 Concerning the Tree of Life. 
3Vol. 3 Book 5, p. 124 The Canopic Gods

Neophyte Ritual 115

Higher Self, steps upon and keeps down the Evil Triad until the danger 
is passed. However “well prepared” or knowledgeable before initiation, 
the critical choice of the aspirant's soul is the same for everyone, and is 
especially equal in the equilibrating system of the Golden Dawn.

Also present for the judgement, disappearing after the Oath, are the 
Invisible Stations of the 42 Assessors. These god-forms are more like 
accusors than assessors, as the deceased in the Book of the Dead is 
required to deny to each one of them a particular crime or fault in the 
"Negative Confession." In the © = [0] temple these gods are represented 
through visualization by the officers, reinforced by other members pre- 
sent. Contemplation of these and the other god-forms and stations will 
enhance experience of the ceremony and facilitate the establishing of the 
Neophyte energies in all participants.

THE TREE OF LIFE IN THE TEMPLES OF THE OUTER ORDER

The representation of the Tree of Life in the Outer Order temples 
reflects the harmony and balance of that simple and infinite diagram. The 
philosophy of the Qabalah is expressed in the temple’s changing patterns 
throughout the grade rituals and in the rhythm of activity within the ritu- 
als individually. Regardless of nationality, religion, language, etc. of the 
god-forms and forces represented, they are consistently balanced and in 
alignment with the different levels of manifestation in the temple and on 
the Tree, in their attributes, functions and with the magical purpose of the 
ceremonies. Systematically working through the grades can provide 
unexpected insights, new perspectives and a broader understanding of 
the synthesis of magical, religious, and scientific aspects of the Great 
Work as it relates to the growth and processing of the aspiring student.The four Sephiroth of the @)=[0] are the only ones shown in the Outer 
Order temples. The stations and officers as appropriate, follow the Tree 
thru the Elemental Grades from ©) =[0] to @ = [z] Malkuth is the Sephi- 
rah of the Neophyte and Zelator grades, Theoricus is in Yesod, Practicus 
in Hod, Philosophus in Netzach. In a sense all Outer Order ceremonies 
take place in Malkuth as they never leave the world of Assiah represent- 
ed macrocosmically by Malkuth.

The floor plan of the temple as an ideal, geometrically perfect reality 
may not be visible in the less than perfect surroundings of the partici- 
pants' living room, bedroom, union hall, or whatever place has been cho- 
sen for a ceremony. There are significant connections to be discovered in 
the arrangement of the temple. Experimentation and application of num- 
ber systems, including the Hebrew alphabet and numbers, and geometri- 
cal concepts like the symbols introduced as Meditations in the Knowledge 
Lectures of each grade can lead students to leaps in understanding of the 
relationships between the Qabalah and the Golden Dawn system. Practice 
in drawing the Tree in different ways, connecting paths with Sephiroth in 
the endless variety of patterns, will ad in determining a satisfactory geo- 
metric model and a method of drawing the Tree which students of the 
Qabalah and the Golden Dawn will use countless times. The potential for 
discovery is exponential with conscious, receptive experience of the ritu- 
als—literally walking the Paths—and dedicated, directed study, assimi- 
lating and synthesizing knowledge and experience over time.

Anupassana, May 4, 1986

<11> NEOPHYTE © = &@ GRADE 
OF THE 
ORDER OF THE STELLA MATUTINA

East

Hierophant

Block White 
Nod [Hesemen|

Pillar Pillar

U44ON 
SB4S1046

:

116

Neophyte Ritual 117Anupassana, May 4, 1986

<11> NEOPHYTE © = &@ GRADE 
OF THE 
ORDER OF THE STELLA MATUTINA

East

Hierophant

Block White 
Nod [Hesemen|

Pillar Pillar

U44ON 
SB4S1046

:

116

Neophyte Ritual 117

<12>OFFICERS: 
On the Dais: 
Imperator—Cancellarius—Past Hierophant—Praemonstrator. 
Hierophant (Red Cloak!, Lamen, Sceptre). 
In the Hall: 
Hiereus (Black Cloak, Lamen, Sword). 
Hegemon (White Cloak, Lamen, Sceptre). 
Kerux (Lamen, Lamp and Wand). 
Stolistes (Lamen, Cup of Lustral Water). 
Dadouchos (Lamen, Thurible). 
' Sentinel (Lamen, Sword). 
REQUIRED: 
For the Altar: 
Red Cross and White Triangle. Red Rose. Red Lamp. Cup of 
Wine. Paten of Bread and Salt. 
For the Candidate: 
Black Robe and Red Shoes.? Hoodwink, Rope. Neophyte Sash. 
For the Temple: 
Chemical Change.?

OPENING OF THE @ = [0] GRADE

When the Members are assembled and robed, Hierophant gives one knock 
and each is seated in his proper place, and the Officers rise. 
Members present, but not taking on office, do not rise except for Adora- 
tions to the East or when asked for the Signs. They stand after the Hiero- 
phant says: “Let us adore the Lord of the Universe and Space” and face 
East, remaining so to the end of the Adoration, These non-participating 
members do not circumambulate with the Officers, but when they have 
occasion to move in the Temple, they do so in the direction of the SUN and 
make the Sign of the Enterer* on passing the Throne of the East whether the 
Hierophant is there or not. The Sign of the Enterer is made in the direction 
of movement except when entering or leaving the Hall, when it is made 
<13> towards the East or when asked to give the Signs, and then it is made 
towards the Altar.1— This sign represents one knock made by rap- 
ing the base of Sceptre or shaft of wand or the pommel of sword on 
a table or side-altar.1Cloaks — See page 111, Vol. II] — are worn over the basic robe. Members of the Outer 
Order wear black robes while members of the Inner Order wear White Robes. G.W.

2Orred slippers, or red socks. G.W.

3See page 38. Dissolve a small amount of Sodium Salicylate in one glass of water, anda 
small amount of ferric Ammonium Sulfate in a second glass of water. Both glasses will 
continue to exhibit the clear transparency of water; however, when either is poured into 
the other, the liquid will change into a blood red color. A little experimentation before- 
hand will assure the best shade of red and avoid such disconcerting experience as having 
the fluid change back to a clear fluid (e.g. when there is too little of one of the two ingre- 
ients). G.W.

4In the original, the first sign reference was to the Neophyte Sign and the second was to the 
Grade Sign. Only the Sign of the Enterer is made when passing the Throne of the East to 
project into the vortex about the temple energy received from the Throne at the point of 
the rendering of the Veil. To make the Sign of Silence, after making the Sign of the Enter 
er, would block the flow of this energy and actually be counterproductive to what you 
wish to accomplish in the circumambulation. G.W.

118

Hiero

Kerux

Hiero

Kerux

Hiero

Hiereus

<14>

Hiero

Hiereus

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero 
Dad

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

(one knock)

Kerux on hearing the Hierophant’s knock, goes to the North East, to 
Hierophant's right, faces West, raising his Lamp and Wand and says: 
HEKAS! HEKAS! ESTE BEBELOT!.

Kerux returns to his place.

Hierophant rises with one knock.

(knocks) Fratres and Sorores of the.......... Temple of the Order of 
the Stella Matutina, assist me to open the Hall of the Neophytes. 
Frater Kerux, see that the Hall is properly guarded.

Kerux goes to the door and gives one knock. Sentinel replies with one 
knock.Kerux goes to the door and gives one knock. Sentinel replies with one 
knock.

Very Honoured Hierophant, the Hall is properly guarded.

He salutes the Hierophant’s Throne. Remains by door.

Honoured Hierus, guard the hither side of the portal and assure 
yourself that all present have witnessed the Stella Matutina. 
Hiereus goes to the door, stands before it with Sword erect, Kerux being on 
his right with Lamp and Wand, and says:

Fratres and Sorores of the Order of the Stella Matutina, give the 
Signs of a Neophyte.

This done, Hiereus gives Signs towards Hierophant, and says:

Very Honoured Hierophant, all present have been so honoured. 
Hiereus and Kerux return to their places.

Hierophant gives the Sign of the Enterer towards the West, but NOT the Sign 
of Silence.

Let the number of Officers in this degree and the nature of their 
Offices be proclaimed once again, that the Powers whose images 
they are may be re-awakened in the spheres of those present and in 
the Sphere of this Order — for by Names and Images are all Powers 
awakened and re-awakened.

He makes the Sign of Silence.

Honoured Hiereus, how many Chief Officers are there in this 
Grade?

There are three Chief Officers; the Hierophant, the Hiereus, and 
the Hegemon.

Is there any peculiarity in these Names?

They all commence with the letter ‘H’.

Of what is this Letter a symbol?

Oflife; because the Letter ‘H’ is our mode of representing the ancient 
Greek aspirate or breathing, and Breath is the evidence of Life. 
How many lesser Officers are there?

There are three besides the Sentinel; the Kerux, the Stolistes, and 
the Dadouchos.

The Sentinel is without the Portal of the Hall and has a Sword in his 
hand to keep out intruders. It is his duty to prepare the Candi- 
date.

Frater Dadouchos, your station and duties?

My station is in the South to symbolise Heat and Dryness, and my 
duty is to see that the Lamps and Fires of the Temple are ready at the

GARDEN OF EDEN AFTER THE FALLMy station is in the South to symbolise Heat and Dryness, and my 
duty is to see that the Lamps and Fires of the Temple are ready at the

GARDEN OF EDEN AFTER THE FALL

Refer to page 76.

yy

een

PH} et : x 
Ctra

GARDEN OF EDEN BEFORE THE FALL 
Refer to page 73.

THE BANNER OF THE EAST

THE BANNER OF THE WEST

Refer to page 117.

THE MINUTUM MUNDUM

Refer to page 95-98.

Neophyte Ritual 119

<15> 
Hiero 
Stol

Hiero 
Kerux

Hiero 
Heg

<16>

Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero

<17>

opening, to watch over the Censer and the Incense and to consecrate 
the Hall and the Fratres and Sorores and the Candidate with Fire. 
Frater Stolistes, your station and duties?

My station is in the North to symbolise Cold and Moisture, and my 
duties are to see that Robes and Collars and Insignia of the Officers 
are ready at the Opening, to watch over the Cup of Lustral Water and 
to purify the Hall and the Fratres and Sorores and the Candidate 
with Water.

Frater Kerux, your station and duties?

My place is within the portal. My duties are to see that the furniture 
of the Hall is properly arranged at the Opening, to guard the inner 
side of the portal, to admit the Fratres and Sorores, and to watch over 
the reception of the Candidate; to lead all Mystic Circumam- 
bulations carrying the Lamp of my Office, and to make all reports 
and announcements. My Lamp is the symbol of the Hidden 
Knowledge, and my Wand is the symbol of its directing power. 
Honoured Hegemon, your station and duties?My station is between the Two Pillars of Hermes and Solomon and 
my face is towards the cubical Altar of the Universe. My duty is to 
watch over the Gate-way of the Hidden Knowledge for I am the 
reconciler between Light and Darkness. I watch over the prepara- 
tion of the Candidate and assist in his reception and I lead him in the 
Path that conducts from Darkness to Light. The White Colour of my 
Robe is the colour of Purity, my ensign of office is a Mitre-headed 
sceptre to symbolise religion which guides and regulates life, and 
my Office symbolises those higher aspirations of the soul which 
should guide its action.

Honoured Hiereus, your station and duties?

(holds Sword and Banner) My station is on the Throne of the West and 
is a symbol of increase of Darkness and decrease of Light and Iam 
the Master of Darkness. I keep the Gateway of the West and watch 
over the reception of the Candidate and over the lesser officers in 
the doing of their work. My black Robe is an image of the Darkness 
that was upon the Face of the Waters. I carry the Sword of Judgment 
and the Banner of the Evening Twilight, which is the Banner of the 
West, and I am called Fortitude by the Unhappy.

Hierophant stands holding Sceptre and Banner of the East.

My station is on the Throne of the East in the place where the Sun 
rises, and I am the Master of the Hall, governing it according to the 
laws of the Order, as HE whose Image I am, is the Master of all who 
work for the Hidden Knowledge. My robe is red because of Un- 
created Fire and Created Fire, and I hold the Banner of the Morning 
Light which is the Banner of the East. I am called Power and Mercy 
and Light and Abundance, and I am the Expounder of the 
Mysteries.

He sits down,

Frater Stolistes and Frater Dadouchos, I command you to purify and 
consecrate the Hall with Water and with Fire.

120

Stol

Dad

Hiero

<18>

Kerux

<19>

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Heg

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two120

Stol

Dad

Hiero

<18>

Kerux

<19>

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Heg

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Stolistes goes to the East, faces Hierophant, and making a cross in the Air 
with his Cup, sprinkles a few drops of Water three times towards the East. He 
passes to the South, West and North, repeating the purification in each quar- 
ter and returns to the East to complete the circle. He then holds the Cup on 
high and says.

I purify with Water.

Dadouchos follows Stolistes when he goes to the East, and when Stolistes has 
gone to the South, Dadouchos faces East, raises his Censer and swings it 
thrice towards the East. He then goes to the South, West and North repeating 
the censing at each quarter and returns to the East where he completes the 
circle and raising the Censer says:

I consecrate with Fire.

Stolistes and Dadouchos return to their places.

Let the Mystic Circumambulation take place in the Pathway of 
LIGHT.

Hierophant stands holding the Sceptre in his right hand, the Banner of the 
East in his left. Kerux goes to the North-East with Lamp and Wand. Then 
follow Hegemon, Hierus with Banner and Sword, Stolistes with Cup. 
Dadouchos with Censer and last, Sentinel with Sword. They ail line up in 
this order behind the Kerux who leads the procession past Hierophant, mak- 
ing the Signs of Horus and Harpocrates as he passes. Each Officer in turn 
does the same.

Hierus falls out as soon as he reaches his Throne. Hegemon returns to his 
place after passing Hierophant twice. The other Officers pass Hierophant 
three times and then take their places as they come to them.

The Mystical Circumambulation symbolical of the Rise of LIGHT is 
accomplished. Let us adore the Lord of the Universe and Space. 
Members rise, All face East and make the Saluting or the Enterer (Horus) 
Sign following the lead of Hierophant. The Sign of Silence is made at the end 
of the Prayer.

Holy art Thou, Lord of the Universe! (Salute)Holy art Thou, Lord of the Universe! (Salute)

Holy art Thou, Whom Nature hath not Formed! (Salute)

Holy art Thou, the Vast and the Mighty One! (Salute)

Lord of the Light and of the Darkness! (Sign of Silence)

Hierophant, Hierus and Hegemon raise Wands and Sword in salute, and 
sink them.

All face as usual but remain standing.

Frater Kerux, in the Name of the Lord of the Universe, I command 
you to declare that I have opened the Hall of the Neophytes. 
Kerux goes North-East, faces West, and raising his Wand says:

In the Name of the Lord of the Universe, Who works in Silence and 
Whom naught but Silence can express, I declare that the Sun has 
arisen and the Shadows flee away.

Kerux returns to his place.

Hierophant knocks. } Hiereus knocks. } Hegemon knocks. 3

(knocks and says:) KHABS.

(knocks) AM.

(knocks) PEKHT.

Neophyte Ritual 121

Hiereus 
Heg 
Hiero 
Heg 
Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero

<20>

Heg 
Kerux 
Hiero

Heg 
Stol 
Dad 
Hiero 
Kerux

Stol 
<21>

Dad 
Hiero

(knocks) KONX.

(knocks) OM.

(knocks) PAX.

(knocks) LIGHT.

(knocks) IN.

(knocks) EXTENSION.

The Knocks are given before the Words are said. When the battery is com- 
pleted, all make the Signs towards the Altar and then sit down. Kerux 
removes the Rose, Cup, Paten of Bread and Salt and the Lamp from the Altar, 
leaving the Cross and Triangle only. He sees that a hassock is in readiness at 
the West for the Candidate to kneel on.

Fratres and Sorores of the........ Temple of the Order of the Stella 
Matutina, I have received a Dispensation from the Greatly Hon- 
oured Chiefs of the Second Order, to admit........ to the @= 
Degree of Neophyte. Honoured Hegemon, bid the Candidate pre- 
pare for the Ceremony of his admission, and superintend his 
preparation.Hegemon rises and removes his chair from between the Pillars and goes out 
followed by Sentinel, who carries the Hood-wink and Rope. Hegemon sees 
that the Candidate is properly robed and hood-winked and that the Rope goes 
three times round his waist.

He then leads Candidate to Door, and gives one knock.

(one knock on the door)

(one knock from within) The Candidate seeks for entrance.

I give permission to admit........ who now loses his name and will 
henceforth be known among uSas........ Let the Stolistes and the 
Dadouchos assist in the reception.

Stolistes and Dadouchos stand behind Kerux who is facing the entrance, 
ready to open the door, As soon as Candidate is well in the Hall, these three 
Officers stand before him in triangular formation, and Sentinel is behind 
him. The Officers then say their words in turn.

Inheritor of a Dying World, arise and enter the Darkness.

The Mother of Darkness hath blinded him with her Hair.

The Father of Darkness hath hidden him under His Wings.

His limbs are still weary from the wars which were in Heaven. 
Unpurified and Unconsecrated, thou canst not enter our Sacred 
Hall.

Stolistes comes forward and dipping his thumb in the lustral water, makes 
with it a Cross on the Candidate’s brow and sprinkles him three times, 
saying:

I purify thee with Water.

Dadouchos comes forward and makes a Cross over Candidate with his cen- 
ser, and waving it three times, says:

I consecrate thee with Fire.

Conduct the Candidate to the foot of the Altar.

Inheritor of a Dying World, why seekest thou to enter our Sacred 
Hall? Why seekest thou admission to our Order?

Hegemon speaks for Candidate.

122 The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Heg = My Soul wanders in Darkness and seeks the Light of the Hidden 
Knowledge, and I believe that in this Order Knowledge of that Light 
may be obtained.122 The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Heg = My Soul wanders in Darkness and seeks the Light of the Hidden 
Knowledge, and I believe that in this Order Knowledge of that Light 
may be obtained.

Hiero Wehold your signed pledge to keep secret everything that relates to 
this Order. I now ask you, are you willing to take a solemn Obliga- 
tion in the presence of this Assembly, to keep the secrets and Mys- 
teries of our Order inviolate?

Heg (prompts Candidate to say) I am.

Hiero There is nothing contrary to your civil, moral or religious duties in 
this Obligation. Although the Magical virtues can indeed awaken 
into momentary life in the wicked and foolish hearts, they cannot 
reign in any heart that has not the natural virtues to be their 
throne.

He Who is the Fountain of the Spirit of Man and of Things, came not 
to break, but to fulfill the Law. Are you ready to take this Oath.

Cand. (prompted by Hegemon) I am ready.

Hiero Then you will kneel on both your knees.

Hierophant comes to the East of the Altar with his Sceptre. Hegemon assists 
<22> Candidate to kneel, and stands right of Candidate. Hiereus stands to left. 
Kerux, Stolistes and Dadouchos complete the Hexagram of Officers as shown

below.

(East)

Hierophantr 
a om 
NS 
e 
ie 
ere eo 
Hiereus Candidate Hegemon 
(West ) 
Stolistes Dadouchos 
eee 
“S Zr 
x 4 
‘\ 4 
*. Prd 
\ ‘ 
N 4 
Keruk 
‘e)

Hiero Give me your right hand which place upon this Holy Symbol. Place 
your left hand in mine, bow your head, repeat your full name by 
which you are known on earth, and say after me: 
| eer ee in the Presence of the LORD of the Universe, Who works in

Neophyte Ritual 123

<23>

<24>Neophyte Ritual 123

<23>

<24>

Silence and Whom naught but Silence can express, and in this Hall 
of the Neophytes of the STELLA MATUTINA, regularly assembled 
under Warrant from the Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the Second 
Order, do, of my own freewill, hereby and hereon, most solemnly 
promise to keep secret this Order, its Name, the Names of its Mem- 
bers and the proceedings that take place at its meetings, from every 
person in the world who has not been initiated into it; nor will I dis- 
cuss them with any Member who has not the Pass-word for the time 
being, or who has resigned, demitted or been expelled.

I undertake to maintain a kindly and benevolent relation with all the 
Fratres and Sorores of this Order.

I solemnly promise to keep secret any information I may have 
gathered concerning this Order before taking this Oath.

I solemnly promise that any Ritual or lecture placed in my care or 
any cover containing them, shall bear the official label of this 
Order.

I will neither copy nor allow to be copied, any manuscript, until I 
have obtained permission of the Second Order, lest our Secret 
Knowledge be revealed through my neglect.

Isolemnly promise not to suffer myself to be placed in sucha state of

passivity, that any uninitiated person or power may cause me to loseIsolemnly promise not to suffer myself to be placed in sucha state of

passivity, that any uninitiated person or power may cause me to lose

control of my words or actions. 
Isolemnly promise to persevere with courage and determination in 
the labours of the Divine Science, even as I shall persevere with 
courage and determination through this Ceremony which is their 
Image — and I will not debase my mystical knowledge in the labour 
of Evil Magic at any time tried or under any temptation. 
I swear upon this Holy Symbol to observe all these things without 
evasion, equivocation, or mental reservation, under the penalty of 
being expelled from this Order for my perjury and my offence. 
Furthermore, if I break this, my Magical Obligation, I submit myself, 
by my own consent, to a Stream of Power, set in motion by the 
Divine Guardians of this Order, Who live in the Light of their Perfect 
Justice, and before Whom my Soul now stands.

They journey as upon the Winds—

They strike where no man strikes—

They slay where no man slays— 
and, as I bow my neck under the Sword of the Hiereus, so do 1 com- 
mit myself unto their Hands for vengeance or reward. - 
So help me my Mighty and Secret Soul, and the Father of my Soul 
Who works in Silence and Whom naught but Silence can ex- 
press. 
Hiereus, at the words “Bow my neck” places the flat of his Sword on the nape 
of Candidate's neck. 
Rise, Neophyte, of the @= [2] Grade of the Order of the Stella 
Matutina. 
Hierophant returns to his Throne. 
Hiereus removes hassock and returns to his Throne.

124

<25>

Hiero

Kerux 
<26>

Stol

Dad

Heg

Hiereus

Heg 
- Hiereus

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Hegemon assists Candidate to rise.

The other Officers resume their seats.

Honoured Hegemon, you will now place the Neophyte in the 
Northern part of the Hall — the place of Forgetfulness, Dumbness 
and Necessity, and of the greatest symbolical Darkness.Honoured Hegemon, you will now place the Neophyte in the 
Northern part of the Hall — the place of Forgetfulness, Dumbness 
and Necessity, and of the greatest symbolical Darkness.

Hegemon takes Candidate to the North and faces him East. Kerux goes with 
Lamp and Wand to the North East. Stolistes and Dadouchos stand ready to

follow in the Procession.

The Voice of my Undying and Secret Soul said unto me—“Let me 
enter the Path of Darkness and, peradventure, there shall I find the 
Light. I am the only Being in an Abyss of Darkness; from an Abyss of 
Darkness came I forth ere my birth, from the Silence of a Primal 
Sleep.

And the Voice of Ages answered to my Soul—’I am He who for- 
mulates in Darkness—the Light that shineth in Darkness, yet the 
Darkness comprehendeth it not.’ ”

Let the Mystical Circumambulation take place in the Path of 
Knowledge that leadeth unto Light, with the Lamp of Hidden 
Knowledge to guide us.

Kerux leads forward, followed by Hegemon with Candidate—Stolistes and 
Dadouchos coming last. As they pass Hierophant gives one knock, just as 
Candidate passes. They pass on by South and West and passing Hiereus he 
also gives one knock as Candidate passes. They pass on by the North and on 
passing East again Hierophant gives one knock as Candidate passes. Kerux 
stops in the South after the second passing of Hierophant and barring the 
way with his Wand, says:

Unpurified and Unconsecrated, thou canst not enter the path of 
the West!

Stolistes comes forward and dipping his thumb in Water, makes a Cross on 
Candidate's brow, sprinkles three times and says:

I purify thee with Water.

Dadouchos comes forward, censes in the form of a cross, and waves incense 
three times, and says:

I consecrate thee with Fire.

Stolistes and Dadouchos then step back to their places in the procession. 
Child of Earth, twice purified and twice consecrated, thou mayest 
approach the Gate-way of the West.Stolistes and Dadouchos then step back to their places in the procession. 
Child of Earth, twice purified and twice consecrated, thou mayest 
approach the Gate-way of the West.

Kerux leads the Procession to Throne of Hiereus. Hegemon raises the hood- 
wink for a moment. Hiereus stands threatening with his sword.

Thou canst not pass by me, saith the Guardian of the West, unless 
thou canst tell me my name.

Darkness is thy Name, thou Great One of the Paths of the Shades. 
Thou hast known me now, so pass thou on. Fear is failure so be thou 
without fear. For he who trembles at the Flame and at the Flood and 
at the Shadows of the Air, hath no part in God.

Kerux leads on. They pass Hierophant who gives one knock. Hiereus gives 
one knock as they pass. After this passing, Kerux halts in the North, and 
raises his Wand.

Neophyte Ritual 125

Kerux 
Stol

<27> 
Heg

Hiero

Heg

Hiero

<28>

Heg 
Hiereus

Unpurified and unconsecrated, thou canst not enter the Path of 
the East!

I purify thee with Water. Cross and sprinkling as before)

Dad I consecrate thee with Fire. (Cross and censing as before)

Child of Earth, thrice purified and thrice Consecrated, thou mayest 
approach the Gate-way of the East!

Kerux leads the procession forward to Hierophant who stands threatening 
with his Sceptre. The Hood-wink is again raised for a moment.

Thou canst not pass by me, saith the Guardian of the East, unless 
thou canst tell me my Name.

Light dawning in Darkness is thy Name, the Light of a Golden

‘Day!

Unbalanced Power is the ebbing away of Life.

Unbalanced Mercy is weakness and the fading out of the Will. 
Unbalanced Severity is cruelty and the barrenness of Mind.

Thou hast known me now, so pass thou on to the Cubical Altar 
of the Universe.

The Hood-wink is replaced.Thou hast known me now, so pass thou on to the Cubical Altar 
of the Universe.

The Hood-wink is replaced.

Kerux leads the Procession to the Altar. Candidate is placed exactly West of 
the Altar — Hegemon on his right — Hiereus on his left; Kerux, Stolistes and 
Dadouchos at the rear form a supporting triangle. Hierophant, holding Scep- 
tre in his right hand and the Banner of the East in his left, advances between 
the pillars and comes to the East of the Altar, saying:

I come in the Power of the Light.

I come in the Light of Wisdom.

I come in the Mercy of the Light.

The Light hath Healing in its Wings.

The Officers now form a Hexagram round the Altar. Hiereus holds his Sword 
in his right hand, the Banner of the West in his left. All the Officers except 
Hierophant kneel down. Candidate is assisted to kneel. Hierophant stands, 
raising his hands, holding Sceptre and Banner for the Invocation as 
follows.

Lord of the Universe — the Vast and the Mighty One!

Ruler of the Light and of the Darkness!

We adore Thee and We invoke Thee!

Look with favour on this Neophyte who now kneeleth before 
Thee.

And grant Thine aid unto the higher aspirations of his Soul,

So that he may prove a true and faithful Frater Neophyte among 
us. ;

To the glory of Thine Ineffable Name. Amen!

All rise, Candidate is assisted to rise and is brought close to the Altar. 
Hierophant, Hiereus, and Hegemon raise their Wands and Sword to touch 
each other over the head of Candidate. Kerux, at the word “Darkness” 
removes the hood-wink.

Inheritor of a Dying World, we call thee to the Living Beauty. 
Wanderer in the Wild Darkness, we call thee to the Gentle 
Light. (Hood-wink removed)

126

Hiero

Heg 
Hiereus 
Hiero 
<29> 
Hiereus 
Heg 
Hiereus 
Heg 
Hiero 
Heg 
Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero

<30>

Hiereus

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Long hast thou dwelt in Darkness — 
Quit the Night and seek the Day.

\ (together) We receive thee into the Order of the Stella Matutina.

Hiero KHABS.Hiereus

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Long hast thou dwelt in Darkness — 
Quit the Night and seek the Day.

\ (together) We receive thee into the Order of the Stella Matutina.

Hiero KHABS.

AM.

PEKHT.

KONX.

OM.

PAX.

LIGHT.

IN.

EXTENSION.

The Officers take down their Sceptres and Sword. Kerux moves to 
North East of the Altar and raises his Lamp. Hierophant points to 
the Lamp to direct Candidate's attention.

In all thy wandering in Darkness, the Lamp of the Kerux went 
before thee, though it was not seen by thine eyes. It is the Symbol 
of the Light of the Hidden Knowledge.

The Officers return to their places, Hierophant to his Throne. 
Hegemon and Candidate remain West of the Altar.

Let the Neophyte be led to the East of the Altar.

Hegemon places him to the East, near but not between the Pil- 
lars, and then takes his place outside the White Pillar.

Honoured Hiereus, give the Neophyte the Secret Signs, Token and 
Words, together with the present pass-word of the © = [@ 
Grade of the Stella Matutina.

Place him between the Mystical Pillars and superintend his fourth 
and final Consecration.

Hiereus passes by the North to the Black Pillar. He comes round 
to the East. Hegemon advances to meet him and take from him 
his Sword and Banner. Hiereus steps between the Pillars, and 
facing Candidate, says:

Frater....... , I shall now proceed to instruct you in the secret 
Step, Signs, Grip and Words of this Grade.

Firstly, advance your left foot a short space, as if entering a por- 
tal. This is the Step.Firstly, advance your left foot a short space, as if entering a por- 
tal. This is the Step.

The Signs are two. The First or Saluting Sign is given thus: Lean 
forward and stretch both arms out thus: (make Neophyte do this). 
It alludes to your condition in a state of Darkness, groping for Light. 
The second Sign is the Sign of Silence, and is given by placing the 
left fore-finger on your lip thus (makes Neophyte do it). It is the 
position shown in many ancient statues of Harpocrates, and it 
alludes to the silence you have sworn to maintain concerning 
everything connected with this Order. The first sign is always 
answered by the second.

The Grip or Token is given thus: Advance your left foot touching

Neophyte Ritual 127

<31>

Stol

Dad 
Hiero

<32>

Hiero

mine, toe and heel, extend your right hand to grasp mine, fail, try 
again, and then succeed in touching the fingers only. It alludes to the 
seeking guidance in Darkness.

The Grand Word is Har-Par-Krat, and it is whispered in this position 
mouth to ear, in syllables. (They exchange the Word) It is the Egyptian 
Name for the God of Silence, and should always remind you of the 
strict silence you have sworn to maintain.

The Pass-Wordis........ It is periodically changed each Equinox, so 
that aMember who has resigned, demitted or been expelled, may be 
in ignorance of the existing Pass-Word.

I now place you between the two Pillars of Hermes and of Solomon 
in the symbolical Gateway of Occult Wisdom.

Hiereus leads Neophyte forward and then takes back the Sword and Banner 
as Hegemon hands them to him. He stands North East of the Black Pillar 
and says:

Let the final Consecration take place.

Stolistes and Dadouchos come forward and purify and consecrate the Hall as 
in the Opening, but on returning to the East, Stolistes turns round to 
Neophyte, makes a cross of Water on his brow, sprinkles three times, and 
says:

I purify thee with Water.I purify thee with Water.

Dadouchos likewise turns round from the East and says after making a cross 
and censing three times:

I consecrate thee with Fire. (They return to their places)

Honoured Hegemon, I command you to remove the Rope, last 
remaining symbol of the Path of Darkness, and to invest our Frater 
with the Badge of this degree.

Hegemon comes forward and hands his Sceptre and Ritual to Hiereus He 
removes the Rope and puts on the Sash over the left shoulder.

Heg By command of the Very Honoured Hierophant, I invest you 
with the Badge of this degree. It symbolises Light dawning in 
Darkness.

Takes Sceptre, etc. and returns to White Pillar.

Let the Mystical Circumambulation take place in the Path-way of 
Light.

Kerux goes to the North East. Hegemon takes Candidate behind Black Pillar, 
and stands behind Kerux. Hiereus comes next, followed by Stolistes and 
Dadouchos. Kerux leads off, all salute on passing Hierophant who stands 
holding Sceptre and Banner as in the Opening. Hiereus drops out on reach- 
ing his Throne. Hegemon returns to between the Pillars after passing 
Hierophant twice. He directs Neophyte to follow Kerux, who with the other 
Officers passes Hierophant thrice. After the third passing, Hierophant 
says:

Take your place North West of the Stolistes.

Kerux indicates this and goes on followed by Stolistes who falls out in the 
North and returns to his place.

Hegemon replaces his chair between the Pillars and sits down. Kerux re- 
places the Rose, Lamp, Cup and Paten in their proper places on the Altar.

128

<33>

<34>

<35>

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

All are seated.128

<33>

<34>

<35>

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

All are seated.

The Three Fold Cord bound about your waist, was an image of the 
three-fold bondage of Mortality, which amongst the Initiated is 
called earthly or material inclination, that has bound into a narrow 
place the once far-wandering Soul; and the Hood-wink was an 
image of the Darkness, of Ignorance, or Mortality that has blinded 
men to the Happiness and Beauty their eyes once looked upon. 
The Double Cubical Altar in the centre of the Hall, is an emblem of 
visible Nature or the Material Universe, concealing within herself 
the mysteries of all dimensions, while revealing her surface to the 
exterior senses. It is a double cube because, as the Emerald Tablet 
has said “The things that are below are a reflection of the things that 
are above.” The world of men and women created to unhappiness is 
a reflection of the World of Divine Beings created to Happiness. It is 
described in the SEPHER YETSIRAH, or The Book of Formation, as 
“An Abyss of Height” and as an “Abyss of Depth”, “An Abyss of the 
East” and “An Abyss of the West”, “An Abyss of the North” and “An 
Abyss of the South.” The Altar is black because, unlike Divine 
Beings who unfold in the Element of Light, the Fires of Created 
Beings arise from Darkness and Obscurity.

On the Altar is a White Triangle to be the Image of that Immortal 
Light, that Triune Light, which moved in Darkness and formed the 
World of Darkness and out of Darkness. There are two contending 
Forces and One always uniting them. And these Three have their 
Image in the three-fold Flame of our Being and in the three-fold 
wave of the sensual world.

Hierophant stands in the form of Cross, saying:

Glory be to Thee, Father of the Undying. For Thy Glory flows out 
rejoicing, to the ends of the Earth!

He reseats himself.Hierophant stands in the form of Cross, saying:

Glory be to Thee, Father of the Undying. For Thy Glory flows out 
rejoicing, to the ends of the Earth!

He reseats himself.

The Red Cross above the White Triangle, is an Image of Him Who 
was unfolded in the Light. At its East, South, West and North Angles 
are a Rose, Fire, Cup of Wine and Bread and Salt. These allude to the 
Four Elements, Air, Fire, Water, Earth.

The Mystical Words — Khabs Am Pekht — are ancient Egyptian, and 
are the origin of the Greek “Konx Om Pax” which was uttered at the 
Eleusinian Mysteries. A literal translation would be “Light Rushing 
Out in One Ray” and they signify the same form of Light as that sym- 
bolised by the Staff of the Kerux.

East of the Double Cubical Altar, of created things, are the Pillars of 
Hermes and of Solomon. On these are painted certain Hiero- 
glyphics from the 17th and the 125th Chapters of the Book of the Dead. 
They are the symbols of the two powers of Day and Night, Love and

- Hate, Work and Rest, the subtle force of the Lodestone and the Eter-

nal out-pouring and in-pouring of the Heart of God.

The Lamps that burn, though witha veiled light, upon their summits 
show that the Pathway to Hidden Knowledge, unlike the Pathway of 
Nature — which is a continual undulation, the winding hither and

Neophyte Ritual 129

thither of the Serpent — is the straight and narrow way between 
them.

It was because of this that I passed between them, when you came to 
the Light, and it was because of this that you were placed between 
them to receive the Final Consecration.

Two contending Forces and one which unites them eternally. Two 
basal angles of the triangle and one which forms the apex. Such is the 
origin of Creation — it is the Triad of Life.Two contending Forces and one which unites them eternally. Two 
basal angles of the triangle and one which forms the apex. Such is the 
origin of Creation — it is the Triad of Life.

My Throne at the Gate of the East is the Place of the Guardian of the 
Dawning Sun. 
The Throne of the Hiereus at the Gate of the West is the Place of the 
Guardian against the Multitudes that sleep through the Light and

~ awaken at the Twilight.

<36>

Kerux

Hiero

Hiereus

<37>

The Throne of the Hegemon seated between the Columns is the 
Place of Balanced Power, between the Ultimate Light and the 
Ultimate Darkness. These meanings are shown in detail and by the 
colour of our robes.

The Wand of the Kerux is the Beam of Light from the Hidden Wis- 
dom, and his Lamp is an emblem of the Ever-burning Lamp of the 
Guardian of the Mysteries.

The Seat of the Stolistes at the Gate of the North is the Place of the 
Guardian of the Cauldron and the Well of Water — of Cold and 
Moisture. The Seat of the Dadouchos at the Gate of the South is the

_Place of the Guardian of the Lake of Fire and the Burning Bush.

Frater Kerux, command you to declare that the Neophyte has been 
initiated into the Mysteries of the @ = [1 Grade.

Kerux advances to the North East, faces West, raises his Wand, and says: 
In the Name of the Lord of the Universe, Who works in Silence and 
Whom naught but Silence can express, and by command of the Very 
Honoured Hierophant, hear ye all, that I proclaim that........ who 
will henceforth be known to you by the Motto........ , has been duly 
admitted to the @ = [2] Grade as a Neophyte of the Order of the 
Stella Matutina.

Kerux returns to hts Place.

Honoured Hiereus, I delegate to you the duty of pronouncing a 
short address to our Frater on his admission.Kerux returns to hts Place.

Honoured Hiereus, I delegate to you the duty of pronouncing a 
short address to our Frater on his admission.

Frater....... , itis my duty to deliver this exhortation to you. Remem- 
ber your Obligation in this Order to secrecy — for Strength is in 
Silence, and the Seed of Wisdom is sown in Silence and grows in 
Darkness and Mystery.

Remember that you hold all Religions in reverence, for there is none 
but contains a Ray from the Ineffable Light that you are seeking. 
Remember the penalty that awaits the breaker of his Oath. Remem- 
ber the Mystery that you have received, and that the Secret of Wis- 
dom can be discerned only from the place of Balanced Powers. 
Study well the Great Arcanum of the proper equilibrium of Severity 
and Mercy, for either unbalanced is not good. Unbalanced Severity 
is cruelty and oppression; unbalanced Mercy is but weakness and

130

Hiero

<38>

Kerux

<39>

The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book Two

would permit Evil to exist unchecked, thus making itself, as it were, 
the accomplice of that Evil.

Remember that things Divine are not attained by mortals who 
understand the Body alone, for only those who are lightly armed can 
attain the summit.

Remember that God alone is our Light and the Bestower of Perfect 
Wisdom, and that no mortal power can do more than bring you to 
the Pathway ofthat Wisdom, which he could, ifit so pleased him, put 
into the heart of a child. For as the whole is greater than the part, so 
are we but Sparks from the unsupportable Light which is in 
Him.

The ends of the Earth are swept by the Borders of His Garment of 
Flame — from Him all things proceed, and unto Him all things 
return.

Therefore, we invoke Him. Therefore even the Banner of the East 
falls in adoration before Him.Therefore, we invoke Him. Therefore even the Banner of the East 
falls in adoration before Him.

Before you can ask to pass to a higher Grade, you will have to com- 
mit certain rudiments of Occult Knowledge to memory. A manu- 
script lecture in these subjects will be supplied you by the Chief in 
whose charge they are. When you can pass an examination in this 
elementary Qabalistic knowledge, you will inform the Member in 
whose charge you are, and arrangements will be made for you to sit 
for examination. If you are found perfect you will then apply for 
admission to the next Degree. Remember, that without a Dispensa- 
tion from the Second Order, no person can be admitted or advanced 
to a Grade of the First Order.

Kerux conducts Neophyte to his table and gives him one of the small dishes of 
solution to hold. ,

Nature is harmonious in all her workings, and that which is above is 
as that which is below. Thus also, the Truths which by material 
Science we investigate, are but special examples of the all-per- 
vading Laws of the Universe. So, within this pure and limpid fluid, 
lie hidden and unperceived of mortal eyes, the elements bearing the 
semblance of blood, even as within the mind and brain of the Initiate 
lie concealed the Divine Secrets of the Hidden Knolwedge. Yet ifthe 
Oath be forgotten, and the solemn pledge broken, then that which is 
secret shall be revealed, even as this pure fluid reveals the sem- 
blance of blood.

Kerux adds fluid from the other dish.Kerux adds fluid from the other dish.

Let this remind thee ever, O Neophyte, how easily by a careless or 
unthinking word, thou mayst betray that which thou hast sworn to 
keep secret and mayst reveal the Hidden Knowledge imparted to 
thee, and planted in thy brain and in thy mind. And let the hue of 
blood remind thee that if thou shalt fail in this thy oath of secrecy, thy 
blood may be poured out and thy body broken; for heavy is the 
penalty exacted by the Guardians of the Hidden Knowledge from 
those who wilfully betray their trust.

Hierophant comes to the table. The Register is signed.

Neophyte Ritual 131

Hiero

Hiero

Kerux

Hiero

Hiereus

Kerux 
Sentinel 
. Hiero 
Kerux 
Hiero

<40> 
Hiero 
Stal

Dad 
Hiero

<41>

Resume your seat, and remember that your admission to this Order 
does not give you the right to initiate any other person without a 
Dispensation from the Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the Second 
Order.

Kerux directs Neophyte to his seat.

Hierophant returns to the dais.Kerux directs Neophyte to his seat.

Hierophant returns to the dais.

CLOSING OF THE NEOPHYTE GRADE 
(gives knock \) 
Kerux goes to the North East, faces West, and raising Lamp and Wand, 
says: 
HEKAS! HEKAS! ESTE BEBELOI! 
He returns to his place. 
Fratres and Sorores of the...... Temple of the Order of the Stella 
Matutina, assist me to close the Hall of the Neophytes. 
All rise. Neophyte is directed to rise by Stolistes. 
(knocks) 1 
(knocks) } 
(knocks) } 
(knocks) } 
Frater Kerux, see that the Hall is properly guarded. 
The Hall is properly guarded, Very Honoured Hierophant. 
Honoured Hiereus, assure yourself that all present have beheld the 
Stella Matutina. 
Hiereus Fratres and Sorores, give the signs. (done) Very Honoured 
Hierophant, all present have been so honoured. 
Let the Hall be purified by Water and by Fire. 
I purify with Water. (Purifying as in the Opening) 
I consecrate with Fire. (Consecrating as in the Opening) 
Let the Mystical Reverse Circumambulation take place in the Path- 
way of Light. 
Kerux goes by the South to the South East. 
Hegemon goes to the North and leads the new Neophyte by West and South, 
directing him to follow Hegemon in the Procession. 
Hiereus follows Neophyte and Stolistes follows Hiereus, accompanied or 
followed by Dadouchos, and Sentinel ends the Procession. As they pass the 
Hierophant, who is standing and holding the Banner of the East in his left 
hand, the Sceptre in his right, they make the Neophyte Signs. Hiereus drops 
out when his Throne is reached. Hegemon passes Hierophant twice and then 
takes his place between the Pillars, directing Neophyte to follow Kerux who, 
after the third passing of Hierophant, directs Neophyte to his seat, the other 
Officers dropping out as their places are reached. 
The Mystical Circumambulation is accomplished. It is the symbol of 
Fading Light. Let us adore the Lord of the Universe. 
All turn East. Stolistes directs Neophyte to rise and face East. Hierophant 
faces East, making the salute at each adoration — the others, Officers and 
Members repeating it also. 
Holy art Thou, Lord of the Universe! (salute)132

<42>

Kerux 
<43>

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Heg 
Hiero 
Hiereus

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Holy art Thou, Whom nature hath not formed! (salute)

Holy art Thou, the Vast and the Mighty One! (salute)

Lord of the Light and of the Darkness! (Sign of Silence)

Nothing now remains but to partake together in silence, of the Mys- 
tic Repast, composed of the symbols of the Four Elements, and to 
remember our pledge of secrecy.

All are seated.

Hierophant puts down his Sceptre and returns the Banner of the East fo its 
place. He goes to the West of the Altar and facing East gives the Saluting Sign 
but not the Sign of Silence, and taking up the Rose says:

linvite you to inhale with me the perfume of this Rose, as a symbol of 
Air. (smells Rose)

To feel with me the warmth of this sacred Fire. (spreads his hands 
over it)

To eat with me this Bread and Salt as types of Earth. (dips bread in Salt 
and eats)

And finally to drink with me this Wine, the consecrated emblem of 
Elemental Water. (makes a Cross with the Cup and drinks) 
Hierophant puts down the Cup between the Cross and Triangle. He comes 
East of the Altar and faces West.The Praemonstrator then comes to the West of the Altar and makes the Salut- 
ing Sign. Hierophant replies with the Sign of Silence and then hands the 
Elements, beginning with the Rose which Praemonstrator smells and 
returns; then feels the warmth of the Lamp, eats the Bread and Salt and 
receives from the Hierophant the Cup with which he makes a Cross, and 
having drunk, returns it. Hierophant then passes by West and South to his 
Throne. Praemonstrator then comes to the East of the Altar. Imperator comes 
fo the West, exchanges Signs and partakes. He returns to his place — after 
serving Cancellarius who in turn serves Past Hierophant. After the Chiefs, 
the Officers partake in this order: Hiereus, Hegemon, Stolistes, Dadouchos. 
Whan all the Officers except Kerux have partaken, the Inner Members in 
order of seniority of admission, partake but do not wait for instruction in 
this, If there is a pause, one comes forward. Next come the Members of the 
Outer in the same manner — the Neophytes coming last piloted by Hegemon 
or any Officer appointed. The Order of procedure for Outer members is: 
Philosophi, Practici, Theorici, Zelatores, Neophytes. When the last 
Neophyte stands East of the Altar, Kerux comes to the West, exchanges the 
Signs and partakes. (Hegemon directs Neophyte to return to his place as soon 
as Kerux takes the Cup.) Kerux, on receiving the Cup, drains it, inverts it, 
and says:

It is finished!

Kerux replaces the Cup and returns to his place.

All rise.

(knocks) ) TETELESTAI!

(knocks) }

(knocks) 3

(knocks) Khabs. Hiereus (knocks) Am. Heg (knocks) Pekht.

(knocks) Konx. Heg (knocks) Om. Hierophant (knocks) Pax.

Neophyte Ritual 133

Heg (knocks) Light Hiero (knocks) In Hiereus (knocks) Extension. 
All make the Signs towards the Altar.

Hiero May what we have partaken maintain usin our search for the QUIN- 
TESSENCE, the Stone of the Philosophers. True Wisdom, Perfect 
Happiness, the SUMMUM BONUM.Hiero May what we have partaken maintain usin our search for the QUIN- 
TESSENCE, the Stone of the Philosophers. True Wisdom, Perfect 
Happiness, the SUMMUM BONUM.

Officers remain in the Temple while the new Neophyte is led out by 
Kerux.

(Note: Full instructions as to the magical work performed by the officers 
during the ceremony are given in documents Z.! and Z.3. These latter will be 
found in Volume III of this work. I. R.)

The Neophyte Signs

SIGN OF HARPOCRATES

SIGN OF HORUS 
o | |

Signs of Elemental Grades

SIGN OF THEORICUS

SIGN OF ZELATOR

“ae 
on 
4

SIGN OF PRACTICUS

SIGN OF PHILOSOPRUS

The Portal Signs

THE CLOSING OF THE VFIL

THE RENDING OF THE VEIL

The LV.X. Signs

L. SIGN OF MOURNING 
THE SIGN OF OSIRIS SLAIN OF ISIS

V. SIGN OF APOPHIS X. SIGN OF OSIRIS RISEN

AND TYPHON

134

Elemental Grade Ceremonies 135 
INTRODUCTION TO THE ELEMENTAL GRADE CEREMONIES

The initiation ceremonies of the Zelator, Theoricus, Practicus and 
Philosophus grades are each referred to one of the four elements of Tetra- 
grammaton— YHVH—beginning with the last, Earth, Air, Water and Fire 
respectively. Asa whole these grades represent the fundamental work of the 
Outer Order which is to equilibrate the elemental forces in the working tem- 
ple and in the psyches of individuals, whether participating as officers or as 
aspiring candidates for advancement.These ceremonies will be referred to here generally as the Grade Cere- 
monies for the purpose of providing an overall description of the ritual pat- 
terns repeated and expounded in progression thru the Outer Order. To 
provide ceremonies which can be read and performed from the text, lengthy 
explanations concerning the many details of performance are not practical. 
At the same time, familiarity with the essential formula and basic under- 
standing prior to attempting the ceremonies will effect a smooth flow of 
ritual work enhancing effectiveness. This also makes it easier for participants 
to become aware of specific relationships and symbolism described by pre- 
cise ritual activity within the basic framework of the Grade Ceremonies.

Study of the pattern common to all four would also aid in memorization 
of the ceremonies. Performance of any magickal working from memory isa 
realizable ideal worth some time and effort as the subtleties of the energies at 
work are more easily perceived when the mind is free from chores like find- 
' ing the right page, reading instructions or wondering why you're standing 
and everyone else is sitting. The further participants can get from ordinary 
day to day consciousness the more receptive they can become to the extra- 
ordinary influences which are only available to the intuitiveless intel- 
lectual faculties.

Much can be understood only by experience as an initiate, then as dif- 
ferent officers, and in the steeping of students in the study and practice of the 
Grade Ceremonies, individually and/or collectively, over a period of time. 
‘Don’t be discouraged by errors during ceremony — They are sure to occur. 
To let imperfection stop the aspiring student would end the spiritual journey 
at the very first step which recognizes and accepts human ignorance and 
error.As the dedicated student continues to patiently aspire to be more than 
human, to transcend physical limitations, while forgiving himself for mis- 
takes and setbacks along the way, the ceremonies will become increasingly 
precise and effective. Regular repetition awakens and establishes the ener- 
gies gradually through sincere sustained effort. When a mistake is made dur- 
ing ritual work, simply return to the point immediately preceding the error 
with as little disruption as possible and carefully repeat from there after mak- 
ing certain of the correct procedure. Hopefully, no matter how elevated by 
study and initiation the student’s understanding may become, he will dis- 
cover that the Grade Ceremoniesare not to be learned, performed, perfected 
and left behind; the potential for insight is endless, with levels upon levels of 
meaning and symbol never exhausted, always new.

Initiation into the Elemental Grades is a starting point from which

136 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book Two

students may begin to comprehend the wholeness of the Outer Order. By 
the synthesis of the four elements, in relation to the Hall of the Neophytes 
and as a preparation for Inner Order Initiation and work, continuous inte- 
gration will dynamically balance the forces in the entire being.

The Openings and Closings of each grade follow a similar format which 
is relatively easy to follow and brief to carry out. There are a few points of 
etiquette appropriate to anyone involved whether in a group or alone, as 
an officer or observer, which add significance to the ceremony and empha- 
size the special existence of the spiritual temple wherever it is located.The intention behind special names, clothing, movement—i.e., every- 
thing concerning ritual work—is to produce a state of mind quite different 
from the ordinary non-ritual state. These special signals, in association 
with all that is done in performing the ceremonies, cultivate a “habit” 
which will trigger participants to assume this state of mind spontaneous- 
ly in preparation for magickal work. Students can, with a little imagina- 
tion, find numerous ways of consciously producing mental receptivity to 
the intended work. One could begin by quieting the mind with rhythmic 
breathing and meditation on an appropriate image; for example, a great 
preparation for a Grade Ceremony would be to contemplate the appropri- 
ate symbolism as in the Meditation given in each Grade’s Knowledge Lec- 
ture.* Groups or individuals may decide upon a special rite of entry into 
the temple signaling commencement of ceremonial behavior when all is 
ready to begin.

A quiet, though not somber, mood should be encouraged, limiting 
extraneous speech, movement and noise. Make doubly sure all is arranged 
and supplies available as needed before starting to avoid last minute shuf- 
fling. Lock doors, draw curtains, take the phone off the hook and in gen- 
eral ensure as much as possible that there will be no rude or embarrassing 
interruptions. Discretion in magical activities, as is advised in the ©= bol 
Initiation so emphatically, is as important to the unseen workings and 
effectiveness of ceremony as the secrecy of the visible, physical location of 
the temple is to the protection from unwanted observation, eavesdropping, 
ot even deliberate interference.In any temple of the Outer Order, the Sign of the Enterer or Projecting 
Sign is given toward the East upon entering and the Sign of Silence given 
when leaving. These Signs, special to the @= [0] Grade of Neophyte 
are used in the Elemental Ceremonies in a specific way, as the interpene- 
tration of the @= [0] which encompasses the whole, is followed through 
the Outer Order. These Signs are not given for grade identiftcation in 
the Elemental Ceremonies but as signals to indicate the beginning 
and ending of individual events, usually by an officer. Non-officiating 
members move very little or not at all in the temple but when necessary 
movement is always clockwise and the Projecting Sign is given 
in that direction when passing the East. Upon returning to seat or station 
the Sign of Silence is given signifying completion of that activity. 
Officers give the Sign of the Enterer toward the Hierophant before begin- 
ning any movement, before addressing the Hierophant and in

*Vol. I Book, I, page 99.

Elemental Grade Ceremonies 137

response to the Hierophant’s commands or directives. This is done by rising 
in place (without holding instruments) facing the East and giving the Sign. 
Then the officer may take up instrument, speak or move as needed. Upon 
completion of speech or action the Sign of Silence is given before the next 
activity begins. Opening the Activity with Projection of energy from the 
Officer’s Station toward the East, carrying out the duty, then Closing with the 
Sign of Silence to end the energy flow which the Projecting Sign begins 
creates a precision in the ritual work, and helps define individual duties of 
officers and parts of ceremony.

THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF THE GRADE CEREMONIESTHE BASIC STRUCTURE OF THE GRADE CEREMONIES

Opening 
1. The Hierophant knocks once to signal the onset of the Ceremony when 
the temple is ready: members robed, seated and quiet; lamps, candles, 
incense lit; officers at stations wearing appropriate lamens, nemysses, man- 
tles; with copies of the ritual if needed. The Hiero. tells the officers to assist in 
Opening the Grade and directs either the Kerux (in ®= 2) and @= (9) or 
the Hegemon (in @= [8] and ©@= LZ) to check the temple door. This is 
done without opening the temple door because the office of Sentinel, open to 
the Peo of the Neophyte Grade, is dropped from all grades after 
2. The Hierophant tells Hiereus to see that all present are members of that 
Grade. Hiereus rises, giving Sign of Enterer. Then holding his Sword up- 
right, Hiereus asks the members to give the Sign of the grade, which all mem- 
bers (except the Hiereus and Hierophant) give toward the Altar. Hiereus 
puts down Sword and gives the Grade Sign after the other members before 
assuring the Hiero. that all present are members of the Grade, and then gives 
the Sign of Silence to signal completion of his duty. The Hiero. then gives the 
Grade Sign towards the Altar, alone. 
3. The Stolistes and Dadouchos, stations and offices open to Zelators (mem- 
bers of the = grade), purify and consecrate the temple Opening of the= i grade. These officers and their functions are dropped from the 
remaining higher grade rituals, as the Sentinel is from the © = [i . The office 
of Kerux is omitted likewise from the © = ade of Practicus, as the sta- 
tion apropos to ® = [2]. The Ceremonies of @ = &) and @= H are per- 
formed with the Chief Officers only. 
4. The Hiereus and/or Hegemon name the Element and any Planet, Path(s) 
and Spheres associated with Path(s) at Hierophant’s request. Officers are 
seated at this time and the short responses by Heg. and/or Hier. are given 
from their stations without rising, giving © = [2] Signs. 
5. The Hierophant knocks once and stands to announce the Adoration to the 
East. All members stand, face East, and give the Sign of the Grade, remaining 
in that position for the duration of the Hierophant’s prayer. After “Amen!” all 
release Grade Sign and remain standing quietly, facing East. 
6. The Hierophant now goes to the quarter of the temple appropriate to the 
Grade, and faces the Enochian Tablet in that direction. The officers follow, 
and stand in balanced arrangement behind him, forming a Hexagram, facing 
as the Hierophant. The Tablet should be positioned and centered in that

138 The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

direction, if possible, with the center of the tablet at eye level. A symbol of the 
Element of the grade is before the Tablet on a small table or side altar. The 
Hierophant hands Sceptre to officer on his right, takes up the symbol, ges- 
tures with it three times towards the Tablet: left, right, then center, and pro- 
claims the invokation of the element by the Divine God Name given to the 
Sephirah of the Grade. Replacing the symbol before the Tablet, the Hiero- 
phant takes his Sceptre again in order to trace the invoking figure.

The invokation is performed by tracing certain figures in the air in frontThe invokation is performed by tracing certain figures in the air in front

of and concentric to the Enochian Tablet. With the Sceptre the Hierophant 
first traces the Circle which will contain the Invoking Pentagrams and con- 
fine the invoked force of the Element to the quarter. This Invoking Circle is 
traced in a clockwise direction beginning at the left, or North, as if the top of 
the Circle represented the East. The Circle is visualized in brilliant white 
light and is traced from the North edge past the top, completing one full rota- 
tion at the top, or East. This principle of invoking energy is represented in the 
Opening of the @= [2] by the Mystical Circumambulation which also 
begins in the North led by the Kerux, and describes one complete round on 
the return to the East. Both Circles symbolize the Rising of Light which pre- 
cedes invokation, and provides the container where the invoked forces are 
concentrated and focused in the formula of the Magic of Light. The Circle is 
traced silently, then the Hiero. lowers the Sceptre to the position where the 
Invoking Pentagram of Spirit will begin. Whether the Spirit invoked is active 
or passive depends upon the nature of the Element to be invoked. (A de- 
scription of both the Active and Passive Spirit Pentagrams and how to trace 
them is given in a later chapter — see page 9, Volume III.) The Spirit Pen- 
tagram, active or passive, is visualized in white light, within the Circle 
already traced, and is “charged” by thrusting the Sceptre toward the center, 
visualizing the figure glowing strongly in the astral light, the brilliance of the 
Pentagram flaring brightly at the force of the Hiero.’s projection. 
. The Hierophant then begins the Invoking Pentagram of the Element, 
following the Circle around with Sceptre from the angle where the Spirit 
Pentagram ended to the angle where the Pentagram of the Element begins 
(see page 13, Volume Ill for specific instructions on invoking the Elements by 
Pentagram). The Pentagram of the Element is visualized in the color of that 
element as described in the lecture on the Supreme Ritual of the Pentagram 
and “charged” in the same manner as the Pentagram of Spirit. Both Invoking 
Pentagrams are traced in silence.Vibrating forcefully, using a full breath, the Hierophant invokes by the 
Divine Names and Images of the Grade, with Sceptre raised toward the 
direction of invokation.

Again handing his Sceptre to the officer on his right, the hiero. takes up 
the symbol in front of the Tablet and with it traces the Kerubic Sign of the ele- 
ment in the center of the Pentagram already traced, “charging” the Sign as 
before. Then, vibrating fully, he invokes in the names of the Archangel, in the 
three Great Secret Names of God, and in that of the King of the Tablet. The 
Hiero. replaces the symbol, takes his Sceptre, and all officers return to their 
stations. The non-officiating members who have been standing, facing the 
direction of invokation throughout, are also seated as before.

Elemental Grade Ceremonies 139

7. In the name of the Divine Name or Grand Word of the Grade, the 
Hierophant declares the temple open in the particular grade.

8. Hierophant, Hiereus, and Hegemon, in that order, give the Knocks of the 
Grade in succession, each completing the alarm before the next begins. Thus 
the opening of the Grade Ceremony is completed.

Initiation into the Elemental Grades

1. Hierophant announces dispensation to advance the candidate for the 
grade. Hegemon rises and salutes Hierophant with the Sign of the Enterer or 
Projecting Sign, answering the command to prepare the candidate. If the 
Hegemon passes the East on the way to the door, moving always clockwise 
around the temple, the Projecting Sign of the Enterer is given as in U0 = 
circumambulation. The Sign of Silence is given toward the East before leav- 
ing the temple to prepare the candidate, who is always hoodwinked at first 
part of the ceremony of advancement. The Hegemon gives the candidate an 
admission badge to hold in the right hand and gives the knocks of the grade, 
called ‘the alarm’, when ready to enter.2. The candidate is tested in the Token, Step, Grand Word, Mystic Number, 
and Mystic Password of his present grade.

3. The candidate pledges secrecy concerning the mysteries of this grade, 
going to the Quarter appropriate to the grade and making the pledge there 
toward the Tablet. The hoodwink is then removed.

4, The candidate is placed between the Pillars, facing a Portal in the grade to 
which he seeks admission, represented by the Hebrew letter pictured in the 
correct direction in relation to the temple. This is a Path on the Tree of Life, in 
relation to the Sephirah the temple is in.

5. Circumambulations are made in the Rituals of the Paths, the candidate 
visits the stations, hears speeches of the officers, sees diagrams of the 
Tree and the Garden of Eden in relationship to the Path.

6. Inthe East, the Hierophant explains symbolism of the admission badge to 
that particular Path or Sephirah, and the admission badge is set aside. The 
symbolism of the Path is explained.

7. Hierophant takes candidate to the West of the Altar and describes, and 
explains, the symbolism on the Altar, including a Tarot Key on the Path. Also 
explains other Temple symbolism.

8. Hierophant confers the title Lord or Lady of the (number) Path. Can- 
didate is led out between Path working and reception into the Grade.

Reception into the Sephirah of the Grade

1. The candidate is instructed in knocks, or alarm, of grade and gives them in 
order to be admitted. He also holds the Admission Badge.

2. Candidate is shown past and future Paths to and from the grade. Hiereus 
explains symbolism of the Admission Badge in this reception into the grade 
(which is represented in all four grades by the officers’ lamens: in the W = 
by the Hiereus Lamen or Fylfot Cross; in @ = [2] by the Kerux Lamen or 
Caduceus; in @= by the Stolistes Lamen; in W= by the Hege- 
mon’s Lamen).3. The candidate stands West of the Altar with Hierophant, who speaks on 
the symbolism of the Garden of Eden particularly referred to in the grade;

140 The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book Two

also the Planets, Paths, Sephirah and other Qabalistic correspondences; the 
Sign, Number, Grand Word, Password and Mystic Title. The Sash of the 
grade is described and bestowed.

4, Facing the direction of the Tablet in the grade, Hierophant gives the can- 
didate the symbolism of the Element, the three Names of God, and the name 
of the King from the Enochian Tablet.

5. Next the symbolism of Cross, Triangle, etc. on the Altar is explained by 
the Hierophant.

6. The Hegemon gives his speech on the symbolism of the Sephirah, the 
Planet, and indicates the Kamea, Sigils and Signs appropriate, as displayed in 
the temple.

7. The Hierophant confers Mystic Title of Grade upon the candidate and 
gives the symbol of the Element, which is its name in Hebrew, and proclaims 
him or her Lord or Lady of (number) Paths.

Closing

1. The Hierophant knocks to announce Closing. All rise.

2. Temple security is seen to, the door checked as in the Opening.

3. Hierophant knocks once and all face East for the Adoration. All Salute the 
East with the Grade Sign after “Amen”.

4. Hierophant goes to the Quarter and Tablet appropriate to the Grade, and 
officers arrange themselves behind him as in Opening.

5. Hierophant knocks once and then announces the Elemental Prayer, 
which all recite together.

6, After the Prayer, Hierophant makes Banishing Pentagrams, first of Spirit, 
active or passive, then of the Element — tracing and charging each with 
Sceptre before the Tablet.

7. Hierophant then gives License to Depart, after which all return to places.

8. Hierophant declares the temple closed.

9. Chief officers give knocks as in Opening, with base of Sceptre or Sword 
on floor.

—Anupassana 
May, 1986

<44> CEREMONY 
OF THE 
ZELATOR © = GRADE

E 
ez sseee 32d Banner ) 
of East 
WW 29th9. Chief officers give knocks as in Opening, with base of Sceptre or Sword 
on floor.

—Anupassana 
May, 1986

<44> CEREMONY 
OF THE 
ZELATOR © = GRADE

E 
ez sseee 32d Banner ) 
of East 
WW 29th

TI] 
a 
i 9 
+ 
> 
Py 
A 
® 
a oa

OnAltar AX‘ at base 
of Tree

White 
Pillar Pillar

[KERUX]

141

142

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

<45> OFFICERS —

Hierophant, Hiereus, Hegemon, Kerux, Stolistes, Dadouches.!

TEMPLE —

Arranged as in Diagram.

REQUIRED — 
For the Candidate:

Hoodwink, Zelator Sash.

For the Temple:

Fylfot Cross, Three Portal Symbols, Shewbread Diagram, Candle- 
stick Diagram, Earth Tablet, Altar Diagrams.

For the Altar:

Red Cross, White Triangle, Red Light, Altar Diagram (the Flaming 
Sword of the Kerubim).

OPENING OF THE © = [0] GRADE

(The members, having assembled and robed, each is seated in his proper place. Hiero. 
gives one knock. All rise. 1 = one knock.

Hiero

Kerux 
Hiero 
Hiereus 
Hiereus 
Hiero

<46>

Dad

Stol 
Kerux 
Hiero

Heg

Hiero

(sitting) Fratres and Sorores of the O= Grade of the Stella 
Matutina, assist me to open the Temple in the Grade of Zelator. 
Frater Kerux, see that the Temple is properly guarded.

(knocks once without opening the door), Very Honoured Hirophant, the 
Temple is properly guarded.

Honoured Hiereus, see that none below the Grade of Zelator is 
present.

Fratres and Sorores, give the signs of @O= WW. (an give signs of 
Zelator.)

(gives sign) Very honoured Hierophant, no one below the Grade of 
Zelator is now present.

(giving sign) Purify and consecrate the Temple with Water and 
with Fire.

Kerux advances between the Pillars. Stolistes and Dadouchos, one on each 
side of the Pillars, advance to the centre of the Hall. All salute. Dadouchos 
makes cross in air with Censer, and swings it forward three times, 
saying:

I consecrate with Fire.

Stolistes makes Cross with Cup, and sprinkles thrice towards East, 
saying:

I purify with Water.

The Temple is cleansed.I consecrate with Fire.

Stolistes makes Cross with Cup, and sprinkles thrice towards East, 
saying:

I purify with Water.

The Temple is cleansed.

rae @ = BQ). All three retire, Kerux leading and passing with @=

Let the Element of this Grade be named that it may be awakened in 
the spheres of those present and in the sphere of the Order.

The Element of Earth.

(gives one knock) Let us adore the Lord and King of Earth.

All face East.

ln the earlier editions, an error was perpetuated with regard to the Pencpeen of the officers,

and the role of certain of them in this ritual. See the Intro

uction to this section by

Anupassana.

Zelator Ritual - 143

Hiero Adonai ha-Aretz.* Adonai Melekh.* Unto Thee be the Kingdom and

the Power (cross on self) and the Glory.

Malkuth, Geburah, Gedulah.

He makes Cross and Circle with Sceptre before him as he says Malkuth, 
etc.

The Rose of Sharon and the Lily of the Valley, Amen.

All give Zelator Signs. Hiero goes to North, and sprinkles Salt before the 
Tablet, saying:

Hiero Let the Earth Adore Adonai! 
Hierophant leaves his place and goes to North. He stands facing the centre of

<47>__ the Tablet of the North and at a convenient distance therefrom, say six feet. 
Hiereus takes his place at the right of Hiero. Hegemon on left of Hiero; Stolis- 
tes behind Hiereus, Dadouchos behind Hegemon. All Officers face North. 
Hierophant makes sign in front of, and concentric with Tablet of the North, 
an invoking Pentagram of Earth, saying:Hiero Andthe Elohim said,”Let us make Adam in our Image, after our like- 
ness and let him have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the 
fowl of the air and over the cattle and over all the earth, and over 
every creeping thing that creepeth over the Earth.” And the Elohim 
created Eth ha-Adam in their own Image, in the Image of the Elohim 
created they them. In the name of Adonai Melekh and of the Bride 
and Queen of the Kingdom, Spirits of Earth adore Adonai! 
Hierophant hands his Sceptre to Hiereus and, taking his Sword, makes the 
Ox & in centre of Pentagram, saying:

Hiero Inthe Name of Auriel, the Great Archangel of Earth, and by the sign 
of the Head of the Ox — Spirits of Earth, adore Adonai! 
Hierophant returns Sword to Hiereus and takes Mitre-headed Sceptre from 
Hegemon, and makes Cross in the air, saying:

In the Names and Letters of the Great Northern Quadrangle, Spirits 
of Earth, adore Adonai!

Hiero returns Sceptre to Hegemon, and takes Cup from Stolistes, making 
cross, and sprinkling thrice to North, saying:

<48> Inthe Three Great Secret Names of God, borne upon the Banners of 
the North — EMOR DIAL HECTEGA — Spirits of Earth, adore 
Adonai!

Hiero returns Cup to Stol and takes Censer from Dad, and making three for- 
ward swings, says: In the name of IC ZOD HEH CHAL, Great King of 
the North, Spirits of Earth adore Adonai!

Hiero returns Censer to Dad, and takes back Sceptre from Hiereus, returns to 
Throne. All Officers return to places. All members face as usual.

Hiero In the name of ADONAI HA-ARETZ, I declare this Temple duly 
opened in the © = 0) Grade of Zelator.

Hieo WH M

Hiereus 1 WOM

He ww WM

*All god names and words of power used in ceremonies are “vibrated” (or intoned) forcefully, 
using a complete breath to pronounce the word during an entire exhalation. P.M.

144

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

ADVANCEMENT — FIRST PART 
Hierophant sits East of Altar, Hiereus North, and Hegemon South.

Hiero

<49>

Heg 
Kerux

Hiero144

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

ADVANCEMENT — FIRST PART 
Hierophant sits East of Altar, Hiereus North, and Hegemon South.

Hiero

<49>

Heg 
Kerux

Hiero

Heg

Kerux 
Hiero

Neo

Fratres and Sorores, our Frater (Soror) having made such progress

in the Paths of Occult Science as has enabled him (her) to pass an

examination in the required knowledge, is now eligible for advance-

ment to this Grade, and I have duly received a dispensation from the

Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the Second Order to admit him (her) in

due form. Honoured Hegemon, superintend the preparation of the

Neophyte and give the Customary alarm

Hegemon salutes with O= fg sign, and leaves the room By South and

West. Hegemon prepares Neophyte who wears sash of Grade

and is blindfolded. He carries the Fylfot Cross in right hand Hegemon

instructs Neophyte in knocks of the Grade. Kerux opens the door to be

Just ajar.

Let me enter the Portal of Wisdom.

I will.

Opens door and admits them. Kerux having turned down lights pre-

viously.

Except Adonai build the house, their labour is but lost that build it.

Except Adonai keep the City, the Watchman waketh in vain. Frater 
Soror) Neophyte, by what aid dost thou seek admission to the

10} Grade of Zelator of the Stella Matutina?

(for Neophyte) By the guidance of Adonai; by the possession of the

necessary knowledge; by the dispensation of the Greatly Honoured

Chiefs of the Second Order; by the signs and tokens of the e O=

Grade. By this symbol of the Hermetic Cross.

Kerux takes Cross from Neophyte.

Give the step and signs of a Neophyte.

Neophyte gives them.

Frater Kerux, receive from the Neophyte the Token, Grand Word,

and Password of the © = [1] Grade.

Kerux places himself in front of Neo. and says:

Give me the grip of the Neophyte. (done)

Give me the Word. (done)

Give me the Pass-word (done)

Having received it, he turns to Hiero, gives Grade Salute, and says:

Very Honoured Hierophant, I have received them.Give me the Word. (done)

Give me the Pass-word (done)

Having received it, he turns to Hiero, gives Grade Salute, and says:

Very Honoured Hierophant, I have received them.

(to Hegemon) Lead the Neophyte to the West and set him between the 
Mystic Pillars, with his face towards the East.

Hegemon places Neophyte between the Pillars, and remains behind him. 
Frater (Soror)........ will you pledge yourself to maintain the same 
secrecy regarding the Mysteries of this Grade as you are pledged to 
maintain regarding those of the © = [2] Grade — never to reveal 
them to the world, and not even to confer them upon a Neophyte 
without a dispensation from the Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the 
Second Order?

I will.

Zelator Ritual 145

Hiero

<51>

Dad

Stol

Hiero

<52>

Then you will kneel on both your knees, lay your right hand on the 
ground, and say: — “I swear by the Earth whereon I kneel.” 
(done)

Let the symbol of blindness be removed.

Hegemon unbinds Neo’s eyes. Kerux turns up lights. Hegemon goes back to 
his proper place. Neophyte remains kneeling between the Pillars with his 
hand on the ground. Kerux takes the Salt from before the Tablet of the North, 
and passing round the Altar with Sol stands in front of Neophyte facing him 
and holds the Salt in front of him.

Take Salt with your left hand and cast it to the North; say “Let 
the Powers of Earth witness my pledge.”

Done. Kerux replaces Salt, and returns to his place.

Let the Neophyte rise and let him be purified with Water and con- 
secrated with Fire, in confirmation of his pledge, and in the Name of 
the Lord of the Universe who works in silence and whom naught but 
silence can express.

Dad. comes forward round South Pillar, stands before Neo. and makes three 
forward swings of censer, saying:

In the name of the Lord of the Universe who works in silence and 
whom naught but silence can express, I consecrate thee with 
Fire.In the name of the Lord of the Universe who works in silence and 
whom naught but silence can express, I consecrate thee with 
Fire.

Dadouchos returns by way he came. Stolistes comes round North Pillar, 
stands before Neophyte, makes cross on forehead, sprinkles thrice, 
saying:

Inthe Name of the Lord of the Universe Who works in Silence and 
Whom naught but Silence can express, I purify thee with Water. 
Returns to place as he came.

The © = [lo] Grade of Neophyte is a preparation for other Grades, a 
threshold before our discipline, and it shows by its imagery, the 
Light of the Hidden Knowledge dawning in the Darkness of Crea- 
tion; and you are now to begin to analyse and comprehend the 
Nature of that Light. To this end, you stand between the Pillars, in the 
Gateway where the secrets of the @= Grade were com- 
municated to you.

Prepare to enter the Immeasurable region.

And Tetragrammaton Elohim planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, 
and out of the ground made Tetragrammaton Elohim to grow every 
tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the Tree of Life 
also, in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good 
and of Evil. This is the Tree that has two Paths, and it is the Tenth 
Sephirah Malkuth, and it has about it seven Columns, and the Four 
Splendours whirl around it as in the Vision of the Mercabah of 
Ezekiel; and from Gedulah it derives an influx of Mercy, and from 
Geburah an influx of Severity, and the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and of Evil shall it be until it is united with the Supernals 
in Daath.

But the Good which is under itis called the Archangel Metatron, and 
the Evil is called the Archangel Samael, and between them lies the

146

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

straight and narrow way where the Archangel Sandalphon keeps 
watch. The Souls and the Angels are above its branches, and the 
Qlippoth or Demons dwell under its roots.

’ Let the Neophyte enter the Pathway of Evil.

Hiereus 
Kerux

<53>

Hiero’ Let the Neophyte enter the Pathway of Evil.

Hiereus 
Kerux

<53>

Hiero

Heg 
Kerux

Heg

Hiero

Hiero

Kerux takes his place in front of Neophyte, leads him in a N. E. direction 
towards the Hiereus, halts, and steps out of the direct line between Hiereus 
and Neophyte.

Whence comest thou?

I come from between the two Pillars and I seek the light of the Hid- 
den Knowledge in the Name of Adonai.

Hiereus And the Great Angel Samael answered, and said: I am the 
Prince of Darkness and of Night. The foolish and rebellious gaze 
upon the face of the created World, and find therein nothing but 
terror and obscurity. It isto them the Terror of Darkness and they are 
as drunken men stumbling in the Darkness.

Return, for thou canst not pass by.

Kerux leads Neo. back as he came, to between the Pillars.

Let the Neophyte enter the Pathway of Good.

Kerux leads Neophyte S. E., and halts opposite Hegemon, stepping aside 
from before Neo.

Whence comest thou?

I come from between the Pillars, and I seek the Light of the Hidden 
Knowledge in the Name of Adonai.

The Great Angel Metatron answered, and said: Iam the Angel of the 
Presence Divine. The Wise gaze upon the created world and behold 
there the dazzling image of the Creator. Not yet can thine eyes bear 
that dazzling Image. Return, for thou canst not pass by.

Kerux turns and leads Neophyte back between the Pillars.

Let the Neophyte enter the straight and narrow Pathway which 
turns neither to the right hand nor to the left hand.

Kerux leads Neophyte directly up centre of Hall until he is near the Altar, 
halts, steps aside from before Neophyte, leaving him to face Altar un- 
obstructed.

Hiereus, Hegemon (together) Whence comest thou?

(They cross Sceptre and Sword before Altar.)Hiereus, Hegemon (together) Whence comest thou?

(They cross Sceptre and Sword before Altar.)

I come from between the Pillars and I seek the Light of the Hidden 
Knowledge in the Name of Adonai. 
Hierophant advances to East of Altar with Sceptre, which he thrusts between 
Sword of Hiereus and Sceptre of Hegemon, and raising it to an angle of 
45° says:

But the Great Angel Sandalphon said: I am the reconciler for Earth, 
and the Celestial Soul therein. Form is invisible alike in Darkness 
and in blinding Light. I am the left hand Kerub of the Ark and the 
Feminine Power, as Metatron is the right hand Kerub and the Mas- 
culine Power, And I prepare the way to the Celestial Light. 
Hegemon and Hiereus step back to South and North of Altar respectively. 
Hiero takes Neo by right hand with his left, and pointing to the Altar and 
Diagram says:

Zelator Ritual 147

<55>

<56>

Heg

Hiereus

Hiero

And Tetragrammaton placed Kerubim at the East of the Garden of 
Eden and a Flaming Sword which turned every way to keep the Path 
of the Tree of Life, for He has created Nature that Man being cast out 
of Eden may not fall into the Void. He has bound Man with the Stars . 
as with a chain. He allures him with Scattered Fragments of the 
Divine body in bird and beast and flower, and He laments over him 
in the Wind and in the Sea and in the birds. When the times are 
ended, He will call the Kerubim from the East of the Garden, and all 
shall be consumed and become Infinite and Holy.Receive now the secrets of this Grade. The step is thus given — 6 by 
6 — showing you have passed the threshold. The Sign is given by 
raising the right hand to an angle of 45°. It is the position in which 
the Hierophant interposed for you between the Hiereus and the 
Hegemon. The Token is given by grasping fingers, the thumb touch- 
ing thumb to form a triangle. It refers to the Ten Sephiroth. The 
Word is ADONAI HA—ARETZ, and means Adonai the Lord of the 
Earth, to which Element this Grade is allotted. The Mystic Numberis 
55, and from it is formed the Pass-word Nun He. It means Ornament, 
and when given is lettered separately. The Badge of this Grade, is the 
sash of the Neophyte with the narrow white border, a red cross 
within the Triangle, and the number ® withinacircleand 24 within 
a square, one on each side of the triangle.

He invests Neophyte with the sash, and points out the Three Portals, 
saying:

The Three Portals facing you in the East, are the Gates of the Paths 
leading to the three further Grades, which with the Zelator and the 
Neophyte forms the first and lowest Order of our Fraternity. 
Furthermore, they represent the Paths which connect the Tenth 
Sephirah Malkuth with the other Sephiroth. The letters Tau, Qoph 
and Shin make the word Quesheth — a Bow, the reflection of the 
Rainbow of Promise stretched over our Earth, and which is about 
the Throne of God.

Hegemon points out the Flaming Sword, saying:

This drawing of the Flaming Sword of the Kerubim, is a representa- 
tion of the Guardians of the Gates of Eden, just as the Hiereus and 
Hegemon symbolise the Two Paths of the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and of Evil.

In this Grade, the red Cross is placed within the White Triangle upon 
the Altar, and it is thus the symbol of the Banner of the West. The 
Triangle refers to the Three Paths and the Cross to the Hidden 
Knowledge. The Cross and the Triangle together represent Life 
and Light.Hiero points out the Tablet of the North, saying:

This Grade is especially referred to the Element of Earth, and 
therefore, one of its principal emblems is the Great Watch Tower or

148

<57>

Hiero

<58>

Hiero

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

Terrestrial Tablet of the North. It is the Third or Great Northern 
Quadrangle or Earth Tablet, and it is one of the four Great Tablets of 
the Elements said to have been given to Enoch by the Great Angel 
Ave. It is divided within itself into four lesser angles. The Mystic let- 
ters upon it form various Divine and Angelic Names, in what our 
tradition calls the Angelic secret language. From it are drawn the 
Three Holy Secret Names of God EMOR DIAL HECTEGA which 
are borne upon the Banners of the North, and there are also number- 
less names of Angels, Archangels, and Spirits ruling the Element 
of Earth.

Kerux comes forward and hands Fylfot Cross to Hiero:

The Hermetic Cross, which is also called Fylfot, Hammer of Thor, 
and Swastika, is formed of 17 Squares out of a square of 25 lesser 
squares. These 17 represent the Sun, the Four Elements, and the 
Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. In this Grade, the lights on the Pillars are 
unshaded, showing that you have quitted the Darkness of the outer 
world. You will leave the Temple for a short time.

Kerux takes Neophyte out.

SECOND PART

3 | Banner 
Banner g 52d Ou East

Sist

Hieveus .1st. |Hieveus.1st.Position a

Pitlor Facing Hieveus Je ettien Pillay

Facing East

Hiereus.2d Posilion

Temple arranged as in Diagram.

Frater Kerux, when the Neophyte gives the proper alarm, you will 
admit him. Fraters Stolistes and Dadouchos, assist the Kerux in 
the reception.

Zelator Ritual 149

<59> 
Hiero

Hiero

<60>

Heg

Heg

<61>

Kerux goes out and instructs Neophyte in the knocks. Stol. and Dad. take up 
positions so as to face Neophyte as he enters Hall. Kerux opens door and 
admits Neo., but does not stand in front of him.Kerux goes out and instructs Neophyte in the knocks. Stol. and Dad. take up 
positions so as to face Neophyte as he enters Hall. Kerux opens door and 
admits Neo., but does not stand in front of him.

Frater...... , as in the Grade of Neophyte, you came out of the World 
to the Gateway of Hidden Knowledge, so in this Grade you pass 
through the Gate-way and come into the Holy Place. You are now in 
the Court of the Tabernacle, where stood the Altar of Burnt Offering, 
whereon was offered the Sacrifices of animals, which symbolised 
the Qlippoth or Evil Demons who inhabit the plane contiguous to 
and below the Material Universe.

Dadouchos makes Cross in air with Censer, and censes Neophyte in silence 
with three forward swings.

Between the Altar and the entrance into the Holy Place, stood the 
Laver of Brass wherein the priests washed before entering the 
Tabernacle. It was the symbol of the Waters of Creation.

Stol. makes cross with water on Neophyte’s forehead and sprinkles thrice 
in silence.

Having made offering at the Altar of Burnt Sacrifice, and having 
been cleansed at the Laver of Brass, the Priest then entered the 
Holy Place.

Kerux takes Neophyte behind Pillars to North. Stolistes and Dadouchos 
return to their places. Hiereus takes his stand between the Pillars (Kerux 
having removed the chair) facing Neophyte. He guards the path with his 
Sword and says:

Hiereus Thou canst not pass the Gateway which is between the 
Pillars, unless thou canst give the Signs and Words of a Neophyte. 
Neophyte gives them, and instructed by Kerux, advances to a-position be- 
tween the Pillars. Hiereus returns to his place. Hegemon comes forward, 
stands East of Pillars, facing Neophyte, and bars the way into the Temple 
with Sceptre, saying:

Thou canst not enter the Holy Place, unless thou canst give the Sign 
and Grip of a Zelator.

Neophyte gives them. Kerux resumes his seat after handing Neophyte over 
to charge of Hegemon. Heg. leads Neophyte to North, and says:Neophyte gives them. Kerux resumes his seat after handing Neophyte over 
to charge of Hegemon. Heg. leads Neophyte to North, and says:

To the Northern side of the Holy Place, stood the Table of Shew- 
bread. The drawing before you represents its occult meaning. On it 
twelve loaves were laid as emblems of the Bread of life, and it is an 
image of the Mystery of the Rose of Creation. The 12 circles are the 
12 Signs of the Zodiac, while the Lamp in the centre is symbolic of 
the Sun, which is the source of heat and life. The Four Triangles 
whose twelve angles each touch one of the 12 circles are those of 
Fire, Earth, Air, and Water, and allude to the four Triplicities of the 
Zodiacal Signs. The Triangle inscribed within each of the 12 circles, 
alludes to the 3 Decanates, or phases of ten degrees of each sign. On 
one side of each Triangle is the Permutation of the Divine Name Yod 
Heh Vau Heh, which is referred to that particular sign, while in the 
opposite side of it is the name of one of the 12 Tribes which is also 
attributed to it.

150

<62>

Hiereus

<63>

The Golden Dawn: Volume I Book Two

Now the 22 sounds and letters of the Hebrew Alphabet are the foun- 
dations ofall things. Three Mothers, Seven Double and Twelve Sim- 
ples. The Twelve Simple letters are allotted to the 12 directions in 
space, and those diverge to Infinity, and are in the arms of the Eter- 
nal. These Twelve Letters He designed and combined, and formed 
with them the Twelve Celestial Constellations of the Zodiac. They 
are over the Universe as a King upon his throne, and they are in the 
revolution of the year as a King traversing his dominions, and they 
are in the heart of man as a King in warfare.

And the Twelve Loaves are the images of those ideas, and are the 
outer petals of the Rose; while within are the Four Archangels ruling 
over the Four Quarters, and the Kerubic emblems of the Lion, Man, 
Bull and Eagle.Around the great central Lamp which is an image of the Sun, is the 
Great Mother of Heaven, symbolised by the letter Heh, the first of 
the Simple letters, and by its number 5, the Pentagram, Malkah the 
Bride, ruling in her Kingdom Malkuth, crowned with a crown of 
Twelve Stars.

These Twelve Circles further represent the 12 Foundations of the 
Holy City of the Apocalypse, while in Christian Symbolism the Sun 
and the Twelve Signs are referred to Christ and His Twelve 
Apostles.

Hegemon leads Neophyte to Hiereus and then returns to his place and is 
seated. Hiereus leads Neophyte to the South, and says:

On the Southern side of the Holy Place stood the Seven-Branched 
Candlestick, wherein was burned pure olive oil. It is an image of the 
Mystery of the Elohim, the Seven Creative Ideas. The symbolic 
drawing before you represents its occult meaning. The Seven Cir- 
cles which surround the Heptagram, represent the Seven Planets 
and the Seven Qabalistic Palaces of Assiah, the Material World — 
which answer to the Seven Apocalytic Churches which are in Asia 
or Assiah — as these again allude to the Seven Lamps before the 
Throne on another Plane.

Within each circle is a triangle to represent the Three Fold Creative 
Idea operating in all things. On the right hand side of each is the 
Hebrew Name of the Angel who governs the Planet; on the left side 
is the Hebrew Name of the sphere of the Planet itself; while the He- 
brew letter beneath the base is one of the duplicated letters of the 
Hebrew Alphabet which refer to the Seven Planets.

The Seven Double Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet have each two 
sounds associated with them, one hard, and one soft. They are called 
“double”, because each letter represents a contrary or permutation, 
thus: Life and Death; Peace and War; Wisdom and Folly; Riches and 
Poverty; Grade and Indignity; Fertility and Solitude; Power and 
Servitude.These Seven letters point out 7 localities; Zenith, Nadir, East, West, 
North, South, and the Place of Holiness in the midst sustaining all 
things. The Archetypal Creator designed, produced, combined and

Zelator Ritual 151

Hiero

<64>

<65>

Hiero

Kerux

formed with them the Planets of the Universe, the Days of the Week, 
and in Man, the Gate of the Soul. He has loved and blessed the num- 
ber 7 more than all things under His Throne. The powers of these 7 
letters are also shown forth in the 7 Palaces of Assiah, and the Seven 
Stars of that Vision are the 7 Archangels who rule them.He leads Neophyte to W. of Altar, and returns to his place, and is seated. 
Hierophant comes to E. of Altar, takes censer from Altar, and holding it with 
chain short, makes cross and three forward swings, replaces it, and says: 
Before the Veil of the Holy of Holies, stood the Altar of Incense, of 
which this Altar is an image. It was of the form of a double cube, thus 
representing material form as a reflection and duplication of that 
which is Spiritual. The sides of the Altar, together with the top and 
bottom, consist of ten squares, thus symbolising the Ten Sephiroth 
of which the basal one is Malkuth, the realisation of the rest upon the 
material plane, behind which the others are concealed. For were this 
double cube raised in the air immediately above your head, you 
would but see the single square forming the lowest side, the others 
from their position being concealed from you. Just so, behind the 
material Universe, lies the concealed form of the Majesty of God. 
The Altar of Incense was overlaid with Gold to represent the highest 
degree of purity, but the Altar before you is black to represent the 
terrestrial Earth. Learn then, to separate the pure from the impure, 
and refine the Gold of the Spirit from the Black Dragon, the corrupt- 
ible body. Upon the Cubical Altar, were Fire, Water, and Incense, the 
Three Mother Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; Aleph, Mem, and 
Shin. Mem is silent, Shin is sibilant, and Aleph is the tongue of a 
balance between these contraries in equilibrium, reconciling and 
mediating between them. In this is a great Mystery, very admirable 
and recondite. The Fire produced the Heavens, the Water, the Earth, 
and the Air is the reconciler between them. In the year, they bring 
forth the hot, the cold, and the temperate seasons, and in man, they 
are imaged in the head, the chest, and the trunk.I now confer upon you the Mystic Title of Periclinus de Faustis, 
which signifies that on this Earth you are ina wilderness, far from the 
Garden of the Happy.

And I give you the symbol of ARETZ which is the Hebrew name for 
Earth, to which the UW = Grade of Zelator is referred. The word 
Zelator is derived from the ancient Egyptian Zaruator, signifying 
“Searcher of Athor”, Goddess of Nature; but others assign to it the 
meaning of the zealous student whose first duty was to blow the 
Athanor of Fire which heated the Crucible of the Alchemist. 
Hierophant resumes seat on Dais: Kerux leads new Zelator to seat in 
North West.

Frater Kerux, you have my command to declare that our Frater has 
been duly admitted to the O= Grade of Zelator.

Kerux comes to N. W. of Hierophant, faces West, raises Wand and says: 
In the Name of ADONAI MELEKH, and by command of the Very 
Honoured Hierophant, hear ye all that I proclaim that Frater......

152

Hiero

<66>

Hiero

Kerux

Hiero

<67>

Hiero

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

has been duly admitted to the O= Grade of Zelator, and that he 
has obtained the Mystic Title of Periclinus (Pericline) de Faustis and 
the symbol of Aretz.

He returns to his place by E, saluting, and by S. and W.*He returns to his place by E, saluting, and by S. and W.*

In the Zelator Grade, the symbolism of the Tenth Sephirah Malkuth 
is especially shown, as well as the Tenth Path of the Sepher Yetsirah. 
Among other Mystic Titles, Malkuth is called SHAAR, the Gate, 
which by metathesis becomes ASHUR, meaning the number Ten. 
Also in Chaldee it is called THRAA, The Gate, which has the same 
number as the Great Name ADONAL, written in full: Aleph, Daleth, 
Nun, Yod, which both equal 671 in total numeration. It is also called 
the “Gate of Death”, “The Gate of Tears”, and the “Gate of Justice”, 
the “Gate of Prayer”, and “The Gate of the Daughter of the Mighty 
Ones”. It is also called “The Gate of the Garden of Eden” and the 
Inferior Mother, and in Christian symbolism, it is connected with 
the Three Holy Womenat the foot of the Cross. The Tenth Path of the 
Sepher Yetsirah which answereth to Malkuth is called “The Re- 
splendent Intelligence”, because it exalts above every head and sit- 
teth upon the Throne of Binah. It illuminateth the Splendour of all 
the Lights, (the Zohar ME-OUROTH) and causeth the current of the 
Divine Influx to descend from the Prince of Countenances, the 
Great Archangel Metatron.

Frater...... before you can be eligible for advancement to the next 
Grade of Y = [2], you will be required to pass an examination in cer- 
tain subjects. A manuscript on these will be supplied to you. When 
you are well satisfied that you are well informed on these, notify the 
Officer in charge.CLOSING 
Fratres and Sorores, assist me to close this Temple in the O= 
Grade of Zelator. 
All rise. 
Frater Kerux, see that the Temple is properly guarded. 
(on inner side of the door, knocks. Sentinel knocks.) Very Honoured 
Hierophant, the Temple is properly guarded. 
Let us adore the Lord and King of Earth. 
All face East. 
ADONAI HA-ARETZ, ADONAI MELEKH, Blessed be Thy Name 
unto the countless ages. Amen. 
Gives Sign. All give sign and face as usual. Hiero. leaves his Throne and 
passes to the North, standing before the Tablet of the North, Hiereus stands 
on right of Hiero; Hegemon left; Kerux behind Hiero; Stolistes behind 
Hiereus, Dadouchos behind Hegemon. 
Let us rehearse the prayer of the Earth Spirits. 
O Invisible King, Who, taking the Earth for Foundation, didst hollow 
its depths to fill them with Thy Almighty Power. Thou Whose Name 
shaketh the Arches of the World, Thou who causest the Seven 
“It is at this point that the Secrets related on page 55 would be better place. P.M.

Zelator Ritual 153

<68>

Hiero

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Heg

Metals to flow in the veins of the rocks, King of the Seven Lights, 
Rewarder of the subterranean Workers, lead us into the desirable 
Air and into the Realm of Splendour. We watch and we labour 
unceasingly, we seek and we hope, by the twelve stones of the Holy 
City, by the buried Talismans, by the Axis of the Lodestone which 
passes through the centre of the Earth — O Lord, O Lord, O Lord! 
Have pity upon those who suffer. Expand our hearts, unbind and 
upraise our minds, enlarge our natures.O Stability and Motion! O Darkness veiled in Brilliance! O Day 
clothed in Night! O Master who never dost withhold the wages of 
Thy Workmen! O Silver Whiteness — O Golden Splendour! O 
Crown of Living and Harmonious Diamond! Thou who wearest the 
Heavens on Thy Finger like a ring of Sapphire! Thou Who hidest 
beneath the Earth in the Kingdom of Gems, the marvellous Seed of 
the Stars! Live, reign, and be Thou the Eternal Dispenser of the 
Treasures whereof Thou hast made us the Wardens.

Depart ye in peace unto your abodes. May the blessing of Adonai be 
upon you. (Makes Banishing Pentagram of Earth.) Be there peace be- 
tween us and you, and be ye ready to come when ye are called. 
All return to their places and face as usual.

In the Name of ADONAI MELEKH, I declare this Temple closed in 
the Grade of Zelator.

man m

mossy om

mois oy

Candidate is let out by Hegemon.

<69> CEREMONY 
OF THE 
@ = 2] GRADE OF THEORICUS

LLP sist a\ 32nd 29

wt 
Ist Part

VILLA 
7, 7

14] KEY of 
Salt taRoT |

Cup

Flamin 
8 word

aes

; Incense

154

Theoricus Ritual 155

<70> Requirements:

In the East — Pentacle, Banner of East and West.

On the Altar — Fan, Lamp, Cup, Salt, surrounding the Altar Diagram of 
the Universe.

For the Zelator — Hoodwink, Cubical Cross (1st point); Caduceus 
(2nd point).

Hiero

Kerux 
Hiero

Hiereus

<71>

Heg 
Hiero

Hiereus 
Hiero 
Heg 
Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero

Hiero

HieroFor the Zelator — Hoodwink, Cubical Cross (1st point); Caduceus 
(2nd point).

Hiero

Kerux 
Hiero

Hiereus

<71>

Heg 
Hiero

Hiereus 
Hiero 
Heg 
Hiero 
Hiereus

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

OPENING 
Temple arranged as in diagram for the 32nd Path. Members assembled and 
clothed. Lamp on Altar lighted. Members present, but not taking office, rise at 
the words “Let us adore the Lord and King of Air” and face East, remaining so 
to the end of the invokation. They do the same at the closing, but otherwise do 
not move from their places. (1 = one knock) 
(knocks) Fratres and Sorores of the Order of the STELLA 
MATUTINA in the Outer, assist me to open the Temple in the 
Theoricus Grade. Frater KERUX, see that the Temple is properly 
guarded. 
Kerux goes to door, sees that it is closed, knocks, and says: 
(knocks) Very Honoured Hierophant, the Temple is properly guard- 
ed. (returns to his place.) 
Honoured Hiereus, see that none below the Grade of Theoricus 
is present. 
Fratres and Sorores, give the Signs of the ® =E] Grade. (done) 
Very Honoured Hierophant, all present have attained the Grade of 
Theoricus. (Salutes with @ =] Sign.) 
Hiero Honoured Hegemon, to what particular Elementis this Grade 
attributed? 
To the Element of Air. 
Honoured Hiereus, to what Planet does this Grade especially 
refer? 
To the Moon. 
Honoured Hegemon, what path is attached to this Grade? 
The 32nd Path of TAU. 
Honoured Hiereus, to what does it allude? 
To the Universe as composed of the Four Elements — to the 
KERUBIM, the QLIPPOTH and the Astral Plane, and the reflection 
of the sphere of SATURN. 
(knocks) (All rise and face East.) Let us adore the Lord and King of 
Air! 
Hierophant makes circle with Sceptre towards E. 
SHADDAI EL CHAI, Almighty and Ever-lasting — Ever-Living be 
Thy Name, Ever Magnified in the Life of All. Amen. 
All Salute. Hiero remains facing E. Hiereus advances to W. of Altar. 
Hegemon and Kerux advance and stand at the outer sides of the Pillars. All 
face E. Hiero makes invoking Pentagrams within a circle before the Air 
Tablet. 
And the ELOHIM said—“Let us make ADAM in Our Image, after our 
likeness, and let them have dominion over the Fowl of the Air.”156

<72>

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero 
Hiereus 
Heg

Hiero

<73>

Heg 
Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

The Golden Dawn: Volume II Book Two

In the Name YOD HE VAU HE and in the Name of SHADDAI EL 
CHAI Spirits of Air adore your Creator.

Takes up Pentacle and at the words “Head of the Man” makes the sign 
Aquarius before Tablet.

In the Name of RAPHAEL, the Great Archangel of Air, and in the 
Sign of the Head of the Man =», Spirits of Air adore your Creator! 
Makes Cross with Pentacle.

In the Name and Letters of the Great Eastern Quadrangle, revealed 
unto ENOCH by the Great Angel AVE, Spirits of Air adore your 
Creator!

(holding Pentacle on High) In the Three Great Secret Names of God, 
borne on the Banners of the East, ORO IBAH AOZPI, Spirits of Air 
adore your Creator! In the Name of BATAIVAH, Great King of the 
East, Spirits of Air, adore your Creator!

Replaces Pentacle. All return to places.

Inthe mea of SHADDAI EL CHAL I declare this Temple opened in 
the @ =[8] Grade of Theoricus.

mw yy

mow wm

mom

Ceremony of Advancement in the Path of TAU

(knocks) Fratres and Sorores, our Frater (Soror)...... having made 
such progress in the Paths of Occult Knowledge as has enabled him 
to pass an examination in the requisite knowledge, is now eligible 
for advancement to the Grade of Theoricus, and I have duly re- 
ceived a dispensation from the Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the 
Second Order, to advance him in due form.

Honoured Hegemon, superintend the preparation of the Zelator 
and give the customary alarm,

Hegemon rises and saluting, quits the Temple. He prepares the Zelator by 
seeing he is robed and wearing his sash, presents him with Greek Cubical 
Cross, Hood-winks him and comes to the door, giving the knock.

Kerux meanwhile, places FAN by Hierophant; LAMP by Hegemon; CUP by 
Hiereus; and SALT by his own place. Kerux, on hearing the alarm, opens the 
door and allows Hegemon to enter with Zelator, and then closes it.QUIT THE MATERIAL AND SEEK THE SPIRITUAL.

Conduct the Zelator to the East.

Zelator is led between the Pillars to Hierophant's Throne, Kerux standing on 
his right, Hegemon on his left. Kerux takes Cubical Cross from him. 
Give me the Step and Sign of a Zelator. (done)

Give me the Grip or Token. (done)

Give me the Grand Word. (ADONAI HA-ARETZ) Mystic Title 
(Periclinus de Faustis) and the Mystic Number (55) of a Zelator. 
What is the Pass-Word formed from the Mystic Number? (Nun 
Heh)

(This is done, Hegemon prompting if necessary)

Frater Periclinus de Faustis, do you solemnly pledge yourself to

Theoricus Ritual 157

<74>

Zelator

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

Hiero

Kerux

<75>

Hiereus

Hiero' 
Kerux 
Hiero

Kerux

Hiero

Hiereus

maintain the same Sree "8 regarding the Mysteries of the 
32nd Path of the Grade o P Theoricus, which you have 
already sworn to maintain regarding those of the preceding Grades?

I do. (Kerux gives back Cross to Zelator.)

Then you will stretch out your hand, holding the Cubical Cross 
towards Heaven and say: “I swear by the Firmament of Heaven.” 
This is done — Zelator repeating the words.

Let the hood-wink be removed.

Done. Hegemon returns to his place in the South. Kerux is now in 
charge of Zelator.

S

*[... 1299937 more characters truncated ...]*