vie oT oe
7 r va fb.
od j ar 2 ‘
ow, bir hw:
M sb te —
Tow Ae O41
ae

am ard an
E Caleta a , ‘oe
p ) eo Lihat a

aaa A} _ ian ia
f =—= “i ‘ates > tee
moe ig eS) iw
: e=5 a a or, See
- - Ae . caf aie ee 7 ee
ao
— 7 a Js

iv igh ve we i ny ae
Sina elias ae a
i

BARNABAS, HERMAS
AND THE DIDACHE

BEING : THE: : DONNEL LAN: _LECEURES
DELIVERED. BEFORE THE ‘UNIVERSITY
OF: SDR: -IN*: “1920

BY

J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON, DD.

DEAN OF WELLS

LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

1920

ae t
aa

ti

PRINTED BY
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS LIMITED

LONDON AND BECCLES

PREFACE

HE ultimate aim of these Lectures is to reach a
point of view from which the literary character
and the historical value of the Didache, or

Teaching of the Apostles, can be justly estimated.
The study of the Epistle attributed to the Apostle
Barnabas goes to show that its closing section, which
treats of the “‘Two Ways,” is wholly in character
with the rest of the Epistle and is almost certainly
the original composition of this rabbinically-minded
author. The study of the Shepherd will suggest that
Hermas knew the “‘ Two Ways”? in the form in which
it is found in the Epistle of Barnabas. The Didache
in its opening section offers us the “Two Ways” of
the Epistle of Barnabas with an improved arrange-
ment of its precepts and with modifications intro-
duced from the Shepherd of Hermas as well as from
the Sermon on the Mount. Moreover the closing
section of the Didache has borrowed from the earlier
part of the Epistle of Barnabas.

The use of Barnabas and Hermas was recognised
at once by Bryennius the first editor of the Didache
in 1888, and by Dr Harnack in his notable edition
of 1884; and it was allowed that for this reason the
Didache could not be placed earlier than c. 140-160.
But the question of date was obscured by a theory
propounded two years later by Dr C. Taylor, who
was impressed by the rabbinic cast of much of the

iii

iv PREFACE

Didache and accordingly suggested that the earlier
part of it, at any rate, was a Jewish manual of
instructions for proselytes which had been embodied
with various modifications in the Epistle of Barnabas
and in the Didache. The references to the Sermon
on the Mount and to the Shepherd of Hermas were
disposed of by the assumption that the chapter of the
Didache in which they occurred was a Christian inter-
polation, introduced to make this Jewish manual
more suitable for candidates for Holy Baptism. As
the interpolation might have been made, not by the
author of the Didache himself, but by a later reviser
of it, neither Barnabas nor Hermas need any longer
be taken into account in fixing the date of the book
in its uninterpolated form. Some critics were there-
fore courageous enough to assign it to the first
century, though Dr Harnack, who accepted the new
theory, still refused to go back behind the time of
Hadrian.

If what is urged in these Lectures is accepted, the
theory of a Jewish manual disappears altogether, and
the ground is cleared for a new consideration of the
whole problem. Eight years ago I suggested that
the aim of the writer of the Didache was to be
gathered from the title which he himself prefixed to
his work: ‘The Teaching of the Lord, through the
Twelve Apostles, to the Gentiles.”” In other words,
he was endeavouring to present a picture of the way
in which the Gentile Churches were ordered by their
Apostolic founders, and he sought to confine himself,
so far as he could, to such precepts and regulations
as could be authenticated, directly or indirectly, by
writings of the Apostolic age. In the essay which
dealt with this matter, and which I have reprinted
here as Appendix A, only the second portion of the
Didache came under investigation; for when it was
written I still held the almost universally accepted

PREFACE Vv

theory of an original Jewish “Two Ways,” and there-
fore did not attempt to apply the same principle of
interpretation to the first portion of the book. This
I have now done, with the result that I am more
than ever convinced that the writer of the Didache
was trying to represent the moral instruction and the
ecclesiastical ordinances which the Apostles might
reasonably be supposed to have sanctioned for their
Gentile converts; and that accordingly we may not
assume that the whole of the picture which he has
drawn corresponded to the actual conditions of his
own time, whatever that time may have been.

It is not easy to present in a course of Lectures
an argument which needs for its full appreciation a
constant reference to the original Greek. But I hope
that what is here said will suffice to clear away some
serious misconceptions and to open a new path for
the criticism and interpretation of a document the
discovery of which has had an extraordinary influence
upon the modern presentation of early Christian
institutions.

For the Table of Parallels in Appendix B I have
to thank my friend Dom Connolly, who has also
helped me by valuable suggestions.

J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON.

THE DEANERY,
WELLS, SOMERSET,
June, 1920.

CONTENTS

PREFACE ... one as
THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS
THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS
THE DIDACHE a pale

EPILOGUE ae ae

APPENDIX A. ‘THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE

APPENDIX B. ‘TABLE OF PARALLELS: THE Two
Ways IN BARNABAS AND THE DIDACHE ,,..

vii

104

BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE
DIDACHE

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS

HE contrast in spiritual power and in literary
merit between the Epistle to the Hebrews and
the Epistle which has come down to us under

the name of Barnabas has quite justly thrown the
jatter work into the shade. Yet the same problem,
though under different aspects, was before each of
these writers. The Gentiles through the teaching
and labours of St Paul had claimed and secured
equal privilege with the Jews in the Christian Society.
It was becoming evident that the future of Chris-
tianity was mainly with the Gentiles, and that the
Jews as a people had finally refused to admit that in
this joint inheritance lay the fulfilment of the Promise
to the Fathers. Even after the Temple had fallen
Judaism as a religion persisted, devoting itself to an
observance of such parts of the Mosaic Law as were
not interfered with by the loss of the unique centre
of sacrifice, and upholding a morality far superior to
that of the surrounding heathenism; claiming,
moreover, to be the only true exponent of the doctrine
of the One God, and to possess sacred books inspired

by divine wisdom.
1

2 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

Christianity could not forget its Jewish origin.
The Law and the Prophets had been treated as
divine utterances by Christ and His Apostles. The ~
ceremonial obligations of Judaism had indeed been
relaxed for Gentile converts; but it might still be
urged that some of the ancient ordinances, if not
obligatory, were yet of value to all Christian believers,
if only as the symbols and precepts of a higher standard
of sanctity. In the period of reflection which neces-
sarily succeeded to the first enthusiasm of the Gospel
message, grave questions arose. Was God’s old
Covenant a reality, or had the Jews been under a
delusion all through their history ? If it was a reality,
and if it had never been formally set aside by any
direct words of Christ, how did Christians stand in
regard to it? How could the Old Testament be
accepted by them as their Bible, and at the same time
practically rejected by their refusal to obey its pre-
cepts? What if a grave and pious Judaism, with
its treasures of holy memory and its careful rules of
conduct, were perhaps after all a nobler and a more
sustaining creed than the Christianity which, since
it had broken away from its original stock, was already
showing signs of decay and failing to hold the baptised
to the high ideals of their regeneration ? The problem
was to have very various answers during the coming
years. One, quite decisive in its clearness, was given
by Marcion, who maintained that the Old Testament
religion was false from beginning to end. The world
had been created by a Being who, though divine,
was less than the Highest. The Demiurge, or Creator
—the Just God of the Old Testament—had deceived
the Jews until the Good God of the New Testament
had sent forth His Son to bring them out of their
darkness. ‘Therefore the Old Testament must- be
discarded altogether, and of the New Testament
only St Paul’s Epistles and the Pauline Gospel of

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 3

St Luke could be accepted as the authentic scriptures
of the Christian Church.

That such an answer could have been suggested
at all shows how real the difficulty was, and how per-
sistently it troubled Christian minds. But in the first
century, and in the early years of the second, no one
proposed so drastic a purge. The value of the Old
Testament was too obvious to admit the suggestion
that it could be abandoned. It must be explained,
and at all costs retained. On the other hand it was
vital to the Christian Church that its superiority to
Judaism, both as a system of thought and as a way of
life, should be placed beyond doubt. Two anonymous
writings of this earlier period have survived to show
us in what different ways the problem was attacked.
The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews addressed
himself to Jewish readers, who had accepted Chris-
tianity, but under the pressure of some great crisis
were looking wistfully back to the religion of their
fathers. With passionate earnestness he warned
them against apostasy. And he brought a great
message of hope. He bade them see that the Christ
was more than they had ever supposed, even in the
enthusiasm of their first acceptance of Him. He
was the Fulfiller of the past—that sacred past in which
fragments of the eternal truth had been enshrined in
temporary ordinances, whose only abrogation lay in
their complete fulfilment. One great thought he was
inspired to give them—the Eternal High-priesthood
of Christ. Here was the justification of the sacrificial
system, and at the same moment its perpetual abroga-
tion. The sacred past was theirs because it was taken
up and fulfilled: to honour the record of it was a
part of their loyalty to its Fulfiller. The Old Testa-
ment thus remained among the essential title-deeds
of the Christian Church: its holy precepts and
its inspiring examples, freed from the ceremonial

4 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

limitations of their first appearance, would for ever
be the guides of Christian life and devotion.

Strange to say this great Epistle had for a long time
but a narrow circulation and a restricted influence.
Clement of Rome at the end of the first century knew
it and made some use of its language, but failed to
reach the height of its thought. Apart from this we
hear little of it. At the end of the second century it
still lingered on the outskirts of the Canon. The
uncertainty of its authorship weighed against its
internal merit; and not till the fourth century was
its claim universally admitted.

Curiously different was the fate of the Epistle to
which the name of Barnabas came to be attached.
It was not an epistle to Hebrews, but essentially an
epistle to Gentiles. It was the offspring of a warm
heart, but of a narrow mind, stored with Jewish
traditions. Its writer was vigorous indeed in his
rejection of Judaism, but yet wholly unappreciative
of those loftier issues of Christianity which form the
great argument of the writer to the Hebrews. Yet
it made its appeal with a success of which the author
could hardly have dreamed. We find it used by
Hermas in the Shepherd, probably by Justin Martyr,
certainly by Irenzeus, and then frequently by Clement
of Alexandria, who definitely assigns it to Barnabas,
the apostle and the companion of St Paul. Like
the Epistle to the Hebrews this Epistle also lingered
for a while on the outskirts of the Canon. In the
great Sinaitic Codex of the fourth century it stands
with the Shepherd of Hermas at the close of the New
Testament. But after this its glory fades, and indeed
it narrowly escaped complete destruction. When
Archbishop Ussher was preparing what would have
been the editio princeps had not a fire at Oxford
consumed the University Press and all but a few
sheets of his work, he had but scanty materials for

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 5

constructing his text. All that could be found was
an ancient Latin translation and a Greek manuscript
imperfect at the beginning. This manuscript was
descended from a copy which had lost certain leaves,
in such a way that what remained of the Epistle of
Barnabas was joined up with a portion of the Epistle
of Polycarp, as though it were the conclusion of this
latter work. The Sinaitic Codex remained unknown
until the middle of the nineteenth century, and it was
not until many years later that another copy of the
Epistle in Greek was found by Bryennius in the codex
from which he gave us the Didache or Teaching of the
Apostles.

It was plain then that Barnabas—for so we must
for convenience call the writer, though he nowhere
reveals his name—made an appeal, such as the author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews had failed to make, to
the general mind of the early Church. This in itself
entitles him to a respectful hearing. Let us take him
for what he claims to be; a simple man, “‘ no teacher,”’
** one of yourselves ” ; with a firm belief in the Incar-
nation and the Resurrection, and a conviction that
the sufferings of Christ were foretold by the prophets,
even to the details of His death upon the Cross; with
a sense, moreover, that the days are so evil that the
final judgment cannot long be delayed: let us read
him with sympathy, as one who, with however
imperfect a mental equipment, approached a real
difficulty in a spirit of sincerity and with an honest
desire to be helpful; and we shall understand how it
came about that, though his main thesis regarding the
Jewish Covenant could not possibly be accepted, yet
much of his argument and many of his illustrations
passed into the common stock of Christian apologetic.
Refined and elaborated by abler minds, they remained
to dominate the interpretation of the Old Testament
long after his book had been forgotten; and they

6 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

have hardly yet been altogether superseded by that
larger view of the truth which the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews still waits to bring home to
the Church in days when the historical criticism of
the ancient Scriptures has restated the old problem
in a scarcely less disquieting form.

The date of the Epistle of Barnabas remains an
open question. Bishop Lightfoot inclined to place it
as early as a.D. 79, Dr Harnack as late as a.p. 130;
but neither of them would speak with confidence.
The tone of the work is such as makes one eager to
place it early: yet we cannot be sure that the
conditions which called it forth may not have existed
in some part of the Church as late as the time of
Hadrian.

The warm heart of the man shows itself in his
opening words: “ All hail, sons and daughters, in
the name of the Lord who loved us. The ordinances
of God are great and rich towards you.” This phrase,
‘“‘the ordinances of God,” repeats itself again and
again. It is one of the two notes of the Epistle: the
other is “ knowledge ” (gnosis). The divine purpose
running through the past, and leading up to themselves
in the present—that is what he means by the ordi-
nances of God towards them. The deeper meaning of
the past, which has only come to light through Christ
—that is the gnosis which he has to offer them. He
proceeds in words to this effect :

The wonder of your spiritual endowment made me
feel, as I spoke in your midst, that the Lord travelled with
me in the way of righteousness ; and I am wholly con-
strained to love you more than my own soul. To minister
to such spirits must bring me a reward. Therefore I am
sending you somewhat, that with your faith you may
have knowledge (gnosis) to the full. Our Master has
given us through the prophets knowledge of things past
and things present, with a foretaste also of things to come,

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 7

As we observe the working out of all the details just as
He foretold them, we shall be enriched and uplifted in our
devotion. I am no teacher, but just one of yourselves ;
yet I have a few things which may give you cheer at the
present season. For the days indeed are evil; he that
worketh (6 évepyav) hath the power. Therefore must we
the more search out the ordinances of the Lord.

Here we must pause to note the Pauline back-
ground of the writer’s language. Again and again it
is the Epistle to the Ephesians that supplies him
with his phrases. We recall Eph. v. 16, ‘“‘ Redeeming
the time, because the days are evil”? ; and Eph. ii. 2,
“the spirit that now worketh in the children of dis-
obedience.”?> He is profoundly impressed by the
superhuman working—the évépyza—of a personal
power of evil. Twice he names him the Black One
(iv. 9, xx. 1); elsewhere the Evil Ruler (iv. 13), the
Ruler of the present time of iniquity (xvi. 2), and
once at least the Evil One (ii. 9): moreover he speaks
of an Evil Angel (ix. 4), and of the Angels of Satan
(xvill. 2).

The helpers of our faith in this extremity, he
continues, are fear and patience; our allies are long-
suffering and self-restraint. If we have these, then
in joyful train come wisdom, understanding, learning,
knowledge. So he comes again to gnosis. Gnosis is
especially the true understanding of the prophets
whom God fore-ordained as our teachers.

He begins with what the prophets say about
Sacrifice. Here he distinguishes between what God
says to the Jewish people and what He says to us.
To them He says that their sacrifices are vain, are
even an abomination. Tous He says: ‘ The sacrifice
of God is a broken heart : a sweet-smelling savour to
the Lord isa heart that glorifieth Him that formed it.”
As to Fasting the prophets have like words, spoken
in turn to them and to us. Barnabas shows no

8 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

bitterness against the Jews, but he is insistent in his
warnings that we must not “‘ be made like unto them.”
God has prepared for Himself ‘‘ a new people in His
Beloved ”—here again we have an echo of the Epistle
to the Ephesians (i. 6: the only place where the word
‘* Beloved” is so used in the New Testament). Then
follows one of his many exhortations: “ Let us flee
utterly from all the works of iniquity, lest the works
of iniquity overtake us: let us hate the error of the
time that now is, that we may be loved in that which
is tocome.” ‘ The final offence (rd réAeov oxavdadov)
is at hand. The Lord hath cut short the times and
the days, that His Beloved may hasten and come to
the inheritance.’’ Then as to the Covenant :

_ Be not deceived when they claim that it is theirs.
They lost their Covenant when Moses broke the Tables of
the Law because of their apostasy. Their Covenant was
broken to pieces, that the Covenant of Jesus the Beloved
might be sealed in our hearts. I say it again, I am no
teacher; but I love you, I am your slave. The whole
period of our faith will profit us nothing, unless now, in
the iniquitous time and in the offences that are to come,
we resist as becometh sons of God, that the Black One
may effect no subtle entrance. Let us flee from all
vanity, let us hate utterly the works of the evil way.
Go not in by yourselves nor abide alone, as though ye
were already justified: but assemble together and take
joint counsel for the common good.

So his exhortation runs on, till he reminds them of
the fall of Israel after all the signs and wonders God
had wrought for them, and adds the warning: ‘“‘ Let
us take heed lest haply we be found, as it is written,
many called, but few chosen.”

Hereupon follows a new topic, introduced with a
strange abruptness, such as indeed is characteristic
of the author’s untrained style. ‘‘ For to this end
the Lord endured to give over the flesh to destruction,

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 9

that by the remission of sins we might be purified,
to wit by the blood of His sprinkling. For it hath
been written concerning Him, partly regarding Israel,
and partly regarding us,” etc. Here is the same
contrast ; He suffered at their hands, but He suffered
for our sake. There is here no bitterness of reproach ;
but these are facts, he tells us, and they were foretold
long ago. How then, he seems to imply, can you
look towards them after all ?

But he has to answer a question which we may
suppose some Jew to have put to his readers: If
Christ be the Son of God, the Lord of all the world,
to whom God said at the creation, Let us make man
after our image and likeness—how could He endure
to suffer at the hands of men ?

It would take too long to follow his rambling dis-
cussion in answer to this question. Enough to say
that he urges the following points: He suffered for
our purification; He suffered that the sin of Israel
might be consummated: He must needs have come
in flesh, or men could not have looked on Him and been
saved, even as they cannot look on the sun in his
strength: the good Lord showed it us beforehand,
that we might know it as a part of His purpose.

Some strange gnosis is introduced, which we can
only note in passing. Thus “ the land (7 yf) flowing
with milk and honey ”’ is the Lord’s flesh: for ‘‘ man
is earth suffering” (yf wacxotca), and “ milk and
honey ” are the food of the new-born children. More
remarkable still is the exposition of the scape-goat,
‘‘spat upon and pricked and cast out, crowned with
scarlet,” which shows that the writer had a knowledge
of Jewish ritual beyond the injunctions of Leviticus,
The influence of rabbinic lore comes out again when
he plays with letters, numbers and names: for
Abraham’s household whom he circumcised consisted
of eighteen and three hundred souls: but the Greek

B

1¢ BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

numerals for eighteen are iota, eta (1 H), which stand
for Jesus; and three hundred is the letter tau (T),
which signifies the Cross. He prizes this as his own
discovery: ‘“‘ No man hath ever learned from me a
more genuine word ; but I know that ye are worthy.”
We may smile at such a gnosis: but it is only fair to
remember that dark verse of the Apocalypse (xiii. 18) :
‘** Here is wisdom: let him that hath understanding
count the number of the beast: for it is the number
of a man.”

Next, by another of his abrupt transitions, Barna-
bas proceeds to explain the Mosaic ordinances con-
cerning clean and unclean meats. “It is not a
commandment of God that literally they should not
eat; but Moses spake it in spirit.”?> We must not
follow him now into the moral distinctions between
the greedy pig or the idle and rapacious crow and the
quiet, ruminating cow. But it is important to observe
that here again Barnabas is not original in his method
of interpretation. The like distinctions were drawn
two centuries before Christ by an Alexandrine writer,
who sought to commend the Mosaic legislation to the
thoughtful Gentiles of his day. But there is this
difference between the Letter of Aristeas and the
Kpistle of Barnabas, that the former justifies the
literal command, as a constant reminder of the need
of moral purity; while the latter utterly rejects the

literal meaning, as never having been intended by
God.

Ye see how wise a lawgiver Moses was. But whence
should they perceive and understand these things ?
Howbeit we, having justly perceived the commandments,
declare them as the Lord hath willed. To this end He
circumcised owr ears and hearts, that we might under-
stand these things.

Then at once he starts on yet a new topic. “ But
let us inquire whether the Lord took care to signify

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS i

beforehand concerning the water and the cross.”
Barnabas finds these in several Scriptures, as in the
first psalm: ‘the tree planted by the streams of
water.”? One passage he quotes from an unknown
source :

_Another prophet, who saith: And when shall these
things be accomplished ? saith the Lord, When a tree
shall be bended and rise up; and when blood shall drop
from a tree.

The second of these sayings is found in IV Esdras
v. 5, among a number of portents which shall usher in
the end (et de ligno sanguis stillabit) ; but there seems
to be no proof that Barnabas knew that book. The
first saying (érav Etdov Kd) Kal avacrn), Which
perhaps should be rendered ‘‘ When a tree shall lie
down and rise up,” has not been traced to its source.
Nor is it found later, except among the Testimonies
against the Jews ascribed to Gregory of Nyssa, where
it is doubtless quoted from Barnabas. But there is
a passage of Irenzus (V. ii. 3) which seems capable
of explanation only if we suppose that he has this
saying in mind. He is speaking of the way in which
“the cup that has been mixed and the bread that has
been made out of the natural elements of the earth
become the Eucharist and the Body of Christ ’?; and
he says :

Just as the tree of the vine having been bended to the
earth (75 EvAov tis dpmréhov Kuby cis tiv ynv) bore fruit
in its own season, and the grain of wheat, having
fallen into the earth and bcen dissolved, was raised
manifold by the Spirit of God which holdeth together all
things. . . so our bodies, fed by the Eucharist and laid
in the earth, shall rise up in their own scason.

Though he uses it in a different way, it is this saying
which seems to be in his mind—‘‘ When a tree shall

be bended and rise up.”

12 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

After this Barnabas goes on to the outstretching
of the hands of Moses in the battle with Amalek, and
to the prophecy “* All day long have I stretched out
my hands ”’—passages very familiar to us in this
connexion in the later literature. And then he
justifies Moses for having made a serpent of brass
contrary to his own express prohibition. From this
he passes to the re-naming of Hoshea the son of Nun,
as Joshua or (in the Greek) Jesus.

Behold again it is Jesus, not a son of man but the Son
of God, and He was revealed in the flesh in a figure. Since
then men were to say that Christ was the son of David,
David himself prophesies, fearing and perceiving the error
of sinners: The Lord said unto my Lord .. . See how
David calls him Lord, and does not call him son.

He next repeats what he had said before of Moses
breaking the Tables of the Law—to show that the
Covenant is for us and not for them. And then he
passes on to the Sabbath. The true meaning of this
he finds by explaining the six days of Creation as
signifying the six thousand years after which all
things shall come to an end. Then shall we truly
hallow the Sabbath when we have been justified and
have received the promise. God’s meaning is that
He will make the eighth day the beginning of a new
world. ‘‘ Wherefore also we keep the eighth day for
rejoicing, in the which also Jesus rose from the
dead, and having been manifested ascended into the
heavens. ”

Finally he comes to the Temple, lately destroyed,
but to be builded again “ by the very servants of
their enemies.” An attempt has been made to fix
a date for the Epistle by means of this passing phrase.
But it is at least possible that Barnabas refers to the
spiritual Temple, ‘* which is being gloriously builded
in the name of the Lord.”?

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 13

Here he draws this long exposition to a close—
“so far,” he says, ‘‘as was in my power and sim-
plicity to declare it unto you. But let us pass on to
another gnosis and teaching.” And with this abrupt
transition he introduces his famous description of the
Two Ways, and the gnosis by which they are to be
understood.

If we read the Epistle rapidly through in such a
translation as we find in Lightfoot’s Apostolic Fathers,
we are not surprised at the sudden turn at the end
when the writer passes, as he says, to a different
knowledge and teaching: for he has made many such
sudden transitions before. Norshall we be surprised at
the broken sentence which introduces the explanation
of the way of light: such a repetition as it contains
has met us more than once already. And if what
follows is a disjointed medley of moral sayings, if
their tone is predominantly Hebraistic, this is just
what we have learned to expect of our Barnabas,
whose mind is full of the warnings of the ancient
prophets and of the sapiential literature of the Old
Testament.

He has spoken already of “‘ the way of righteous-
ness” in which ‘“‘ the Lord journeyed with him”:
he has bidden his readers “‘ hate utterly the works of
the evil way ” : he has warned them that “‘ a man shall
justly perish, who having the knowledge of the way of
righteousness forceth himself into the way of dark-
ness’: he has referred in quotations from Scripture to
the way of the righteous,” “ the way of the ungodly,”
and God’s ‘“‘ righteous way.” We are not surprised
then, that he takes up his parable at the last and gives
us a picture of Two Ways, a way of light with light-
bearing angels of the Lord who is for ever and ever,
and a way of darkness with angels of Satan, the lord
of the present time of iniquity. This parable has a
gnosis, which he proceeds to declare.

14 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

The importance to our general subject of the actual
wording of this final section is such that it will be
necessary to give a literal translation of it, inter-
spersed with a running comment.

There are two ways of teaching and power, that of
light and that of darkness; and there is great difference
between the two ways. For on the one are stationed
light-giving angels of God, but on the other angels of
Satan. And the one is Lord from eternity and unto
eternity, but the other is ruler of the time of iniquity
that now is.

Why does he speak of the two ways as ways of
teaching and power (8dayfic Kat eEovoiac)? All
through his Epistle he has recognised a background of
spiritual forces, good and evil. If we are guided toa
right understanding, it is by God’s gift of enlighten-
ment: if the Jews were deceived, it was by an evil
angel. The unusual word éodgicev (give wisdom,
instruct) is used twice: v. 8, “ God instructed us ” ;
ix. 4, “they went astray, because the evil angel
instructed them.” Thus there is a power that goes
with the teaching. The words of the Gospel may
have been in the writer’s mind (Matt. vii. 29, Mk. i.
22): ‘‘ For He was teaching them as having power
(eovolav).” And on the other hand, the use of
éEovola in the evil sense is found in Eph. ii. 2:
** according to the ruler of the power of the air,’”’ and
elsewhere. ‘Twice already Barnabas has used like
language: in ii. 1: “ he that worketh hath himself
the power ”’ in these evil days; and in iy. 18 2 ** the
evil Ruler receiving the power against us.” To
Barnabas, therefore, it is not only a question . light
and darkness, in the sense of knowledge and ignorance :
it is the powers of light and darkness respectively that
are his concern. In them lies the “ great difference ”?
between the two ways.

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 15

The next sentences are clumsy and repetitive, like
much that we have had before :

The way of light then is this; if any be willing to
travel on the way, and speed by his works to the appointed
place. The knowledge (gnosis) then, that has been given
to us! to walk therein, is as follows: Thou shalt love
Him that made thee, thou shalt fear Him that formed thee,
thou shalt glorify Him that redeemed thee from death.

Barnabas begins, as he needs must, with Love to
God. But his somewhat rhetorical phraseology is
worthy of analysis. We may compare Ecclus. vii.
30 f.: “‘ With all thy strength love him that made thee,
and forsake not his ministers. Fear the Lord and
glorify the priest.”” Here we have the same three
verbs—love, fear, glorify; as well as the exact
phrase ‘‘ love him that made thee.’”? We know that
Barnabas was familiar with Ecclesiasticus, and it is
not unlikely that this passage was in his recollection
as he wrote.

Next we note that the phrase “‘ that redeemed
thee from death ” has a parallel in the twice repeated
phrase ‘‘ that redeemed us from darkness ”’ (xiv. 5 f.) ;
where also, a few lines later (xiv. 8), he quotes the
passage from Isaiah (xlix. 6 f.) which had suggested
the phrase to him. Yet more interesting is it to recall
at this point the noteworthy addition which Barnabas
had made in ii. 10 to his quotation from Ps. li. 19:
**The sacrifice of God is a broken heart: a sweet-
smelling savour to the Lord is the heart that glorifieth
Him that formed it” (rév mwemdaxdéra aithv). We
can hardly doubt that these last words were in his
mind when he wrote, “fear Him that formed thee,
glorify Him that redeemed thee from death.”

With many writers it would be absurd to analyse
with such minuteness; but Barnabas has a very

1*H Sobetca july yraois: cf, ix, 8: rls 7 do0cioa adltg yvaors

16 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

limited vocabulary, and he is constantly picking up
words and phrases that he has used before, especially
when he has drawn them from a scriptural source.

Thou shalt be simple in heart and rich in spirit. Thou
shalt not be joined with them that walk in the way of
death. Thou shalt hate everything which is not pleasing
to God. Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy. Thou shalt not
forsake the commandments of the Lord. Thou shalt not
exalt thyself, but shalt be humble-minded in all things.
Thou shalt not assume glory to thyself. Thou shalt not
take evil counsel against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not
give daring to thy soul.

This is a mere string of counsels, with as little
connexion as in some chapters of the Book of Proverbs.
The writer is indeed “simple in heart and rich in
spirit.” He probably wishes to begin with that
duty towards God, which consists in humility and
straightforwardness. But he is imperceptibly passing
on to duty towards the neighbour.

Thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt not
commit adultery, thou shalt not corrupt boys. The
word of God shall not go forth from thee in the unclean-
ness of some.

This last sentence is hardly intelligible. The
only other passage in which Barnabas uses the word
“uncleanness ” (axa@apsia) is in his strange gnosis
as to eating the weasel (x. 8), where at any rate we
find the mention of ‘“‘ uncleanness”’ in connexion
with the mouth. Moreover the unexpected precept,
“Thou shalt not corrupt boys,” has its parallel in
the immediately preceding gnosis as to eating the hare
(x. 6), where we read, “ Thou shalt not be a corrupter
of boys, nor like unto such.” One thing is plain:
we are dealing with the same writer in the gnosis of
c. x and in the Two Ways of c. xix.

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 17

Thou shalt not respect persons to reprove any for a
transgression. Thou shalt be meek, thou shalt be quict,
thou shalt be trembling at the words which thou hast
heard.

This is based on Isa. Ixvi. 2: “To whom will I
look, save to him that is humble and quiet and
trembling at my words.’’ Though he has not quoted
this verse before, he has quoted in xvi. 2 the verse
which immediately precedes it : ‘‘ Who hath measured
out the heavens with a span,” ete.

Thou shalt not bear a grudge against thy brother.

This comes from Zech. vii. 10, which he has quoted
above in ui. 8, where he has linked it up with Zech.
viii. 17. Thus we have a fresh example of his picking
up words which he has used before.

Thou shalt not be of a double mind, whether it shall
be or no.

There is nothing in the context to help us to the
meaning ofthissaying. The word for“ double-minded”’
does not come in Old Testament Greek, and the only
writer of the New Testament who has it is St James.
In Jas. i. 8 “the double-minded man” will receive
nothing of the Lord; and in iv. 8 we have: “ Purify
your hearts, ye double-minded.” But Clement of
Rome uses the word: in 1 Clem. xi. 2 we are told
that Lot’s wife was turned into a pillar of salt ‘‘ to
make it known unto all that the double-minded and
those who doubt concerning the power of God”
shall come into judgment. And this language clearly
comes from an apocryphal passage which Clement
quotes later (xxiii. 38): “‘ Wretched are the double-
minded, who doubt in soul, saying: These things we
have heard even in the days of our fathers; and lo,
we have grown old, and none of them has happened

18 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

unto us.” This same quotation is found in an in-
dependent form in 2 Clem. xi. 2. So that it would .
seem that ‘‘ double-mindedness ”? had in early days
the suggestion of scepticism in regard to the divine
warnings or promises. In this sense Barnabas seems
to use the word here.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in vain.

This is the second quotation he has made from
the Ten Commandments; but he has no intention
of following their general scheme.

Thou shalt love thy neighbour more than thine own
soul.

This is a more than “‘ evangelic ” counsel: it has
no parallel in earlier writers. It is his own phrase:
twice has he assured his readers that he loves them
more than his own soul (i. 4, iv. 6).

Thou shalt not murder a child by abortion, nor again
shalt thou kill it when it is born. Thou shalt not with-
draw thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but
from their youth up thou shalt teach them the fear of God.
Thou shalt not be found coveting thy neighbour’s goods ;
thou shalt not be greedy of gain. Neither shalt thou be
joined from thy soul to the lofty, but shalt have thy con-
versation with the humble and the just.

There is nothing here which need detain us
except the phrase “from thy soul” (&« Wuxie cov),
which has an awkward sound in the context. We
may however note that the phrase has occurred before
in his quotation (iii. 5) from Isa. Iviii. 10: “If thou
give thy bread to the hungry from thy soul” (x
~uxfic cov), It is therefore of interest as another
small indication of unity of authorship.

The operations which befall thee thou shalt accept as
good, knowing that nothing cometh to pass without God.

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 19

We should naturally call them “ accidents,’”’ but
to our Barnabas they are “ operations ”’ (évepy/para)
whether of a good or of an evil power. In the New
Testament the verb évepyetv is regularly used either
of God or of an evil power. Already (ii. 1) he has
spoken of ‘‘him that operateth” in these evil
days (avrod rod évepyovvroc). The results of such
operation may be the évepyfuara intended here: in
any case such things are meant as are beyond human
control. The general sentiment comes from Ecclus.
ii. 4, though the phraseology is different: ‘*‘ Whatso-
ever is laid upon thee, receive.”*

Thou shalt not be double-minded nor double-tongued.
Thou shalt be subject to masters, as to a type of God, in
shame and fear. Thou shalt not command thy servant
or handmaid in bitterness, who set their hope on the same
God, lest haply they should not fear the God who is over
you both: for He came not to call with respect of persons,
but unto those whom the Spirit had prepared.

The Epistle to the Ephesians, which he has used
again and again, supplies him with the general ground
of this admonition (vi. 5 ff.). ‘‘ Servants, obey your
masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling ”*
—this he paraphrases as ‘“‘ with shame and fear”:
**in the simplicity of your heart” (é amddrnte rie
kapdtac vue@v)—he has already said, “Thou shalt
be simple in heart (amAove ri) kapdia)”: “as unto
Christ . . . serving as unto the Lord, and not unto
men.” And again, ‘‘ Ye masters, do the same things
to them, forbearing threatening, knowing that both
of them and of you the Master is in heaven, and there
is no respecting of persons with Him.”’ For “ threaten-
ing’? he has substituted ‘‘ bitterness”? (mupia), a
word which comes also from the Epistle to the Ephe-
sians, and is found nowhere else in the New Testament.
St Paul’s final clause “there is no respecting of

20 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

persons with Him,”’ he recasts, giving it a more direct
application to the Christian Society, and at the same
time merging it with a saying of the Gospel. He has
already (v. 9) introduced the words, derived from
Matt. ix. 18: “‘ He did not come to call righteous
men, but sinners.” Here, changing the position of
the negative, he says: ‘“‘He came not to call with
respect of persons, but unto those whom the Spirit
had prepared.” The last clause is an awkward one,
but has a parallel in vi. 14 (&v zpoéBrAerev 7d rvevpa
Kupiov); those from whom the stony hearts are

taken away are ‘‘ those whom the Spirit of the Lord
hath foreseen.”

Thou shalt share in all things with thy neighbour, and
shalt not say that they are thine own : for if ye are sharers
in that which is corruptible, how much more in the
corruptible things.

It is sufficient to recall Acts iv. 82: ‘“‘none of
them said that any of the things which he had were
his own”; Rom. xv. 27: “if the Gentiles have
shared in their spiritual things, they ought also to
minister to them in the carnal things ?”?; 1 Cor.ix.11:
‘if we have sown unto you the spiritual things, is it
a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things ?’’ The
contrast in Barnabas is between ‘that which is in-
corruptible ” and “‘ the corruptible things ” : compare
1 Pet. i. 4: ‘‘ an inheritance incorruptible,” and i. 18 :
“not with corruptible things (as) silver or gold.”
Barnabas has the same contrast (xvi. 9) in speaking
of the Temple.

Thou shalt not be forward in tongue (zpdyAwooos) : for
the mouth is a snare of death. So far as thou canst, thou
shalt be pure for thy soul’s sake.

In Proverbs vi. 2 we read: “ A strong snare to a
man are his own lips; and he is caught by the lips

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 21

of his own mouth.” The phrase “‘ snare (or ‘ snares’)
of death ’’ is found often in the Old Testament. The
expression ‘‘ so far as thou canst,” z.e. “* to the utmost
of thy power,” has parallels in iv. 11 and xvii. 1.

Be not found stretching out thy hands to receive, and
drawing them in to give.

This is an inexact quotation from Ececlus. iv. 88:
“Let not thy hand be stretched out to receive, and
drawn in to give back.”

Thou shalt love as the apple of thine eye every one that
speaketh unto thee the word of the Lord. Thou shalt
remember the day of judgment night and day, and shalt
seek out each day the persons of the saints, either labour-
ing by word and going forth to exhort them and studying
to save a soul by the word, or with thy hands shalt thou
work for a ransom of thy sins.

In the Christian Society every one is to help
others by exhortation and encouragement in these
days of stress. If any one so helps you, give him the
full return of your love. And remember that the
time is short and the day of account is at hand.
You must do your part, seeking out your brethren
and toiling in the word of edification; or, if that is
beyond your power, at least you may not be idle:
work with your hands, so that you may give in alms
for the ransom of your sins.

‘*The apple of the eye” is an Old Testament
phrase. In saying, “ Thou shalt love as the apple
of thine eye,” Barnabas may have been seeking
even to out-do St Paul’s emphatic expression,
** Esteem them very highly in love (tmepexrepicod év
ayary) for their work’s sake*? (1 Thess. v.13). For the
doctrine of the last clause we may compare Ecclus.
iii. 80: ‘* Almsgiving will make atonement for sins ” ;
also Tobit iv. 10, xii. 9 (quoted in Ep. Polyc. x. 2);
and see Lightfoot’s notes on 2 Clem. xvi,

22 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

Thou shalt not doubt to give nor murmur in giving,
but shalt know who is the good recompenser of the reward.
Thou shalt keep the things that thou hast received, neither
adding nor taking away. Thou shalt utterly hate that
which is evil. Thou shalt judge justly. Thou shalt not
make division, but shalt be at peace, bringing together
them that contend. Thou shalt make confession of thy
sins. Thou shalt not draw near to prayer in an evil
conscience. This is the way of light.

It is usual to translate the words sipnvedcae o&
paxopuévove cuvayaywy as “ thou shalt pacify them that
contend, bringing them together.” This is open to two
objections: (1) the verb cipnvevew is intransitive in
LXX. and New Testament, “to be at peace”
whereas the transitive use, “‘ to pacify,” is compara-
tively rare and late; (2) the addition “ bringing
them together ”’ is thus made otiose. We shall have
to return to this point when we consider the subsequent
history of the saying. The phrase “‘an evil con-
science ”’ is found in Heb. x. 22: “ hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience”; and this is the only
example in the New Testament of the use of a depre-
ciatory adjective with the word “conscience.” 'This
brings to an end the description of the way of light.

That which he has called at the outset “ the way
of darkness ” Barnabas dismisses very summarily:

But the way of the Black One is crooked and full of
curse: for it is the way of death eternal with punishment,
wherein are the things that destroy their souls.

A list of seventeen sins follows, beginning with
Idolatry, and ending with Absence of the fear of God,
This is succeeded by a yet longer list of evil persons,
beginning with “ persecutors of good men,” and
ending with a single word, perhaps coined by himself
—ravlapnaptnro, ‘ sinful with all manner of sins.”

The Epistle now comes to its close with earnest:

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 23

exhortations, such as we have had in various forms
before, There is the same sense of approaching
judgment, of the need of doing good while the oppor-
tunity remains, of the importance of understanding
the ordinances of the Lord, and of the joy which the
Bwaletec of them will bring. This is the note on
which he ends: ‘‘ Wherefore I was the more diligent to
write unto you according to my power, that I might
gladden you. Fare ye well, children of loveand peace!
The Lord of glory and of all grace be with your spirit.”?

Looking back on the Epistle as a whole, we think
of Barnabas as a man of earnest piety, claiming no
position as a leader or teacher, yet accustomed to
pour out his peculiar wisdom for the edification of
such as would hear him. He has a wide acquaintance
with the Greek Old Testament; but probably none
with the Hebrew original—or he would not have given
the meaning of Abraham’s 318 servants from the
Greek letters as he does. He quotes very inexactly,
perhaps always from memory: he combines texts
from various prophets, and adds words not found in
the Canon at all. He has an acquaintance with
Jewish ceremonial practices which are not attested
by the Pentateuch, and with the Jewish Alexandrine
exegesis of Mosaic precepts. He applies the Alex-
andrine method freely on his own account, and
produces a new Christian gnosis.

But his aim is moral purity throughout. The
Wisdom Books of the Old Testament, especially
Ecclesiasticus, and the practical parts of St Paul’s
Epistles, especially that to the Ephesians—these are
his quarries for precepts of conduct. The Epistle to
the Hebrews he had probably read; but if so, he
found it too difficult, too remote in its own lofty
gnosis: a few of its phrases abide in his memory, but
he has no use for its high argument. When he has

24 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

delivered his message of exposition, he follows the
manner of the New Testament Epistles and passes
from doctrinal to practical teaching.

It is the mind of an Alexandrian Jew, whose
Judaism had helped him but little, and had been
wholly abandoned in favour of the Christian faith
which had really met the needs of his soul. He
disavows Judaism altogether, as having proved an
utter failure notwithstanding all that God had done
for His rebellious people. He belongs to the New
People whom God’s Spirit foresaw and prepared, as
the true heirs of the Covenant which the Jews had
rejected from the first. He is convinced that the end
of the world is at hand. It is an evil world, ripe for
judgment. His fear is lest Christians may fail, as
the Jews as a people have failed, and be rejected after
all. It is not apostasy under stress of persecution
that he dreads: there is no allusion to persecution of
any kind in the Epistle. It is moral failure, due to a
want of recognition of God’s purpose for the New
People, and issuing in laxity of conduct, neglect of
the bond of Christian fellowship, self-satisfaction and
selfish disregard for the poorer brethren. It is to
counteract this moral decadence that he calls for
strenuousness of life and constant watchfulness, lest
the Evil One effect a subtle entrance and rob them of
their hope.

After reading the Epistle again and again I find
no trace of animosity against the Jews. Severe
things are said about them as a people, but with the
definite purpose of showing that they have forfeited
their privilege in the Divine Covenant, which has thus
passed justly from them to the New People whom God
foresaw. This much at least of historical insight
pervades the Epistle: from the beginning, and all
through the tragic failure of Judaism, God has
been working out a purpose. Later writers indeed

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS 25

recognised more fully the saints and heroes of Judaism,
who waited for their reward and for the fulfilment of
““the promise to the fathers ’—to use our author’s
own phrase—in the coming of Christ. This had been
duly emphasised in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where
the historical sense is much stronger. But to
Barnabas Judaism is blank failure from the beginning,
when Moses broke the Tables of the Law in despair.
Every ceremonial ordinance of Judaism was but
the witness of a spiritual precept: it had no value,
even temporarily, in itself. This is the extreme to
which no New Testament writer proceeds. Nor was
Barnabas followed in this respect.

The immediate purpose of our rapid survey of the
Epistle of Barnabas will have been attained if we have
made it reasonably certain that the description of the
Two Ways with which it ends is an integral part of
the document, conceived in the same spirit as the rest,
marked by the same clumsiness of construction,
drawing upon the same literary sources, and repeating
again and again phrases which the writer has previously
employed. There is no reason a priori for imagining
that this section of the Epistle is borrowed from an
earlier author: on the contrary, all the internal
evidence goes to show that the Two Ways, which
plays so great a part in later Christian literature, is
the original composition of the writer whom we call
Barnabas.

II
THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS

N the great Bible of the fourth century, called the
] Sinaitic Codex, the Epistle of Barnabas holds
the last place but one, and last of all stands the
Shepherd of Hermas. Until the middle of the last
century the Shepherd was known only in a Latin
dress ; but in 1860 an Ethiopic version was published.
Shortly before this that once famous forger, Con-
stantine Simonides, had produced from Mt. Athos
almost the whole of the book in a Greek text. Part
of this proved to be merely his own translation of
the Latin, but the larger part had actually come from
a Greek manuscript. With the text taken from this
manuscript however he had played extraordinary tricks,
doubtless with the intention of finding a later pur-
chaser for the true copy which he was keeping back.
Presently Tischendorf made his discovery on Mt. Sinai,
which gave us an undoubted Greek text for the first
quarter of the book. It took thirty years to clear up
the confusion which Simonides had made, and it is
with a strange interest that I myself look back to the
year 1888, when I published a collation of the Athos
Codex in conjunction with Professor Spyridion P.
Lambros of Athens, who recently gained an un-
enviable notoriety as prime minister of the ex-king
Constantine.

My interest in the Shepherd was at that time
26

*

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 27

further stimulated by an essay of Dr Rendel Harris,
entitled “‘Hermas in Arcadia.” In this essay he
pointed out a number of coincidences between the
characteristics of the Twelve Mountains surrounding
the plain in which the Tower of the Ninth Similitude
was built, and the description in Pausanias of the
mountains which surround the plain of Orchomenus
in Arcadia. He sought to account for the similarity
by the theory that Hermas had used—probably not
Pausanias himself, which would place him too late—
but some other guide book to Arcadia which Pausanias
might also have known. I endeavoured to carry the
investigation a little further, and Dr Rendel Harris
afterwards accepted my suggestion that Hermas,
who was originally a Greek slave, was a native of
Arcadia and reproduced in his vision the natural
features of his old home. He went on to make the
following interesting remarks. “In the century
before Hermas two brothers, Arcadian slaves, rose
to a great eminence in the Roman Empire. The
ease to which I allude is that of Pallas and Felix, who
were sold to Antonia, the mother of the Emperor
Claudius: both of them attained their freedom;
Pallas became a leading figure in the life of imperial
Rome, and Felix is known to us as the procurator of
Judxa who trembled before the preaching of Paul.
Now Tacitus tells us (Ann. xii. 53) that Pallas was
regibus Arcadiae ortus, no doubt because he was named
after one of the Arcadian kings, Pallas the son of
Lycaon; and if this be so, we have an exact parallel
to the naming of Hermas after the great deity of
Arcadia. But it may be asked, where is the brother
of Hermas to complete the parallel ? The answer is
in the Muratorian Canon which tells us that Hermas
is the brother of Pius, who occupied the episcopal
chair of the Roman Church.”

I may conclude this personal reminiscence by

28 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

saying that in the spring of 1888 I returned to Greece,
and pushed into the heart of Arcadia, and satisfied
myself that the plain of Orchomenus with its circle
of hills might well have furnished Hermas with the
scenery of his Ninth Similitude. We must now turn
to the book itself.

Hermas begins by telling us that he was a slave,
sold by the master who had brought him up to a lady
in Rome whose name was Rhoda. In later years he
had met her again, and had thought within himself
how happy he had been if one of such beauty and
goodness had been his wife. This and no more.
But after a time she appeared to him in a vision, and
reproved him for that in which he himself could see
nowrong. Toa servant of God, he was told, even the
thought of wrong is in itself a great sin.

Here we have at the outset a theme which con-
stantly recurs. Hermas is a severe moralist. He
starts with the conviction that for sins committed
after Baptism there can ordinarily be no forgiveness.
But he represents himself as charged with a special
mission to proclaim that, by an exceptional act of
grace, one more chance of salvation is offered to all
those who will now repent and sin no more. They
must, however, clearly understand that sin is not
confined to outward acts of wrong-doing: sins of
thought and sins of word are no less fatal in their
consequences than sins of deed.

The book is divided into three parts. First come
the five Visions, in the last of which appears the
Shepherd, from whom the work has received its
title—‘‘ The Shepherd of Hermas.” Then come
twelve Mandates or Commandments ; and lastly ten
Similitudes or Parables.

In the first of the Visions, after the lady Rhoda has
vanished, leaving Hermas in a condition of abject
despair, there comes an aged lady in glistening

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 29

raiment, who assures him that it is not so much for
this former thought of wrong, as for the sins of his
family, that God is angry with him. She reads to him
out of a book, first of all, words too terrible to be
borne, and then a gentle promise that God is about to
fulfil His promise for His elect. She leaves him,
saying: ‘‘ Hermas, play the man.”

In the second Vision the aged lady reappears,
and lends him the book, which he copies. After this
a young man appears to him in a dream, and asks him
who he thinks the aged lady is. As he had seen her
in the neighbourhood of Cumae, Hermas supposes her
to be the Sibyl. But he is told that she is the Church,
and that she is aged, because she was created before all
things, and for her sake the world was framed.

In the third Vision the same aged lady shows him
a great Tower being builded upon the waters. In
these three Visions he has seen the Church in various
forms: first, as very aged, and seated on a chair ;
secondly, standing, and with a more youthful counte-
nance; and thirdly, yet more youthful and altogether
beautiful. He is told that the change is due to his own
progress in repentance and faith.

The explanation of the final form in which the
Church has appeared contains certain interesting
allusions which were first pointed out by the late
Dr C. Taylor. The words are as follows :

For just as when to a mourner cometh some piece of
good tidings (dyy<cAia dya) ts), immediately he for-
getteth his former sorrows, and admitteth nothing but the
tidings which he hath heard, and is strengthened thence-
forth unto that which is good, and his spirit is renewed for
the joy that he hath received; so also ye have received
a renewal of your spirit by seeing these good things. And
whereas thou sawest her seated on a couch, the position
is a firm one, for the couch has four feet and standeth firmly ;
for the world, too, is upheld by means of four elements,

30 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

In the words “immediately he forgetteth his
former sorrows,” and ‘‘ his spirit is renewed for the
joy that he hath received; soalsoye ... by seeing these
good things,” we have a clear allusion to St John xvi.
21: ‘‘ A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow,
because her hour is come; but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.
And ye now therefore have sorrow,”’ ete.

But there is more than this: the couch on which
the Church sits, when she is thus revived by the good
tidings, is firm because it has four feet ; and the four
feet correspond to the four elements of the world.
Dr Taylor reminds us of the famous words of Irenzeus
(III. xi. 11) about the Four Gospels, and the strange
parallels which he brings to show that there must
needs be four and no more: moreover he points out
that the allusive method of Hermas makes it reason-
ably certain that ayyeXla aya) is his way of avoiding
the obvious word evayyéXiov.

In the fourth Vision Hermas was going into the
country by the Campanian Way, praising God for the
wonders which He had shown him, when he met with
a monster whose appearance filled him with the same
uncertainty and horror as was produced by the
earliest onslaughts of one of our modern instruments
of war. We must hear his own story:

And as I gave glory and thanksgiving to God, there
answered me as it were the sound of a voice, “‘ Be not of
doubtful mind, Hermas.” I began to question in myself
and to say, “* How can I be of doubtful mind, seeing that
I am so firmly founded by the Lord, and have seen glorious
things?’ And I went on a little, brethren, and behold,
I see a cloud of dust rising as it were to heaven; and I
began to say within myself, “Can it be that cattle are
coming, and raising a cloud of dust?” for it was just
about a stade from me. As the cloud of dust waxed

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 31

greater and greater, I suspected that it was something
supernatural. Then the sun shone out a little, and
behold, I see a huge beast like some sea-monster, and from
its mouth fiery locusts issued forth. And the beast was
about a hundred feet in length, and its head was as it were
of pottery. And I began to weep, and to entreat the Lord
that He would rescue me from it. And I remembered the
word which I had heard, “‘ Be not of doubtful mind,
Hermas.”’ Having therefore, brethren, put on the faith
of the Lord and called to mind the mighty works that He
had taught me, I took courage and presented myself to
the beast. Now the beast was coming on with such a
rush that it might have ruined a city. I come near it,
and, huge monster as it was, it stretcheth itself on the
ground and merely put forth its tongue, and stirred not
at all until I had passed by it. And the beast had on its
head four colours: black, then fire and blood colour, then
gold, then white.

After his courageous encounter with this camou-
flaged tank, Hermas is met by a virgin clad in white,
whose hair also was white.

I knew from the former visions that it was the Church,
and I became more cheerful. She saluteth me saying,
‘* Good morrow, my good man’”’; and I salute her in
turn, ‘“‘ Lady, good morrow.” She answered and said
unto me, ‘‘ Did nothing meet thee?” I say unto her,
““Lady, such a huge beast, that could have destroyed
whole peoples.”

She tells him: ‘the Lord sent His angel which is
over the beasts, whose name is Thegri, and shut its
mouth, that it might not hurt thee.”? Dr Rendel
Harris has shown from a comparison of Dan. vi. 22,
to which allusion is here made, that the angel’s name
must be Segri (the Shutter). The beast is declared
to be the type of the great tribulation, from which
men may escape by repentance and courage.

In the fifth and last of the Visions there appears a

32 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

man glorious in his visage, in the garb of a shepherd,
with a white skin wrapped about him, and with a
wallet on his shoulder and a staff in his hand. This is
the Shepherd who gives his name to the book. He
announces himself as the future guide, philosopher
and friend of Hermas: henceforth all instruction
comes from him. ‘‘ Write down,” he says, “ my
commandments and my parables.” Thus we are
introduced to the remaining sections of the book, the
twelve Mandates or commandments, and the ten
Similitudes or parables.

When we come to the Mandates, a new interest
attaches to our study of the Shepherd, namely, the
investigation of the sources from which the subjects
and the phraseology of these commandments are
drawn.

The first Mandate opens with words which are
frequently quoted by later Christian writers :

First of all,believe that God is One, even He who created
all things and set them in order, and brought all things
from non-existencé into being, who comprehendeth all
things, being alone incomprehensible.

Trenzeus in his work Against Heresies (IV. xxxiy. 2)
quotes this as “Scripture”; and he embodies it,
without reference to its source, in his Demonstration
of the Apostolic Preaching (c. 4). Hermas adds to
these words: ‘‘ Believe Him therefore, and fear Him
and in this fear be continent.” To these three points,
Faith, Fear and Self-restraint, he will return in a later
Mandate.

The Second Mandate begins: “ Keep Simplicity,
and be without malice, and thou shalt be as the babes,
who know not the wickedness that destroyeth the
life of men.” This commandment, “‘ Keep Sim-
plicity,” is expounded under two heads: (1) Absence
of malice, as shown by the avoidance of back-biting,

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 33

and (2) Simplicity in giving, as God gives with-
out discriminating between worthy and unworthy
receivers.

This Mandate offers a good illustration of the
peculiar method of Hermas in regard to the authorities
on whom he draws for ideas and language. First we
have.an indirect use of 1 Cor. xiv. 20: ‘‘ In malice be
babes”? (7) kxaxia vnmiaZere). Observe that he will
not make an actual quotation: he never quotes
Seripture, or indeed any book save the unknown
apocryphal work of Eldad and Modad. He will not
take over either word of St Paul exactly as it stands.
“* Malice”? appears in the adjectival form “ without
malice” (akaxoc); and out of the verb vnmdZere,
“be babes,” he takes the noun vi#ma, “ babes.’’
Thus he gives us: ‘“‘ Be without malice, and thou
shalt be as the babes.’’ Then he proceeds:

First of all, speak evil of no man, nor listen with
pleasure to one that speaketh evil. Otherwise thou that
hearest also shalt be guilty of the sin of him that speaketh
the evil, if thou believe the evil-speaking that thou hearest :
for in believing it thou thyself also wilt have somewhat
against thy brother: so then thou shalt be guilty of the
sin of him that speaketh the evil. Evil-speaking is evil,
a restless demon (dxatdoratov daudvov), never at peace,
but always having its home among factions. Refrain
from it therefore, and thou shalt have success at all times
with all men. But clothe thyself in reverence, wherein
is no evil stumbling-block, but all things are smooth and
gladsome.

The prohibition of back-biting comes from St
James, the author whose language is most frequently
laid under contribution by Hermas. In James
iv. 11 we read: ‘“‘ Speak not evil one of another,
brethren; he that speaketh evil of a brother, or
judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law and
judgeth the law.”. “The brother”? falls out of the

34 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

wider command of Hermas, “ speak evil of no man” ;
but he reappears at once in the context; for in
believing a slander “thou thyself also wilt have
somewhat against thy brother.” This last phrase is
itself a kind of inverted reproduction of Matt. v. 23:
“that thy brother hath somewhat against thee.”
The twice-repeated phrase “ guilty of”? (voyoc) is
found in James i. 10: “he is guilty of all.’ From
St James comes also the word axaréoraroc (rest-
less) ; ; “the tongue is a restless evil”? (axaraorarov
kakov, iii, 8); and “the double- minded man (i. 8)
is SC hbrieoes in all his ways.”

Yet more interesting is the second part of this
Mandate, which enjoins Simplicity in giving. Here
there must be the same freedom from malice and
suspicion.

Work that which is good, and of thy labours which
God giveth thee, give to all that are in want simply
(a7AGs), not doubting to whom thou shalt give and to
whom thou shalt not give. Give to all; for to all God
desireth that there should be given of His own bounties.

The first sentence is derived from St Paut (Eph. iv.
28): “working with his hands that which is good,
that he may have to give to him that hath need.”
Out of this he has picked the phrase éoyéZou 75 ayabdv.
But his sources soon become complicated. ‘‘ Give to
all . . . simply (a7Aéc)”’; and hedefines the simplicity
by adding: ‘ not doubting to whom thou shalt give,
and to whom thou shalt not give.”

We might remind ourselves to begin with of
St Paul’s “he that giveth (let him do it) with sim-
plicity ” (év amAdrnt, Rom. xii. 8). But the true
parallel is with St James, as the reference to God soon
shows us: for in Jas. i. 8 we read: ‘‘ God who giveth
to all simply (a7A@c) and upbraideth not.”? This is
the only place where the word amc is used in the

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 35

New Testament, and its sense is governed by the
following words cai mw) évediZovroe: it means “ un-
conditionally, simply.”

The substance of this teaching is from the Sermon
on the Mount. Our Lord said: “To every one that
asketh thee, give. God sendeth His rain on just and
unjust alike. Be ye pitiful, even as your Father is
pitiful, and judge not ” (Luc. vi. 80, 35-87: Matt. v.
45). So Hermas says once again: ‘* Give to all; for
to all God desireth that there should be given of His
own bounties.”” And we note here that the word
for “‘ bounties *”’ (Swpyuara) is derived from James i. 17
(wav SwHpnua Tédevov).

But there remains still a phrase which waits to be
explained: “not doubting (mu) diraZwv) to whom
thou shalt give and to whom thou shalt not give.”
May we not here properly call to mind that strange
precept of Barnabas (xix. 11): “Thou shalt not
doubt to give, nor murmur in giving” (ov dirdcue
dodvac...)? And may this not lead us to ask
whether Barnabas has not already been laid under
contribution in the same indirect way as other
authorities ?

We remember that Barnabas begins his descrip-
tion of the Way of Light with the command to love
and fear God the Creator, and then at once proceeds
to say: ‘‘ thou shalt be simple (a7Aod¢) in heart.”
Is it mere coincidence that Hermas should give us as
his first Mandate the belief in One God the Creator
and the fear of Him, and then devote his second
Mandate to the duty of Simplicity ? We must not
prejudge the question: it will meet us again before
long.

The propriety of indiscriminate giving is next
considered :

Give to all; for to all God desireth that there should
be given of His own bounties. They then that receive

~

36 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

shall render account to God, why they received, and
to what end: for they that receive in distress shall not
be judged, but they that receive by pretence (év iroxpioe)
shall pay the penalty. He then that giveth is guiltless ;
for as he received from the Lord the ministration to
perform it, he hath performed it in simplicity (ads),
making no distinction to whom he should give or not give.
This ministration then, when performed in simplicity
(ds), becometh glorious in the sight of God. He there-
fore that ministereth thus simply (a7Aé@s) shall live unto
God. Therefore keep this commandment as I have told
thee, that thine own repentance and that of thy household
may be found in simplicity (év azAdryrt), and thy heart
pure and undefiled.

The word for “guiltless” (a@@oc) is that which Pilate
used when he washed his hands (Matt. xxvii. 24).
The ministration received of the Lord to be fulfilled
is an echo of the charge to Archippus at Colossae :
‘“* Take heed of the ministry which thou hast received
in the Lord, that thou fulfil it”? (Col. iv. 17). The
last words of the Mandate, ‘“‘ pure and undefiled,”
take us back to the familiar words of St James
(‘‘ pure religion and undefiled,” i. 27), a source from
which he is never tired of drawing.

This allusive method of Hermas characterises his
whole book. He never tells you his authority. Often
he takes only a word or a phrase: then he adds a
striking phrase from somewnere else in the same or
another writer; and presently he returns to pick up
the context which he had dropped as it were on
purpose.

Before we leave the Second Mandate, it is worth
while to read the description given in Simi. ix. 242 of
those who came from the Seventh Mountain: ‘ they
were at all times simple (avAot) and without malice
(dxaxor) and blessed, having nought against each other,
but ever rejoicing over the servants of God, and clad

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 37

with the holy spirit of these Virgins, and ever having
compassion towards every man, and of their labours
they supplied every man without upbraiding and
without doubting (avovediotwe cat adiorakrwe). The
Lord then, seeing their simplicity and all their
childlikeness, increased them in the labours of their
hands, and favoured them in all their work.”’

Here we have the indirect testimony of Hermas
himself that in the Second Mandate he was para-
phrasing the words of St James: ‘God who giveth
to ail simply and upbraideth not.’ Here as there
the “‘ not upbraiding ”’ is interpreted as ‘‘ not doubt-
ing ’’ in the giving of alms.

The Third Mandate is the command to love Truth,
the Fourth to preserve Purity, the Fifth to be Long-
suffering. On these we must not now tarry: we
pass on to the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth, which are
coneerned with Faith, Fear and Self-restraint.

The Sixth Mandate breaks into the series of plain
injunctions, and is more elaborately conceived. It
begins by referring us back to the First Mandate :

I enjoined upon thee in the first commandment that
thou shouldest keep Faith, Fear and Self-restraint. Now
I will show thee the powers of these, that thou mayest
perceive what power and energy each of them has. For
their energies are two-fold. They are set therefore over
the just thing and the unjust. Do thou therefore believe
the just, and believe not the unjust.

This then is what he means by the double energy,
or working, of Faith: “ believe the just, believe not
the unjust.” The exposition is clumsy, almost
grotesque; but he is leading up to something, which
in this awkward manner he is about to introduce.
He proceeds thus :

For the just hath a straight way, but the unjust a
crooked one (ép0ijv 68dv .. . orpeBArjv). Go thou in the

38 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

straight and smooth way, and let alone the crooked one.
For the crooked way hath no paths, but pathless places
and many stumbling-blocks, and it is rough and thorny.
It is harmful therefore to them that go therein. But they
that go by the straight way walk smoothly and without
stumbling: for it is neither rough nor thorny. Thou
seest then that it is more profitable to go by this way.

We need not continue the quotation. Hermas
agrees to go by the straight way, and the Shepherd
returns to his topic of Faith: ‘“‘ Hear now concerning
Faith. There are two angels with the man, one of
righteousness and one of wickedness.”” The respective
works of the two angels are described, and Hermas is
told to believe the one angel, and not to believe the
other. And at the close we read: ‘‘ The things
concerning Faith this commandment shows, that
thou mayest believe the angel of righteousness. .. .
But believe that the works of the angel of wickedness
are harsh; if thou do them not, thou shalt live unto
God.”

Let us now look back to Barnabas (xviii. 1 f.), and
hear how he introduces the last section of his Epistle :

But let us pass on also to a different gnosis and teaching.
There are two ways of teaching and power, that of light
and that of darkness : and there is great difference between
the two ways. For on the one are stationed light-giving
angels of God, but on the other angels of Satan.

Can we seriously doubt that Hermas in writing his
Sixth Mandate was under the fascination of this vivid
picture, and broke the sequence of his injunctions in
order at any cost to make some use of it ? The two
ways and the two angels are awkwardly drawn in,
but the very clumsiness of their introduction shows
that he has brought them from elsewhere.

The Ninth Mandate is directed against Double-
mindedness, a fault which, it will be remembered,

ij H
THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 39

was rebuked by Barnabas in his Two Ways. Hermas
is perpetually rebuking the double-minded ; but it is
probable that it is to St James that he is primarily
indebted for this particular word.

The Tenth Mandate is against Grief, or Sadness
(Abéan), as afflicting the Holy Spirit which God makes
to dwell in a man—a strange exposition of Eph. iv. 30:
** Grieve not (1) Aumetre) the Holy Spirit of God.”

The Eleventh Mandate is against False Prophets.
Incidentally it gives an interesting description of a
congregation (cuvaywyi) of believers, and the exercise
in their midst of the prophetic gift.

The Twelfth Mandate is against every Evil Desire.
At its close Hermas makes the Shepherd angry by
suggesting that the commandments are beyond the
power of a man to keep. He is warned that if he

starts with such a belief it will certainly prove true ;.

but he is encouraged to believe that he will be able to
keep them by the help of the Shepherd, who describes
himself as the angel of repentance.

From the Mandates we pass on to the Similitudes
or parables. They take up more than half of the
book. We can but enumerate them here, and select a
few characteristic passages.

The First Similitude is of the Two Cities, the
temporal and the spiritual—with the moral, “ there-
fore instead of fields buy ye souls that are afflicted, as
each is able, and visit widows and orphans.” Here
Hermas again takes his language from St James—
‘**to visit orphans and widows in their affliction ”
(i. 27). “* Fields and houses of this kind... thou wilt
find in thine own city, when thou shalt come there-
unto ” (Sim. i. 9).

The Second Similitude is of the Elm and the Vine—
a famous picture of the interdependence of poor and
rich: the fruitless poor man lifts the rich man from
the ground, and so prevents the wasting of his fruit,

40 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

The Third Similitude shows the likeness of good
and bad in this life, as the likeness of all trees in
winter-time.

The Fourth shows some trees still bare, while
others are shooting with the approach of summer—
the world to come, which shall manifest the difference.

The Fifth deals with fasting. The Shepherd
finds Hermas fasting, and asks what he is doing.
‘Sir, say I, I am keeping a station (orariwva txw).
What, saith he, is a station? I am fasting, Sir, say
J.” After rebuking this fast, he tells him a parable.
A landowner plants a vineyard, and bids a faithful
servant fence it in his absence, but do nothing more.
Having fenced it, however, the servant went on to
weed it as well, and the vineyard flourished the more.
His lord returnmg was rejoiced, since the servant
had done more than he was told. He determined to
make him joint-heir with his son. Presently at a
feast he sent him a special portion: this the servant
shared with his fellow-servants, thereby rejoicing
them and rising yet higher in his master’s favour. A
detailed interpretation of this parable is given, the
theology of which is somewhat strange. But not less
strange is the moral drawn from the parable. Hermas
must fulfil the commands that are laid upon him:
then, having done these, he may fast and his fasting
will be acceptable—the more so if he count up the
saving of expenditure thereby, and give it in alms to
the poor. Fasting then seems to be a work of superero-
gation, rather than a means of grace or even a bounden
duty like almsgiving. But elsewhere in the book it
is recognised and even enjoined, as a preparation for
receiving spiritual revelations.

The Sixth Similitude introduces us to a gladsome
shepherd and frolicking sheep. This shepherd is the
angel of self-indulgence and deceit, and the sheep are
those who have been led away from God by him, some

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS 41

altogether and finally, others not beyond hope of
recovery. The latter are given over to a stern shep-
herd to torture them among thorns and briars, till at
length they can be passed on to Hermas’s Shepherd,
who is the angel of repentance.

The Seventh Similitude carries on the Sixth: for
Hermas finds himself oppressed by the stern shepherd
on account of the sins of his house.

The Eighth Similitude is of the great Willow tree,
and the rods cut from it for each individual man,
whose fate is determined by the growth or withering
of his rod.

The Ninth Similitude takes up the Fifth Vision,
and explains afresh the Building of the Tower. The
scene is laid in Arcadia, in a plain with a rounded hill
in the centre and twelve very various mountains
encircling it. Some critics, having determined that
the scene should still be in the neighbourhood of Rome,
have altered Arcadia into Aricia. But Dr Rendel
Harris, as we have said before, has shown by a com-
parison of the description in Pausanias that the hill
and plain of Orchomenus in Arcadia exactly answer
to the requirements: and we may be reasonably
confident that Hermas was describing the scenery of
his early home. This Similitude together with its
interpretation occupies more than a quarter of the
whole book. The last part of it and the whole of the
Tenth Similitude are known to us only through the
versions. The Greek of this part produced by
Simonides was a translation made by himself from the
Latin.

This last Similitude contains no new parable, but
with warnings and promises brings the book to a close,

Here then we may take leave for the time being
of the Shepherd of Hermas. It has a unique interest
as the earliest example of the application of the

D

42 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

imagination on the grand scale to the enforcement of
the Christian religion and morality. Like the Pilgrim’s
Progress it comes to us from an earnest spirit in the
humbler walks of life. Hermas, though he obtained
his freedom, does not seem to have risen above the
position of a small shopkeeper in Rome. His fame
rests on his book alone; and, unlike that of Bunyan,
it owes nothing to the vigorous use of a language in
its prime. His style is dull and repetitive; his
phrases are obviously borrowed again and again from
two or three favourite writers. But his moral
intensity so far prevailed that the Shepherd was
quoted as Scripture, and only just failed to be in-
cluded in the Canon of the New Testament. As to
its date there is some uncertainty ; but there appears
to be no decisive reason for rejecting the tradition
that it was written when Pius, the brother of Hermas,
was bishop of Rome (c. 140-155). In modern times
the Shepherd has been frequently cited to illustrate
the extraordinary corruption which had already
disfigured Christianity in Rome. But we must
remember that every reformer is tempted to ex-
aggerate the extent of the evils which he sets himself
to combat; and, whatever blame may justly be
apportioned to the Roman Church, it deserves to be
credited, on the other side of the account, with the
signal development of the moral consciousness which
the teaching of Hermas represents.

Hil
THE DIDACHE

HE Didache, or Teaching of the Apostles, was
first published by its discoverer, the Greek
bishop Bryennius, at the end of the year 1883.

With remarkable rapidity Dr Harnack produced in
1884 an edition with a learned commentary and full
prolegomena. The Didache has been edited again
and again, and critically investigated by scholars of
all lands; but no agreement has been reached as to
its date, or the sources of its composition, or its
historical value as a witness to the early organisation
of the Christian Church. Its date has been placed
by capable critics in every decade of the century
from A.D. 60 to A.D. 160. It has been regarded as
the work of a single author from beginning to end ;
as a composition of the first century which has been
modified by subsequent interpolation; or as the
elaboration of a Jewish manual of instruction for
proselytes, which has been adapted and expanded
for Christian use. Its historical importance has been
variously estimated according to its assignment to an
earlier or a later date; but with hardly an exception
scholars have regarded it as a document of the highest
value for the history of early ecclesiastical institutions.
The work consists of two main sections: (1) a
brief manual of morals designed for the instruction
of candidates for Holy Baptism; (2) a Church Order
43

44 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

of a primitive type, giving directions for Baptism,
Fasting, Prayer, and other ecclesiastical institutions.
The first section is in fact a considerably expanded
recension of the Two Ways, which we have met with
in a briefer and less systematic form at the close of
the Epistle of Barnabas. This is followed by the
injunction, ‘‘ having first said all these things, baptise
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, in living water.” Thus a link is formed
between the first section and the second, which goes
on to describe various ordinances, and to give a
remarkable account of Apostles, Prophets and
Teachers; after this the Sunday Eucharist is men-
tioned, and Bishops and Deacons are briefly noticed :
then the book closes with eschatological warnings.

Kight years ago I endeavoured, in an article in the
Journal of Theological Studies (April, 1912),! to show
that in this second section the writer has striven to
confine himself as far as was practicable to such
injunctions as might fairly be presumed to have been
actually given by the Apostles themselves ; and that
accordingly his account of the Christian ordinances
and ministry is not to be taken as representing the
Church of his own time or place, but rather as an
imaginative picture of the primitive Church, as it
was planted by the Apostles in Gentile lands. What
he professed to give was according to his own title
of the work, “‘ The teaching of the Lord, through the
Twelve Apostles, to the Gentiles.” Such a view of
the book deprives it indeed of most of its historical
value; but it explains the fact that the picture of
the Church which is there drawn remains, after nearly
forty years of eager investigation, isolated and unique:
history has found no time and no locality to which.
such a representation can be reasonably assigned.

In the article to which I have referred the first

1 See below, Appendix A.

THE DIDACHE 45

section of the Didache did not come under treatment.
I was myself at that time prepared to maintain what
had come to be the almost universal belief, that the
Two Ways of the Didache, when certain obviously
Christian passages were set aside as interpolations,
represented in substance a Jewish manual of moral
teaching, which had been embodied in somewhat
different forms by Barnabas in his Epistle and by the
writer of the Didache. It is the object of the present
lectures to set aside that view, and to establish the
judgment of Bryennius the first editor, and of Dr
Harnack himself in his edition of 1884, that the
writer of the Didache took the Two Ways from Bar-
nabas, and also made use of the Shepherd of Hermas ;
and that consequently he cannot have written at an
earlier date than between 140 and 160 a.p.

The Teaching of the Apostles is the work of a
writer who has chosen to remain anonymous. The
full title of his work tells us what he wishes it to be
regarded as being—‘* The teaching of the Lord,
through the Twelve Apostles, to the Gentiles.” This
remarkable title he no doubt composed with the last
verses of St Matthew’s Gospel before him: ‘‘ Go ye
therefore and instruct all the nations (the Gentiles,
ra £0vn), baptising them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them
to observe all that I have commanded you.” We
find echoes of this verse later, in such a phrase as
“the second command of the teaching,’ and again in
the words, ‘‘ Having first said all these things, baptise
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost.”

Though the book was called in early times quite
briefly ‘‘ The Teaching of the Apostles,” the author’s
own claim is to have put on record what the Apostles
had handed down as that “teaching of the Lord ”
which in His parting words He had bidden them

46 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

give to their Gentile converts. Other writers who
professed to present to their readers our Lord’s unre-
corded teachings sought to commend their inventions
by describing a scene in which Christ conversed with
His disciples after the Resurrection; or else they
boldly attributed their work to an Apostle or a disciple
of the Apostles. Our author adopts no such pretence.
He prefers to be anonymous. He is content to let
his work stand on its merits: it is “‘ The teaching of the
Lord, through the Twelve Apostles, to the Gentiles.”
And so without further preface he proceeds: ‘‘ There
are two ways, one of life and one of death; and there
is great difference between the two ways.”

Such a beginning might well seem to be in our
Lord’s own manner; for had He not spoken (Matt.
vii. 13 f.) of “‘ a narrow way which leadeth unto life,”
and ‘‘a broad way that leadeth to destruction ” ?
Well therefore might the Apostles convey our Lord’s
teaching to the Gentiles under such an image as this.
But more: these were, with but slight modification,
the actual words of an Apostle—the Apostle Barnabas,
as Clement of Alexandria constantly called him—who
in the last section of the Epistle attributed to him
wrote thus: “There are two ways of teaching and
power, that of light and that of darkness; and there
is great difference between the two ways.” Barnabas
indeed goes on to explain wherein the “ great differ-
ence’ consists: ‘‘ For on the one are stationed light-
giving angels of God, but on the other angels of Satan :
and the one is Lord from eternity and unto eternity, but
the other is ruler of the time of iniquity that now is” ;
then he proceeds: “* The way therefore of light is this.’

But the Didachist—if I may be allowed for
brevity’s sake the use of the term—has no intention
of merely copying the words of a particular Apostle :
it is enough that what he writes should be such as
Apostles might very we'l have said. He has changed

THE DIDACHE 47

“the way of light ” and “‘ the way of darkness ” into
* the way of life ” and ‘‘ the way of death” ; probably
with the words of Jeremiah (xxi. 8) in his mind:
“Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I set before you the
way of life and the way of death.’? Then he omits
altogether the explanation of the ‘“ great difference
between the two ways,” and so leaves the sentence
which asserts it in the air. It is curious to note in
this connexion that nowhere in his book does he men-
tion either angel or devil: such a silence is almost,
if not quite, unique in the early Christian writers.

His next words, however, are still derived from
Barnabas: ‘‘ The way of life therefore is this.” He
then drops two more sentences of Barnabas, though
he will take up part of one of them later; and he
proceeds: ‘‘ First, thou shalt love the God that
made thee; secondly, thy neighbour as thyself.”
Now Barnabas had said: ‘Thou shalt love Him
that made thee, thou shalt fear Him that formed
thee, thou shalt glorify Him that redeemed thee from
death”; and much later he will say: ‘‘ Thou shalt
love thy neighbour more than thine own soul.” This
excess of language and warmth of emotion does not
commend itself tothe Didachist, who has a good deal
to add to what Barnabas says, and who is moreover
desirous of getting his precepts into a more systematic
order. So he cuts down the flowing rhetoric, and,
keeping only the phrase ‘‘ Him that made thee,”
remodels on the lines of the First and Second Com-
mandments of the Gospel: ‘“‘ First, thou shalt love
the God that made thee; secondly, thy neighbour as
thyself.” He compensates for this brevity by adding
in a negative form the Golden Rule of the Sermon on
the Mount. This negative precept was pre-Christian,
being found, for example, in Tobit iv..15: ‘ What
thou hatest, do to no man.” It occurs, in forms
modified by a recollection of the Golden Rule itself, in

48 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

various places in early Christian literature; but nowhere
is the form so close to the words of St Matthew (vii.
12) as here: ‘“‘ And all things whatsoever thou wouldst
not have done to thee, do not thou to another.”

But if the Didachist plainly had St Matthew’s
wording before him, why should he perversely change
the Golden Rule from the positive to the negative
form? I believe that we can show that,so far from
acting from perversity, he is following his own funda-
mental principle.

The Apostolic Decree contained in the fifteenth
chapter of the Acts has been the subject of a striking
dissertation by Gotthold Resch, the son of the veteran
compiler of the “‘ Agrapha ” or Unwritten Sayings of
our Lord. Whether we are convinced or not by his
powerful pleading for the originality of the ‘“‘ Western
text” of this passage, we must at any rate recognise
that this extra-canonical text, as he calls it, had a
very early and wide circulation. The essential point
of difference between the canonical text and the extra-
canonical is this—that the former is in the main a
regulation as to food, whereas the latter is concerned
only with moral prohibitions. ‘It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden than these necessary things: that ye abstain
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
things strangled, and from fornication: from which
if ye keep yourselves ye shall do well.” Such is the
accepted text, attested by all the great Greek manu-
scripts save one. But Codex Bez, with strong
support from early Fathers, reads: “ that ye abstain
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
fornication: and whatsoever ye would not have
done to yourselves, do not to another; from which
keeping yourselves do ye well, being carried forward
by the Holy Ghost’ (xv. 29). In like manner in
v. 20, instead of ‘‘ that they abstain from_pollutions

THE DIDACHE 49

of idols, and from fornication, and from things
strangled, and from blood,” Codex Bezz has ‘‘ from
pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from
blood; and whatsoever they would not have done
to themselves, do not to another.” The earliest
Fathers interpreted ‘‘ blood ” in the sense of ‘* homi-
cide,”’ and did not suppose that the Apostles had laid
down any law of food ; they simply forbade “ idolatry,
fornication and murder.” But we must leave this
interesting problem and return to the Didache.

We may be confident that the text of the Acts
which our author used contained twice over (xv. 20,
29) the negative form of the Golden Rule. This,
then, was the teaching given by the Apostles, on a
most solemn occasion, as summing up those necessary
prohibitions which the Gentile converts must by all
means accept. It was emphatically a part of “ the
teaching of the Lord through the Twelve Apostles to
the Gentiles.” What words could be more appro-
priately added to the two great commandments of the
Gospel? So he writes: “ First, thou shalt love the
God that made thee: secondly, thy neighbour as
thyself; and all things whatsoever thou wouldst
not have done to thee, do not thou to another.”

He has however made slight changes in wording,
sufficient to show that he is no mere copyist. He
has prefixed the phrase “all things,” and he has,
contrary to Greek idiom, put the negative after
instead of before the verb. The text of Codex Bezee
runs: Kai doa pn) OéXere Eavrote yslvecOa, érépy pu) Touty.
But he writes : dvra d: dca éav OeAfjone pm yivecbai cou,
kai ov GAAw py Tole. The explanation is given when
we look at the Golden Rule in Matt. vii. 12, which
begins, Ilavra obv doa édv BéXnrs.}

1 It is interesting to find that the ‘* Apostolic Church Order ”
in reproducing this sentence of the Didache prefers to give the

natural order of the Greek construction: xdyra 5é boa by ph OéAns.
So too in the Apostolic Constitutions we read : ray 3 wh Ores,

50 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

We see at once where the changes have come from :
he has conformed the negative rule which he found
in the Acts of the Apostles so far as was possible to
the wording of the positive rule in the Sermon on
the Mount. And his having done so has a special
interest when we observe that he immediately passes
on to expand his opening clauses by introducing a
series of precepts which are mainly derived from the
Sermon itself.

The Didachist goes on thus: ‘‘ Now of these
words the teaching is this: Bless them that curse
you,” etc. Barnabas had written, very characteristi-
cally, concerning “‘ the way of light’: ‘“‘ The gnosis
therefore which has been given to us to walk therein
is such as this: Thou shalt love Him that made thee,”
ete. This is plain enough: for Barnabas has given
us his little parable of the two ways and the two
kinds of angels; and he now begins its interpretation
—the gnosis of it. But the Didachist’s clause is less
clear. What are “‘ the words ” of which he will give
us ‘“‘ the teaching’? ? and why “the teaching,” and
not “the interpretation” ? We must look on, and
hope for some light from the context.

What follows is a series of precepts, mainly founded
on the Sermon on the Mount, the language of St
Matthew being blended with that of St Luke, and the
sentences so recast as to avoid the appearance of
exact quotation from either Gospel. These precepts
are then expanded and modified by phrases borrowed
from the Shepherd of Hermas ; and they are supple-
mented by a strange citation from an unknown source.

Then a fresh start is made thus: ‘“ The second
command of the teaching: Thou shalt not kill,
thou shalt not commit adultery,” ete. Here we come
back to precepts of Barnabas, rearranged, and added
to from the Ten Commandments, and otherwise im-
proved in our author’s manner. The precepts thus

THE DIDACHE 51

introduced under the heading, “‘ The second command
of the teaching,” are mainly negative, just as those
which were introduced by “* Now of these words the
teaching is this ” were positive. The positive precepts
belong to the lofty morality of the Sermon on the
Mount; the negative precepts represent rather the
morality of the Old Testament. The positive and
the negative standards had both been given in the
opening words, in the demand for love to God and the
neighbour, followed by the negative form of the Golden
mmc. «Lover, <. love . 2. and do not.” - Itmay
be that his idea is thus to divide “‘ the teaching,” or
fuller exposition, “ of these words” into a first and
second “command.” It is unfortunate that he had
used “first”? and “secondly” of the two Great
Commandments: for it obscures the meaning of
‘the second command of the teaching,”’ which other-
wise is quite easy to explain as the expansion of the
negative form of the Golden Rule.

We go back again now to the group of positive
precepts which is introduced by the phrase, ‘“ Now
of these words the teaching is this.” The whole of
the section is dismissed as an interpolation by those
critics who desire to give an early date to the Didache ;
and necessarily, of course, by those who regard the
Two Ways as a Jewish document. It runs as follows :

Bless them that curse you, and pray for your enemies,
and fast for them that persecute you: for what thank is tt,
if ye love them that love you? Do not even the Gentiles the
same? But do ye love them that hate you, and ye shall not
have an enemy.

We may pause here to note that the words of St
Matthew and St Luke are welded together, so that
express quotation is avoided; and strange additions
are made (no doubt to add to the appearance of
originality and independence of any written Gospel)

52 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

—‘* fast for them that persecute you,’’ and again,
‘*and ye shall not have an enemy.” After this the
commands are in the second person singular instead
of the second person plural: they still come from the
Sermon on the Mount, where there is the same dis-
tinction between singular and plural. But the
passage from plural to singular is here made by the
introduction of a command which seems curiously
out of place and recalls the language of 1 Pet. 1. 11.

Abstain thou from fleshly and bodily lusts. If any
man give thee a blow on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also, and thou shalt be perfect ; if a man impress thee to
go with him one mile, go with him twain ; if a man take away
thy cloak, give him thy coat also; if a man take away from
thee that which is thine, ask it not back, for neither art
thou able.

Here we have a similar conflation of St Matthew
and St Luke. A suggestion has been made that the
writer used Tatian’s Diatessaron: but the evidence
for this completely breaks down under examination.
We have again two supplements introduced. The
first of these, ‘‘ and thou shalt be perfect,” is no doubt
derived from Matt. v. 48: ‘‘ Ye therefore shall be
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” It is
of interest as an indication of unity of authorship,
because we read in vi. 2, “If thou art able to bear
the whole yoke of the Lord, thou shalt be perfect ;
but if thou art not able, do that which thou art able.”
The second supplement, “‘ for neither art thou able,”
might possibly again suggest unity of authorship ;
but it is too small a point to press. We need only
note that it seems curiously futile to say, ‘ Ask it
not back, for neither art thou able.” This is not the
only place where the Didachist’s eagerness to appear
original has led him into futility. Indeed we have
another instance in the passage which follows, where

THE DIDACHE 53

he blends the language of the Sermon on the Mount
with that of the Shepherd of Hermas, and ends by
contradicting them both.

To every man that asketh of thee give, and ask not back ;
for to all the Father desireth that there should be given
of His own free-gifts. Blessed is he that giveth according
to the commandment; for he is guiltless. Woe to him
that receiveth; for if a man receiveth having need, he
shall be guiltless; but he that hath no need shall give
satisfaction why and wherefore he received; and being
put in confinement he shall be examined concerning the
deeds that he hath done, and he shall not come out thence
until he have paid the uttermost farthing. But indeed
concerning this it hath been said: Let thine alms sweat
into thy hands, until thou know to whom thou shouldst
give.

At this point we must remind ourselves of the
Second Mandate of the Shepherd. In enjoining
Simplicity in giving Hermas started from the words
of St James which speak of God “ giving to all simply ”
(a7ASe, unconditionally). “‘ Give to all,” he says,
** for to all God desireth that there should be given
of His own bounties.” The receivers will give ac-
count to God for what cause and to what end they
received. Those who received because they are in
need will not be punished; but those who receive
under pretence will pay the penalty. So the giver
is not responsible; he, in any case, is “ guiltless.”
For the giver had received of the Lord a ministration
to fulfil, and he fulfilled it simply, not doubting to
whom he should give or not give. Here the sequence
of thought is perfect : Hermas knows what he wants
to say end he says it. He faces the problem of
undiscriminating charity and finds his own solution.

How then does the Didachist treat the matter ?
He has been giving us garbled passages from the
Sermon on the Mount, and has gone on: ‘If a man

54 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

take away from thee that which is thine, ask tt not back,
for neither art thou able. To everyman that asketh of
thee give, and ask not back.” 'This is evolved out of
the simpler statement of St Luke (v. 30): “ To every
one that asketh of thee give, and from him that
taketh away that which is thine ask it not back.”
Hermas had not started from this text : he has nothing
about asking or asking back. All who are in want
‘he must help, whether they come and ask or not.
So far then there is no point of contact between the
two documents. But the Didachist proceeds: ‘for
to all the Father desireth that there should be given
of His own free-gifts.”” The corresponding sentence
in Hermas was apposite enough; for he had started
from the words of St James, though he had not
quoted them: “ God who giveth to all simply.” No
such connexion is to be found in the Didache. More-
over two words are changed: “the Father” is put
instead of “God,” and “ free-gifts”’ (charismata)
instead of the word which for sake of distinction we
have rendered “ bounties’ (doremaia). The former
change is explicable, if we remember that the Dida-
chist starts from the Sermon on the Mount, whereas
Hermas starts from St James. But the change from
‘‘ His own doremata”’ to “His own charismata” is
strange. The word doremata is a striking one, and
Hermas borrowed it from St James’s “ every perfect
gift (dorema) is from above.” But God is not spoken
of as having charismata of “His own”: it is men
who have charismata from God. There is only one
passage in the New Testament in which the expression
“his own charisma” occurs (1 Cor. vii. 7): ‘‘ Each
man hath his own charisma of God” (fkaoroe tio
tye xdpiopa ée Ocov); and, considering the fre-
quent borrowings from the First Epistle to the
Corinthians in the latter part of the Didache, it would
seem likely that this verse was in the writer’s mind.

THE DIDACHE 55

In any case it cannot reasonably be doubted that the
passage as it stands in Hermas is original, and that as
it stands in the Didache it is secondary.

The Didachist proceeds: ‘‘ Blessed is he that
giveth according to the commandment; for he shall
be guiltless. Woe to him that receiveth.” We may
observe that the injunction to “ give according to
the commandment ” occurs twice in the latter part
of the Didache (xii. 5, 7). Whatever “the com-
mandment ” there intended may be—and this has
puzzled the commentators—“ giving according to
the commandment’? cannot well have occurred
independently to two writers; so that again we have
an indication of unity of authorship.}

It has been suggested that in our present passage
“the commandment ” (1) évroAh) may actually refer
to the Second Mandate or commandment (évroAn)
of Hermas: but this is not very probable. The next
words, however, are certainly from Hermas: “ for
he shall be guiltless.”” We understand the statement
of Hermas that the giver shall be guiltless, because
we know what he has said in defending indiscriminate
giving, or “ giving simply,” as he calls it. But as the
wofds stand in the Didache they are hardly intelli-

ible.
: In constructing the sentences, “* Blessed is he that
giveth according to the commandment ; for he shall
be guiltless. Woe to him that receiveth,” the Dida-
chist is again influenced by the great Sermon as it is
recorded by St Luke, where Blessings are balanced
by Woes. But in the latter clause, ““ Woe to him
that receiveth,” we see how the love of paradox has
betrayed the writer into absurdity. Blessed are the
poor, Woe to the rich—this contrast and_ those
which follow in Luke vi. 20 ff. are paradoxes indeed,

1 It is very unlikely that a later interpolator would have picked
out this phrase from the latter part of the book.

56 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

but full of spiritual meaning. We cannot set on the
same level the Didachist’s invention: Blessed is the
giver, Woe to the receiver.

But we must hear him further: ‘‘ Woe to him
that receiveth; for if a man receiveth having need,
he shall be guiltless °—but then why ‘‘ Woe to the
receiver’? ? ‘‘ But he that hath no need shall give
satisfaction (déoa diknv) why and wherefore he
received ; and being put in confinement he shall be
examined concerning the deeds that he hath done.”
The phrase here rendered “give satisfaction”
is compounded of two phrases in Hermas: “they
shall render account (arodwcovew Adyov) why they re-
ceived and to what end,” and ‘they who received
under pretence shall pay the penalty ” (ricovow Sdiknv).
To say, as the Didachist does, Séou dicny, “ he
shall give penalty (in the sense of “‘ give account ”’)
why and wherefore,’ may not be quite impossible
Greek, but at least it is very unusual.

The Didachist goes on with words from the
Sermon on the Mount about “ the uttermost farthing ”
(Matt. v. 26); and then adds his curious and un-
identified quotation, which directly contradicts the
teaching of Hermas as to giving unconditionally :
‘“* But indeed concerning this it hath been said: Let
thine alms sweat into thy hands, until thou know to
whom thou shouldst give.” This was the doctrine
of Ecclesiasticus (xii. 1): “‘If thou do good, know
to whom thou doest it... Do good to the godly,
and thou shalt find recompense, if not from him, yet
from the Most High.” But it is not the teaching of
Hermas, who distinctly says, ‘ not doubting to whom
thou shouldst give or not give”; nor is it the
teaching of the Sermon on the Mount.

We have now come to the end of what is cominionke
called the great Christian interpolation. We have
observed in it two phrases which suggest that it is

THE DIDACHE 57

written by the same hand as the latter part of the
Didache. One is the phrase “ thou shalt be perfect ”’ ;
the other, “‘ giving according to the commandment.”’
Such evidence might seem to be slight, if we did not
remember how small is the field in which we have
to look for resemblances, and how different is the
subject matter of the two parts of the book—the
moral precepts and the ecclesiastical regulations.
The whole passage occupies but eighteen lines of
Lightfoot’s text. Moreover most of the sentences
ean be directly traced either to the Sermon on the
Mount or to the Shepherd of Hermas. Indeed only
six are entirely the writer’s own :

(1) And ye shall not have an enemy.

(2) And thou shalt be perfect.

(3) For neither art thou able.

(4) Blessed is he that giveth according to the com-
mandment . . . Woe to him that receiveth.

(5) And being put in confinement he shall be examined
concerning the deeds that he hath done.

(6) But indeed concerning this it hath been said.

We might fairly add this last also to our observed
resemblances: for the same method of introducing
a quotation (elpnra, “it hath been said,” instead
of the more usual yéypamra, “it hath been written ’’)
recurs in the closing words of the Didache (xvi. 6);
where a quotation from Zechariah is introduced by
“it was said’ (éppé0n). And we shall remember
that éopé0y is thus used six times in the fifth chapter
of St Matthew—* it was said to them of old time.”
We may also compare Did. ix. 5: ‘for indeed con-
cerning this the Lord hath said: Give not that
which is holy to the dogs.” In the Greek the parallel
is striking: i. 6, aAAd Kai rept robrov & eipnra: ix, 5,
Kal yap Tept Tovrov sipnkev.

If we are to treat the Two Ways as a document

E

58 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

by itself, whether it was written by Barnabas or was
a Jewish manual from which both Barnabas and the
Didachist drew, then no doubt this passage may be
called an interpolation; and in that case it will be
an interpolation made by the author of the Didache
as a whole. But it is surely much simpler to state
the matter thus: The Didachist has begun with the
scheme of the Two Ways, which as coming from
Barnabas he regards as apostolic teaching. But he
quickly shows his independence of a_ particular
Apostle by making verbal changes, and by omitting all
reference to angel or devil; then by adding a group of
precepts, not worded exactly as in the Gospels, but
such as Apostles might well have handed down to the
Gentiles as their recollections of the great Sermon of
our Lord. To these he appends precepts on almsgiving
derived from Hermas, whom he may have considered
a writer of the apostolic age, and who was undoubtedly
quoted as “ Scripture ” in certain circles. Then with
a quotation which we cannot identify he closes this
first section of the Way of Life, which he had intro-
duced by the words: ‘‘ Now of these words the
teaching is this.”

We pass on now to the section which deals mainly
with negative precepts: “‘ The second command of
the teaching.” Here we come back to the Epistle
of Barnabas, the language of which is followed some-
what closely, though the order of the sayings is much
altered and a good many small insertions are made.
Thus the Didachist proceeds :

Thou shalt do no murder, thow shalt not commit adultery,
thou shalt not corrupt boys, thou shalt not commit fornica-
tion, thow shalt not steal, thou shalt not practise magic,
thou shalt not use drugs,! thou shalt not murder a child

1 Od dappuaredoes might be rendered ‘ thou shalt not practise
sorcery’; but the words which follow suggest rather the use of
poisonous drugs.

THE DIDACHE 59

by abortion nor kill it when it is born, thow shalt not covet
thy neighbour’s goods, thou shalt not forswear thyself, thou
shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not speak evil, thou
shalt not bear a grudge.

Barnabas had begun with quite a different set of
precepts : some of these the Didachist drops, such as :
“Thou shalt be simple in heart and rich in spirit.
Thou shalt not be joined with them that walk in the
way of death”: others he embodies later, some of
them in a remodelled form. After eight of such
precepts Barnabas had said: “ Thou shalt not commit
fornication, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt
not corrupt boys.’ But the Didachist prefers to
make a much fuller catalogue, embodying the shorter
precepts of the Ten Commandments. He also inserts
‘Thou shalt not practise magic, thou shalt not use
drugs,” which are not in Barnabas, but apparently are
suggested by the gappaxeia, wayeia, “ poisoning” (or
‘** sorcery ’’?) and “‘ magic,”? which occur later in the
description of the Way of Darkness. We may note
as characteristic of the Didachist that he has taken
over ‘‘thou shalt not forswear thyself” (ov« émopxicac)
from the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. v. 33, the only
place where it occurs), of which he has made so large
a use already. Though he gives from Barnabas
** thou shalt not bear a grudge,”’ he omits the words
‘‘ against thy brother.” Barnabas, as we have seen,
had framed his precept on Zechariah, from whom he
got the words “ against thy brother.” Thus again the
Didachist is seen to be secondary : he has abbreviated
the precept of Barnabas, and has made it of general
application.

To carry out fully this comparison of the Didache
with Barnabas would take us too long, and we should
need to have before us a complete table of parallels.!

1 Such a table is given in Appendix B.

60 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

We should find that the Didachist has rearranged the
precepts so as to bring like to like, that he has recast
many of them and omitted a few: his own additions
are not very considerable. It must suffice here to give
some instructive examples to show the method and the
result of his alterations.

At the end of c. ii we read :

Thou shalt not hate any man, but some thou shalt
reprove, and for some thou shalt pray, and some thou shalt
love more than thine own soul.

Here we have a remarkable conglomerate. In
Lev. xix. 17 f. we find the precepts: ‘‘ Thou shalt not
hate thy brother in thy mind: thou shalt surely
reprove thy neighbour, and not bear sin because of
him. And thy hand shall not take vengeance, and
thou shalt not be wroth with the children of thy people,
and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.’ In
Jude 22 f. we read, according to some early MSS:
‘* But some reprove when they dispute with you, and
some save plucking them out of the fire, and on some
have mercy with fear, hating even the garment
spotted by the flesh.”” The Didachist has taken the
precepts of Leviticus without the limitation to the
** brother ” or “‘ neighbour ”: but he seems to borrow
his construction from the passage in Jude. Most
noticeable however is the debt to Barnabas. Barnabas
had said, using a phrase which he had twice used
before : ! “‘ Thou shalt love thy neighbour more than
thine own soul”: but this sentiment would not suit
the Didachist, who has already given the precept
** Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.’ Yet he
knows and likes the phrase “ more than thine own
soul,” and so he works it up into a new and less
enthusiastic precept: ‘‘Some thou shalt love more
than thine own soul.”

1 See above, p. 18,

THE DIDACHE 61

The passage which next follows (iii. 1-6) is not in
Barnabas at all. It consists of the prohibition of five
mortal sins—murder, adultery, idolatry, theft, and
blasphemy. These prohibitions are constructed on a
uniform and highly artificial plan, which presents
several contrasts to all that has gone before. Each is
introduced by the words ‘‘ My child’: then follows
the imperative “be not” («7 yivov); whereas the
future, ‘thou shalt not,’? has been used hitherto.
Further we are told that one sin “‘ leadeth to” some
other; and this is repeated by saying, “‘ for from all
these things ”’ certain others ‘‘ are engendered.” Such
is the framework. But we must read the whole
passage.

My child, flee from all evil, and all that is like unto it.
Be not angry, for anger leadeth to murder; nor jealous
nor contentious nor wrathful: for of all these things
murders are engendered.

My child, be not lustful, for lust leadeth to fornication ;
nor foul-speaking nor with uplifted eyes: for of all these
things adulteries are engendered.

My child, be not a dealer in omens, since it leadeth to
idolatry; nor an enchanter nor an astrologer nor a
magician, neither be willing to look at them: for of all
these things idolatry is engendered.

My child, be not a liar, since lying leads to theft ; nor
avaricious nor vainglorious : for of all these things thefts
are engendered.

My child, be not a murmurer, since it leadeth to
blasphemy ; nor selfwilled nor a thinker of evil thoughts ;
for of all these things blasphemies are engendered.

This group of five prohibitions has no counterpart
in the Two Ways of Barnabas, and it is not like any-
thing else in the whole of the Didache. Barnabas in
his Epistle could not well have said “ My child” ;
and the Didachist, if writing with a free hand, would
hardly have introduced the pronoun of the first person

62 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

singular into the Teaching of the Apostles. It is true
that, having used the phrase ‘‘ My child ” five times in
this passage, he does use it again a few lines further
down, where he is modifying a precept which he has
taken over from Barnabas: but this need not cause
us surprise; for, once it had come in, it could easily
be used again. When we have realised how great a
borrower the Didachist is, and how very few sentences
of the Two Ways come entirely from his own pen, we
are strongly inclined to think that he found this whole
passage elsewhere, and transferred it with but little
if any modification into his own book. Dr Taylor
has insisted on the rabbinic character of the passage,
which is in the spirit of the well-known injunction to
‘* make a hedge about the Law,” 7.e. to forbid lesser
sins as a security against the greater sins which are of a
similar nature. Some apocryphal book, Jewish or
early Christian, may have been the source from which
the Didachist was borrowing.

Now Clement of Alexandria (Strom. I. 25. 100)
says: ‘* This man is called by the Scripture a thief:
it saith, Son, be not a liar, for lying leadeth to theft.”
This is the only passage in Clement of Alexandria in
which it can be thought at all probable that he has used
the Didache. Is it not perhaps more likely that the
Scripture of which he speaks is some lost apocryphal
book of which both he and the Didachist have made
use ? If this be so, we should no longer be faced with
the difficulty that Clement quoted the Didache as
Scripture on this one occasion, and yet never used it
again; and that Clement’s successor, Origen, should
nowhere show any knowledge at all of the existence
of the Didache.

The words which next follow in the Didache
(iii. '7 f.) are an expansion of what Barnabas has said—
“Thou shalt be meek, thou shalt be quieé, thou shalt
be trembling at the words which thou hast heard.”

THE DIDACHE 63

This, as we saw, was based on Isa. Ixvi. 12. The
Didachist greatly expands it; and we note that the
imperative is used instead of the future, as the result
of his use of the imperative in the preceding passage. !

But be meek, since the meek shall inherit the earth. Be
longsuffering and pitiful, without malice and quiet and
kindly (éyo60s), and trembling at the words continually
which thou hast heard.

It has been suggested by those who desire to make
the Two Ways a Jewish document that ‘“‘ the meek
shall inherit the earth ” has been taken from Ps. xxxvii.
11. This is of course possible: but, in view of what
we have already seen of the Didachist’s method, it is
needless to go beyond the familiar words of the
Sermon on the Mount.

We pass on to the beginning of c. iv., a passage
where the alterations of the language of Barnabas
made by the Didachist are of a wider interest.

My child, him that speaketh unto thee the word of
God thou shalt remember night and day, and shalt honour
him as the Lord ; for whencesoever the Lordship is spoken
of, there the Lord is. And thou shalt seek out daily the
persons of the saints, that thou mayest find rest in their
words.

Here a wholly different turn is given to the striking
exhortation which we found in Barnabas, who says :

Thou shalt love as the apple of thine eye every one
that speaketh unto thee the word of the Lord. Thou
shalt remember the day of judgment night and day, and
shalt seek out each day the persons of the saints, either
labouring by word and going forth to exhort them and
studying to save a soul by the word, or with thy hands
shalt thou work for a ransom of thy sins.

Barnabas is living in days of stress, and under a

1 “Io, followed by yivou (cf. pedye, followed by uh yivov, above) ;
- whereas Barnabas has ton. . . Eon.

64 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

sense of approaching judgment. The Christian
Society must hold together, and each member of it
must strive to help the rest. Some can do this by
words of counsel, others have but humbler functions.
But none must be idle and unhelpful. Towards all
who bring messages of divine encouragement the
warmest affection should go forth.

But the Didachist knows of no stress and feels no
emotion. By the simple process of omission the
stress and the emotion disappear. The first sentences
had run: ‘‘ Thou shalt love as the apple of thine eye
every one that speaketh unto thee the word of the
Lord. Thou shalt remember the day of judgment
night and day.”’ Omit ‘“ Thou shalt love as the apple
of thine eye,” and omit “the day of judgment”:
then join up the two sentences, and you have: “‘ Every
one that speaketh unto thee the word of the Lord thou
shalt remember night and day.” This is what the
Didachist gives us, with a slight modification in the
wording: he prefixes ‘“ My child,” which he has used
five times already just before ; he omits “‘ every one,”
and changes “ the word of the Lord ” into “‘ the word
of God’: so that we now read, “‘ My child, him that
speaketh unto thee the word of God thou shalt
remember night and day.”

We can hardly doubt that in making this trans-
formation he was guided by a recollection of Heb. xiii.
7: ‘Remember your leaders, who spake unto you
the word of God.” It is true that there the injunction
was to cherish the memory of leaders who had passed
away: but the temptation to manipulate the sen-
tences of Barnabas in accordance with this text was
too great for the ingenious compiler: he drops the
enthusiastic phrase “* Thou shalt love as the apple of
thine eye”; and he takes ‘‘ Thou shalt remember
night and day ” out of its context, where it was appro-
priately used of “the day of judgment,” and joins

THE DIDACHE 65

it incongruously enough with “him that speaketh
unto thee the word of God.” Then he compensates
for his omissions by a strange insertion: ‘‘ and thou
shalt honour him as the Lord: for whencesoever the
Lordship is spoken of, there the Lord is.” The
phrase “‘ as the Lord ” recurs twice in the latter part
of his work, in one case of a teacher, in the other of an
apostle: Did. xi. 2 and 4, “‘ receive him as the Lord,”
and “he shall be received as the Lord.” The
presence of the Lord where “the Lordship is spoken
of,’’ or where the Lord’s name is named, may be an
eccentric paraphrase of the promise in the Gospel :
“Where two or three are gathered in My name,
there am I.”

In the remainder of the passage the Didachist
distorts yet more grossly the sentiment of the original.
The command now is “ to seek out daily the persons
of the saints,”’ not in order to help them, but to get
the comfort of their words. The duty of warning
and encouragement no longer rests on every member
of the society who is capable of thus helping others :
it has passed over to the professional teacher. The
final clause is omitted altogether, and reappears as a
separate precept a little lower down in the obscure
form : ’Eav éxy¢ dia trav xepOv cov Swaec AVTpwo TOV
apaptiav cov, which may mean: “If thou hast
ought passing through thy hands, thou shalt give a
ransom for thy sins ’’—the original idea of labouring
with the hands having been obliterated.

Barnabas had closed his description of the Way of
Light thus :

Thou shalt not make division, but shalt be at peace,
bringing together them that contend. Thou shalt make
confession of thy sins. Thou shalt not draw near to
prayer in an evil conscience. This is the way of light;

We observed that the word ¢ipnvetcae should be

66 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

rendered “‘ be at peace” or ‘“‘ keep the peace,” and
not “‘ pacify ”—the transitive use being rare and late.
The Didachist however prefers the transitive use,
and joins <ipnvedoac with rove paxouévove, “ thou
shalt pacify them that contend.” He has thus no
use for svvayaywyv, “ bringing together ’’: so he drops
it out. Moreover he alters the position of the precept,
giving it much earlier (iv. 6). The remainder of the
passage he has in a modified form in iv. 14, as follows :

In church thou shalt confess thy transgressions, and
shalt not come to thy prayer in an evil conscience. This
is the way of life.

The phrase “in church,” or “in the assembly ”
(év éxxAnoia) is not found in Barnabas: but, oddly
enough, the word that stands in the same position,
though at the end of the previous sentence, is cvvayayav.
Is it conceivable that the Didachist may have under-
stood this as meaning “ assembling together” ? or
may it have suggested to his mind the word ovvaywyh ?
This is perhaps too fanciful; but it is just worth
mentioning, for the coincidence is certainly remark-
able.

Finally we may note that the Didachist speaks of
confessing “ transgressions”’ rather than “ sins ” ;
so too, when he is referring in a later passage to the
Sunday Eucharist, he says (xiv. 1): “ first confessing
your transgressions ”’—another small item to be
added to the evidences of unity of authorship between
the first and second sections of the book.

On the Way of Death in the Didache we need not
dwell. ere Barnabas is much more closely followed ;
but the Didachist has changed the order in the list of
sins, and he has added some sins to the list, thus
bringing it more into line with his own presentation of
the Way of Life.

In the closing chapter of the Didache we have a

THE DIDACHE 67

series of warnings as to the last times and the end of
the world. It is necessary that we should glance at
some of these, because we find in them clear proof that
the Didachist borrowed from the earlier part of the
Epistle of Barnabas, and not only from the Two Ways
at its close.

Be watchful for your life: let your lamps be not
quenched and your loins not ungirded, but be ye ready, for
ye know not the hour when our Lord cometh.

We observe as before, that he will not quote
directly : he will not say, for example, with St Luke
(xu. 85): “‘ Let your loins be girded about and your
lamps burning.”’ He proceeds thus:

And frequently shall ye be assembled together, seeking
what is fitting for your souls. For the whole time of your
faith will not profit you, if ye be not perfected in the
last time. For in the last days the false prophets shall
be multiplied, ete.

Now Barnabas had said, near the beginning of his
Kpistle (iv. 9):

Wherefore let us take heed in the last days. For the
whole time of our faith will profit us nothing, if we do not
now, in the iniquitous time and in the offences that are
to come, resist as becometh sons of God, that the Black
One may not effect a subtle entrance.

This is characteristic of Barnabas, ‘‘The last days”
are those in which he and his readers are living.
**Now, in the iniquitous time,’ they must hold
together and keep out the Black One. They have no
right, he goes on to say, to withdraw themselves in
solitary superiority : they must come to the common
meeting and take counsel for the common good.
But for the Didachist “‘ the last time ” and “‘ the last
days ”’ are in the future—not in the present, as they
were for Barnabas, who was dealing with a real

68 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

situation of anxiety and peril. The Didachist’s “ last
days” are a literary reminiscence of Matt. xxiv.
10 ff.: ‘‘ And they shall hate one another ; and many
false prophets shall arise and shall deceive many ;
and because iniquity is multiplied the love of many
shall wax cold.’’ So the Didachist, picking up from -
Barnabas “‘ the last days,”’ writes :

For in the last days the false prophets and corrupters
shall be multiplied; and the sheep shall be turned into
wolves, and love shall be turned into hate: for as iniquity
increaseth they shall hate one another.

He has in mind another reference in St Matthew
(vii. 11) to false prophets, who “‘ go about in sheep’s
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.”
When they divest themselves of their disguise, “ the
sheep shall be turned into wolves.” So too the love,
which in the Gospel is said to wax cold, is here said to
be turned into hate.

The remainder of this chapter has several points
of interest, but it would not be to our purpose to
consider them now. Enough has been said to show
that the method of the Didachist in recasting sentences
of the Gospel is the same as in his great insertion at
the beginning of the Way of Life; and also that he
was acquainted with the Epistle of Barnabas as a
whole, and not merely with the Two Ways which
comes at its close.

IV
EPILOGUE

HERE now do we stand at the end of our
inquiry ? In all investigations dealing with
the origin and historical significance of literary

works large allowance must be made for the subjective
element. We all start with our presuppositions, and
we all find it difficult to abandon conclusions to which
our former studies may have led us. Moreover in
this region it is specially true that arguments which
appeal to one mind are by no means convincing to
another: so that a consensus of opinion is not easily
attained. The problem of the Didache will perhaps
never be completely solved: its mysterious author
at any rate has done his best to make it insoluble.
Some new document may possibly be discovered
which will throw a fresh light on the history of its
composition. Meanwhile we must contribute what
we can to the process of elucidation, conscious of the
imperfection of our own treatment of the subject, and
hoping that where we are wrong others by their
unsparing criticism will help to set us right.

With these reserves, which are due to the import-
ance of the matter in hand, we may state our results
in the briefest form as follows :

1. The Two Ways is the original work of the
author of the Epistle of Barnabas.

2. It was known to Hermas in this its earliest
form, which spoke of angels of good and evil.

69

70 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

8. The writer of the Didache found the Two Ways
in Barnabas, and adopted it as the scheme of the
moral teachings which form the first section of his
book. He used it with great freedom, amplifying
it with precepts from the Old Testament, from the
Sermon on the Mount, from the Shepherd of Hermas
and from elsewhere. He rearranged its clauses so as
to produce a more satisfactory order, and he gave his
own interpretation to passages which he found
obscure or uncongenial. Notwithstanding his omission
or abbreviation of many sentences of the original, he
increased the bulk of the Two Ways by more than
one-third. He placed it at the head of his work as
an instruction to be given to candidates for Holy
Baptism. In so doing his intention was to put it
forward as a part of that “‘ Teaching of the Lord
through the Twelve Apostles to the Gentiles,’’ which
was presumably given in obedience to the Last
Command recorded in the Gospel according to
St Matthew.

Something must now be said to draw out the
significance of these conclusions, and to meet the
objections which may reasonably be brought against
them.

The Two Ways, thus borrowed from Barnabas and
recast by the Didachist, entered on a new history.
It was embodied in various forms by subsequent
writers; as, for example, in a Church Order, in a
homily, in a manual of instruction for ascetics.
These writers abbreviated it and otherwise modified
it for their own purposes ; in some instances recurring
to the original form in the Epistle of Barnabas, and
also in one case at least inserting words from the
Shepherd of Hermas.

In 1886 Dr Charles Taylor, then Master of
St John’s College, Cambridge, struck by the rabbinic
character of much of the Didache, propounded the

EPILOGUE 71

view that the Two Ways was originally a Jewish
manual intended for the instruction of proselytes.
We need not give examples of the parallels which
he collected, for we have no interest in denying the
rabbinic cast of much of the Two Ways. This is
indeed just what we should expect after our study
of the earlier part of the Epistle of Barnabas.

The very wide acceptance at once given to this
theory led to a much earlier dating, not only of the
Two Ways, but also of the second part of the Didache.
For the theory of a Jewish origin necessarily involved
the rejection, as a Christian interpolation, of a con-
siderable passage near the beginning which was
largely derived from the Sermon on the Mount and
contained sentences of the Shepherd of Hermas.
If this passage was a later addition, the reasons which
had made it impossible to give an earlier date than
from 140 to 160 were no longer cogent. Then again,
if the Epistle of Barnabas had not after all been used
—if both Barnabas and the Didachist had embodied,
each after his own fashion, the earlier Jewish Two
Ways,-the date of the uninterpolated Didache might
be fixed without reference to Barnabas at all.

The new theory gained support from the absence
of what was called the Christian interpolation from
almost all the later writers who had made use of the
Two Ways. It was absent from the Epistle of
Barnabas, and from the fragmentary manuscript
which gave a Latin translation of the first portion of
the Two Ways: it was absent from the curious
- manual commonly spoken of as “The Apostolic
Church Order,” in which the Two Ways is divided
into sections assigned to the various Apostles: it
was absent also from the Syntagma attributed to
St Athanasius, and from the Fides Nicaena dependent
on this Syntagma: it was absent, lastly, from the
Arabic version of a discourse delivered by the Egyptian

72 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

abbot Schnudi. The one writer who recognises it
is the compiler of the Seventh Book of the Apostolic
Constitutions, which is founded on the Didache in the
final and “interpolated”? form in which we know it.

The most able exponent of this change of view was
Dr Harnack, and we shall find it instructive to trace
the process of his thought upon the subject. In
1884, when he brought out his remarkable edition,
he had affirmed the judgment of the first editor,
Bryennius, maintaining that the Didache embodied
the language both of Barnabas and of Hermas, and
therefore could not be earlier than c. 140-160. The
fact that the precepts of the Two Ways were an
incongruous medley in Barnabas, whereas in the
Didache their order was far more systematic, con-
vinced him that Barnabas must give us the original
and the Didache the ordered recension. It was
inconceivable, he held, that if Barnabas had the more
systematic form in front of him he could have delibe-
rately thrown it into such confusion. The strange
picture of ecclesiastical institutions which the second
section of the Didache presented was of course
exceedingly difficult to reconcile with so late a date.
Henee it came to pass that Harnack and other
excellent critics—Dr Salmon among them—enthusi-
astically welcomed the relief offered by Dr Taylor’s
theory. Before the end of 1886 Harnack had im-
plicitly accepted it,! and he presently developed it in
the article “‘ Apostellehre”’ in the Realencyclopéddie
fur protestantische Theologie und Kirche. His latest
judgment, so far as I know, is to be found in the
second issue (1896) of his smaller edition entitled ‘‘ The
Teaching of the Apostles and the Two Ways.” He
there sums up the results of critical investigation as
follows :

1. The Didache, as we have it, shows use of

4 Texte u, Unters., IL, 5. 1.

EPILOGUE 73

Barnabas and probably of Hermas. It probably
belongs to the period 140-160—not later than 160,
since Clement of Alexandria quotes it as “‘ Scripture.”

2. But a Jewish Manual, “The Two Ways,”’ lies
behind both this and Barnabas.

3. It is reasonable to postulate a Christianised
“Two Ways” with an enlargement on Church
Ordinances, issued as “* The Teaching of the Apostles ”?
—without the section near the beginning which
borrows from the Sermon on the Mount and from
Hermas. This may go back to 120 a.p.—but not
earlier, for two generations of Christianity must lie
behind it.

4, He offers a tentative reconstruction of the
Jewish ‘“‘Two Ways” from the various documents
enumerated above.

This presentation of the literary history enables
him to take back the Church Ordinances contained in
the Didache to 120 4.D.—a date at which he considers
they might still have been current in some remote
corner of Christendom, possibly somewhere in Egypt.
They would thus be important witnesses to an early
stage of Church development beyond which other
regions had by this time advanced.

There are two arguments urged in favour of this
theory which deserve to be carefully considered, even
by those who are already convinced by our present
investigations that the Didache as it stands is the
work of a single author, who has borrowed both from
Barnabas and from Hermas, and who therefore cannot
have written before the period c. 140-160: (1) the
absence of the so-called interpolation from a number
of writers who have made use of the Two Ways; and
(2) the exclusively Jewish character of the Two Ways,
when purged of this “interpolation” and of one or
two minor insertions of a Christian type.

(1) The absence of this “ interpolated” section

F

74 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

from Barnabas needs no explanation for those who
believe that Barnabas was the original author of the
Two Ways, and that the Didachist borrowed his
work and modified it in the way that we have described.

Its absence from the Latin version of the Didache
is at first sight a serious objection. But when
Dr Harnack was writing in 1896 only a fragment of
this was known. Since that date the whole has been
discovered, and we now find that it is not strictly
speaking a Latin version of the Didache, but a Latin
homily based on the first part of the Didache only.
It occurs among a number of other Latin homilies, and
is headed, De Doctrina Apostolorum. At the end the
homilist has added some brief sentences of his own,
and he concludes after the manner of a preacher with
the formula: “through the Lord Jesus Christ, who
reigneth and ruleth with God the Father and the Holy
Spirit, world without end. Amen.”

But there is more than this to be said. Not only
has he used great freedom in omission and alteration,
but he has gone on his own account both to Barnabas
and to Hermas to supplement what he presumably
found in his copy of the Didache. Thus he begins :

There are two ways in the world, of life and of death, of
light and of darkness. On these are stationed two angels,
one of equity, the other of iniquity. But there is great
difference between the two ways. The way therefore of
life is this: first, thou shalt love the eternal God who
made thee; secondly, thy neighbour as thyself. But all
that thou wouldst not have done to thee, do not to
another.

Now the interpretation of these words is this: Thou
shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt do no murder, etc.

The first thing we observe is that he has gone back
to Barnabas for the terms “ of light and of darkness,”
adding them to those which the Didachist had pre-
ferred, ‘‘ of life and of death.’: Secondly, he gives

EPILOGUE 75

us back the angels of good and evil, whom the
Didachist had removed. But like Hermas he gives
us only two, an angel of righteousness and an angel
of unrighteousness ; and he uses the rather peculiar
phraseology of the Old Latin version of Hermas,
“of equity” and “of iniquity” (aequitatis and
iniquitatis).

That the homilist omits the so-called interpolation,
which begins ‘“‘ Bless them that curse you,” may be
due to the fact that he saw that it was not in Barnabas.
He may also have been influenced by his desire to
abbreviate, which appears elsewhere; and he may have
been glad to be relieved of a passage which gave the
words of the Gospel in so strangely garbled a form.

It is further to be noted that, though the homilist
has omitted the so-called interpolation, yet at a later
point he introduces a sentence which occurs in it:
“For to all the Lord desireth that there should be
given of His own gifts.” The sentence was borrowed
by the Didachist from Hermas, and we must allow
for the possibility that the homilist took it independ-
ently from the same source.!

The absence of the “interpolation”? from the
document called ‘“‘ The Apostolic Church Order ” (or
the ’Em:ropu) Gpwv) is quite as readily accounted for as
its absence from the Latin homily. Here again the
writer has the Epistle of Barnabas before him. Indeed
his opening words, “ All hail, sons and daughters,”
are the first words of the Epistle itself; and presently

b

1 The homilist has: ‘‘ Omnibus enim dominus dare vult de
donis suis.”” Hermas has ‘‘ God,” and the Didachist has “ the
Father,”’ whereas the homilist has ‘“‘ the Lord.” It is to be observed
that the homilist has a preference for using the word “ Lord.”
Thus for ‘‘ the fear of God ”’ in the Didache he says “ the fear of the
Lord”; for ‘‘ the word of God,” “‘ the word of the Lord God ’”’;
for “ the same God,” “ the same Lord’’; and for “‘ fearing God,”
‘ fearing the Lord.”’ The order of the words follows Hermas rather
more closely than the Didache; but it is doubtful whether much
stress should be laid on this.

76 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

we find that he has restored words of Barnabas that
the Didachist had dropped. The fact that the
‘‘ interpolation ” was not in Barnabas may have been
his reason for omitting it. Moreover he gives but
selections from the Two Ways, and distributes them
among the different Apostles; ‘“‘ John said: There
are two ways,” etc.; ‘‘ Matthew said,” ‘‘ Peter said,”
and so forth. We can well understand that he might
shrink from assigning to any particular Apostle such
words as ‘‘ Bless them that curse you,” etc. We may
the more readily believe that he had the whole passage
before him and consciously omitted it, when we note
that he omitted the whole of the latter part of the
Didache, though his acquaintance with it is shown
by his including at an earlier point the words “ spiritual
food and drink and life eternal,’”? which come in the
tenth chapter of the Didache.

Little stress can now be laid on the other instances
of omission, such as the Syntagma of St Athanasius
and the discourse of Abbot Schnudi: the writers took
what they wanted, and left out what did not attract
them—perhaps even repelled them. Thus the external
evidence for the “ interpolation ” theory, which for
the moment looked so strong, breaks down when it
is carefully examined.

(2) We have now to consider the argument which is
drawn from the exclusively Jewish character of the
Two Ways, when it has been purged of the great
‘‘ interpolation ’”? and of some minor insertions of a
Christian type.

We have already said that there is no reason for
surprise if the Two Ways, as originally written by
Barnabas at the close of his Epistle, should offer
characteristically rabbinic features. For the earlier
portion of the Epistle is saturated with Jewish doctrine
of the rabbinic type. It is worth while to emphasise

his point by an example which is exactly on a par

EPILOGUE vi!

with some of the parallels which Dr Taylor produced.
In ec. xi Barnabas is seeking for Old Testament
references to the Water and the Cross, and he quotes
from the First Psalm: ‘‘ He shall be like the tree
planted at the parting of the waters, which shall give
his fruit in his season; and his leaf shall not fall off,
and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.’? He goes on
to comment thus :

Ye perceive how He pointed out the water and the
cross at the same time. For this is the meaning: Blessed
are they that set their hope on the cross, and go down into
the water. For He speaketh of the reward in his season 3
Then, saith He, I will repay. But now what saith He ?
His leaves shall not fall off. He meaneth by this that
every word which shall come forth from you through your
mouth, in faith and love, shall be for the conversion and
hope of many.

Here we have a Christian gnosis of Baptism, the
Cross, and the Future Reward “‘ in due season.” But
the passage is not exhausted ; it has a promise for the
present also: ‘‘ But now what saith He? His leaves
shall not fall off.” This is explained to mean that
even now the Christian’s faithful and loving words
of counsel shall not be uttered in vain. The inter-
pretation seems to us far fetched. It is for that
reason all the more interesting to compare with it the
Talmudic saying :

Whence comes it that the common words of the learned
deserve notice and attention? From the word of the
Scripture, His leaf withers not, and all that he doeth is
effectual.

With such passages as these in our mind we shall
not be disposed to deprive Barnabas of the authorship
of the Two Ways on the ground that its language has

1“ Succa. 21, Abod. sar, 19: quoted by Hilgenfeld from
Guedemann,

78 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

a decidedly rabbinic cast. But we must pass on to
our immediate task of examining the statement that
the original Two Ways, as critically reconstructed by
those who have adopted Dr Taylor’s theory, proves
to be an exclusively Jewish document.

Fortunately for our purpose Dr Harnack has
printed a tentative reconstruction made from a com-
parison of all the documents in which the Two Ways
finds a place.! This reconstruction contains certain
passages in square brackets, which it is thought may
perhaps have been absent from the Jewish original :
with these doubtful portions we shall not in the first
instance concern ourselves. We shall take certain
passages about which no doubt is expressed, and con-
sider whether they do not suggest the hand of a
Christian rather than a Jewish writer. Some repeti-
tion of what has been already said about these passages
will be inevitable.

1. The negative form of the Golden Rule, in the
words in which we find it in the Didache, is accepted
as a part of the original Jewish work. But we have
suggested that the Didachist took this negative pre-
cept from the Apostolic Decree, as it is given in the
‘** Western text’? of the Acts of the Apostles; and
that he altered it so as to bring it into a closer verbal
conformity to the positive precept in the Sermon on
the Mount—from which Sermon he goes on to make
considerable borrowings in the immediate context.?
The words “* All things whatsoever thou wouldst not ”
are moulded on the “ All things whatsoever ye would ”
in Matt. vii. 12. Among the various forms in which
this negative precept is preserved, none which is
independent of the Didache shows this point of
contact with the wording of the Sermon on the
Mount.

' Die Apostellehre und die Jiédischen Beiden Wege (1896), pp. 57 ff.
® See above, pp. 47 fi,

EPILOGUE 79

-2. In Did. ii. 8 we have the command, Ovx
émopxyjoec, ‘Thou shalt not forswear thyself.”
This command appears in the presumed Jewish
document. But it is another of the Didachist’s
additions to Barnabas. There is no such command
inthe LXX. Surely it has come from the Sermon on
the Mount (Matt. v. 38).!

3. In ii. 12 of the reconstructed document we read :
** But some thou shalt reprove, and on some thou shalt
have mercy, and for some thou shalt pray, and some
thou shalt love more than thine own soul.’”? We have
spoken already of this combination of a characteristic
phrase of Barnabas with words suggested by Jude 23.2

4, In iv. 2 we have: ‘‘ Thou shalt seek out daily
the persons of the saints.””> This use of the word
“saints” is certainly more natural in a Christian
than in a Jewish book. We have dealt above with
the whole context of this passage, which confirms our
view that we have here a Christian hand.

5. In iv. 8 we read: ‘‘ Thou shalt share in all
things with thy neighbour, and shalt not say that they
are thine own ” (ov« épete idia va). Is it reasonable
to doubt that these last words come from Acts iv. 32 ?

This list of examples could easily be increased if
we were to consider the passages inserted in the recon-
structed document within square brackets; as, for
example, in iv. 10: ‘‘ For He cometh not to call
according to persons, but to those whom the Spirit
hath prepared ”’—a sentence derived from Barn. xix. 7,
where the language is still nearer to that of Matt. ix.
13.4 But it is not necessary to press the matter
further. We may be confident that no reconstruction,

1 See above, p. 59.

2 See above, p. 60.

& Pp, 63.

4 Tt is possible that doubt would not have been cast on this
clause, if it had been known in 1896 that the words were in the Latin
homily.

80 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

based on a critical comparison of the various texts,
will give us a purely Jewish Two Ways—especially
since the evidence of the remainder of the Latin
homily has become available. The only process by
which such a result could be reached would be the
elimination of Christian elements on the sole ground
that they were Christian ; but this would be merely a
form of begging the question, and such a method could
not be adopted by the scholars who have hitherto
dealt with the matter.!

The result of this examination is that neither
external nor internal evidence supports the theory of a
Jewish manual which has been variously embodied in
the Epistle of Barnabas, in the Didache, and possibly
in other early writings. We are thus free to maintain
the belief of the earliest editors of the Didache that
the Two Ways was borrowed from Barnabas and
reduced to a more formal order by the Didachist, who
moreover enlarged it by the insertion of matter taken
from the Sermon on the Mount, from Hermas and
from other writers, and prefixed it to his treatise on
apostolic ordinances, as representing the instructions
which were given in apostolic times to candidates for
Baptism. An investigation of the remainder of his
treatise would confirm our impression of his peculiar
method of composition and of the general purpose of
his work. Such an investigation has, as I have said,
been partially attempted elsewhere, but it is beyond
the scope of our present inquiry.?

It will, however, be natural to ask in conclusion
how far, in view of what we have seen, it is now possible

1 In a valuable work entitled “‘ The Oldest Christian Catechism
and the Jewish Propaganda-Literature ” (Berlin, 1909), Dr. Klein
has adopted the theory of a Jewish Two Ways, and has sought to
illustrate it afresh out of the stores of his rabbinic learning. His
book contains much that is of extraordinary interest, and that cannot
readily be found elsewhere: but on this particular problem he does

not appear to me to throw any further light.
2 See Appendix A,

EPILOGUE 81

to suggest limits of date for the composition of the
Didache. The use of Barnabas and Hermas prevents
our putting it earlier than the middle of the second
century. But how much later we might reasonably
go, it is not easy to say. For once we have perceived
that the writer’s aim is to represent the teaching and
practice not of his own but of apostolic days, we need
no longer ask what part of the Church could have
maintained so primitive an organisation to so late a
date. We must look for guidance rather to the
vocabulary which the author employs, and more
especially to the references which later writers make
to his work.

It has been held, as we have said already, that a
passage of the Didache is quoted as “ Scripture” by
Clement of Alexandria.! If this be so, then the
Didache cannot be put later than about the year 170.
But we have seen good reason for thinking that both
the Didachist and Clement borrowed the passage from
elsewhere. In three other passages Clement uses
language which can be paralleled from the Didache,?
but it can be more naturally accounted for by his use
of the Epistle of Barnabas to which he frequently
refers. There is one other passage which calls for
our consideration, a passage in which an allusion to
one of the Thanksgivings in the second part of the
Didache has been found.? Clement in his interpreta-
tion of the parable of the Good Samaritan speaks of
Christ as pouring in “ wine, the blood-of David’s vine.”
Now in the Didache we read: ‘‘ We thank thee, O
our Father, for the holy vine of David Thy servant,
which Thou hast made known to us through Jesus
Thy servant.” In Clement ‘the vine of David”
would seem to be Christ Himself, who pours in the

1 See above, p. 62.
2 Paed. II. 10 (89, 1): III. 12 (89, 1): Protrept. 10 (108, 5).
3 Clem. Alex, Quis dives salvetur ? 29, 4.

82 BARNABAS, HERMAS AND THE DIDACHE

wine that is His own blood. But in the Didache this
can hardly be intended: for “ the vine of David ” is
“made known to us through Jesus”; and thus it
stands parallel to “‘ the life and knowledge,” and again
to “ the knowledge and faith and immortality,”’ which
are also said to be “ made known to us through Jesus.”
Nor is there any suggestion in the Thanksgiving of
the Didache that the Cup is connected with the Blood
of Christ. It seems, then, hardly conceivable that
Clement should have been indebted to the Didache
for his phrase, ‘‘ wine, the blood of David’s vine.”
The same may be said of a passage in Origen where we
read: ‘‘ before we are inebriated with the blood of the
true vine which rises up from David’s root.” ! By
the mention of “ blood ” this passage is more nearly
allied to the words of Clement of Alexandria than to
those of the Didache: but “‘ David’s vine ” is a figure
of speech which might readily occur to more than one
writer.

If indeed Clement had once quoted the Didache as
‘“‘ Scripture,” it would be strange that he should
never have quoted it again, and not less strange
that in the voluminous works of Origen no certain
trace of it should anywhere be found. If neither
Clement of Alexandria nor Origen was acquainted
with the Didache—and this, if not quite certain,
seems very probable—it may be a third-century
document. Some points of vocabulary, which cannot
be dealt with here, would be more easily explained if
that were the case.

But the date has become a matter of comparatively
small moment, when once we have recognised the
author’s ruling principle. He is deliberately con-
structing an apostolic monument: he is describing
what presumably was the apostolic ordering of the
Gentile Churches. Incidentally he betrays himself

1 Homily VI. on Judges (Lomm, XI. 258).

EPILOGUE 83

here and there by using the language of post-apostolic
writers, or by attributing to the apostolic age practices
which undoubtedly belong to a later period. His
object may have been to recall the Church of his own
day to a greater simplicity by presenting this picture
of the primitive Christian Society. If so, he was
following an instinct which has guided good men in
later times, though their methods have been less
imaginative than his. We may admire his diligence
in research and the ingenuity with which he presents
his results: but we must be exceedingly wary if we
look to him for history.

APPENDIX A
THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE }

HE Didache, or Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, has
been before the world nearly thirty years. It was pub-
lished in 1883 byits discoverer Bryennius, who showed

in his learned Greek commentary that the new book had
many points of contact with Christian documents already
known. Further parallels were soon collected by Harnack,
Rendel Harris, and other scholars. Harnack with amazing
rapidity issued his great edition in 1884, and appended to it
a full discussion of the origins of the Christian Ministry,
basing on the new document a theory which he has since
but little modified, and which in its main features has
been widely accepted. A few years later Dr C. Taylor
argued that the first part of the book was derived almost
entirely from a Jewish manual of ethical instruction,
called from its opening words the Two Ways. Criticism
was then directed to the reconstruction of this Jewish
manual, and to the question whether it had already been
in circulation as a Christian manual before it was em-
bodied in the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. Moreover
the whole series of quotations and references in patristic
literature had to be examined afresh, to see how far they
were explained by the use of the Two Ways alone, and
how far they implied an acquaintance with the Teaching
in its fuller form. In 1900 Joseph Schlecht published a
complete text of the Latin version of which a small

1 This essay appeared as an article in the Journal of Theological
Studies in April, 1912. The opening paragraphs are in part con-
tradicted by what I have said in the present Lectures: but I have
thought it best to reprint it without change, although its argument
could now be considerably amplified and strengthened,

85

86 APPENDIX A

fragment only was already known. This version offers
us the Two Ways in what appears to be very nearly its
original form, but as a Christian manual bearing the title
De Doctrina Apostolorum.

The result of these and other investigations has been to
show that the Two Ways, either as a Jewish or as a
Christian manual, had a considerable vogue in early
times ; but that the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles has
left comparatively few traces of its circulation—hardly
any, indeed, which are of value for determining its date.
Much light has been thrown on the antecedents of the first
part of the book; but the second part, which deals with
Church order, is still an unsolved riddle. It does not seem
to fit in anywhere, in either time or place. The com-
munity which it presupposes is out of relation to al! our
knowledge of Church history. It is as much an isolated
phenomenon after all our researches as when it surprised
us at its first appearance. We still ask, Where was there
ever a Church which celebrated the Eucharist after the ~
manner here enjoined ? Where was there ever a Church
which refused to allow Apostles more than a two days’
stay ?

The object of the present paper is to attack the problem
afresh through an investigation of the author’s indebted-
ness to the writings of St Paul and St Luke. Such an
inquiry may seem to be foredoomed to failure: for
Harnack has declared that there is no decisive instance of
any acquaintance with St Paul’s Epistles ; and that, even
if it be admitted that the author had seen them, he
certainly did not regard them as in any sense authoritative :
moreover quite recently the late Bishop John Wordsworth
pronounced a similar judgment. Now I believe that this
conclusion is one which the writer fully intended should be
drawn ; but I shall be disappointed if I cannot show that
he has used the writings of St Paul, St Luke, and even
St John, though he has been at great pains to conceal his
obligations.

We must begin with an examination of the title, and an
inquiry into the author’s intention in framing it. Although
the book is frequently referred to as the Teaching of the
Apostles, it is possible that this short title ought now to be

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE — 87

confined to the Christian recension of the Two Ways,
which is preserved to us in the Latin version. The manu-
seript which Bryennius discovered gives us two titles:
first of all, Avdayy rév dHdexé arooréAwy, and then, as the
first line of the text itself, Avday Kvpiov dia trav dudexa
arootoAwy Tois eOverw.

The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles may have been the
brief title by which the author himself proposed that his
work should be familiarly known ; for it was the Apostolic
tradition—the instructions delivered by the Twelve—
that he claimed to record. But the ultimate sanction of
the tradition is expressed in the fuller title which is an
integral part of the book itself: ‘‘The teaching of the
Lord through the Twelve Apostles to the Gentiles.”

The substance of this longer title is undoubtedly drawn
from Matt. Xxvill. 19 f., the commission to “‘ the eleven
disciples ’?:; IlopevOévres od babyreioore TavTa To On,
Bamrigovres . ks Barricavres) adrous eis TO Ovo[L0. TOD Tar pos: Kal
Tod viod Kal Tod dyiou TVELHATOS, OLOAOKOVTES adTOUS THPELY TAVTA.
doa évererdapnv tiv. The same passage is referred to
after the conclusion of the moral precepts which constitute
the first part of the Teaching (namely the Two Ways),
when the writer in speaking of Baptism says: Tatra ravra
mpoeimovrTes, Bamticate cis TO OvopaG TOD TaTpds Kal TOD viod Kal TOD
dylov tvetpartos.

It is plain that the writer professes to record what the
Apostles taught to the Gentiles (rdvra ra €6vn), whom they
were commissioned to instruct and baptise. The “ eleven
disciples ’”? who are the repository of the Lord’s teaching
for the instruction of the Gentiles, become, by the addition
of St Matthias, the Twelve Apostles; and thus we have
the full explanation of the title, “The Teaching of the
Lord through the Twelve Apostles to the Gentiles.”

How then does the writer proceed in order to produce
a book which shall correspond to this title? He starts
off with the words “ There are two ways,” and he em-
bodies apparently the whole of a pre-existiag manual of
moral instruction. It is quite possible that it lay before
him in its Christian form, already entitled the Teaching
of the Apostles: indeed, this title may have given him
the cue for his own more elaborate work. After copying

88 APPENDIX A

a few sentences he introduces a considerable interpolation
(i. 8 b-ii. 1), which is largely taken from the Sermon on
the Mount. He does not, however, quote our Lord’s
words exactly; for it is not his purpose to give us the
Sayings of the Lord, but rather His precepts as conveyed
through His Apostles: so he purposely blends the
language of the First and Third Gospels, and further shows
his independence by such a modification as “ Fast for
them that persecute you.”” We note at once this character-
istic of his method: we shall have opportunities of
observing it further as we proceed.

Having thus, with the welcome aid of the Two Ways,
constructed a representation of the teaching given by the
Twelve Apostles to the Gentiles as preliminary to Baptism,
he enters upon a task demanding more originality:
namely the presentation of their teaching as to the method
of Baptism, the celebration of the Eucharist, and other
_ points of Church order. It is of the first importance that
we should bear in mind that what he sets himself to record
is the teaching given by the Apostles to the Church of their
day. It is not as his own book, but as theirs, that he puts
out this manual of Church discipline. He has no eare,
as other authors had, to invent a plausible situation to
explain how this teaching was formulated or came to his
knowledge: he prefers to remain in the background, and
allow the Teaching to win its way to acceptance on its
merits. The book no doubt is coloured by the cirecum-
stances of his own time and place; and yet so little
coloured that no one has ever been able to give con-
vineing proof either of its locality or of its date. In
attempting to interpret it we must constantly remember
that two elements are everywhere present: the writer’s
desire to say nothing that might not be supposed to have
been said by the Apostles, and his desire to issue instruc-
tions which should have some bearing on the Church
life of his day. It is just because he has combined these
elements so skilfully, that we cannot either date or locate
him.

Our author’s obligations to the Two Ways end with
the warning: ‘‘ See that none make thee err from this
way of teaching ; otherwise he instructeth thee apart from

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE = 89

God.” The Latin version contains a few more clauses
after this :—

**Haec in consulendo si cottidie feceris, prope eris vivo deo:
quod si non feceris, longe eris a veritate. haec omnia tibi in animo
pone, et non decip(i)eris de spe tua; sed per haec sancta certamina
pervenies ad coronam; per dominum Iesum Christum regnantem
et dominantem cum deo patre et spiritu sancto in saecula saeculorum;
Amen.”

Our author has nothing of this. Indeed, he has quite
another message: for, in contrast to the requirement
that all the precepts must be observed, he introduces the
principle of a higher and a lower standard of Christian
living. Two passages of St Matthew’s Gospel are ringing
in his ears: “ Ye shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father
is perfect ’’ (v. 48), and “‘ If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell
that thou hast, and give to the poor”? (xix. 21). On the
first he has already played in his interpolation from the
Sermon on the Mount: “ Turn to him also the other cheek,
and thou shalt be perfect”; and both are in his mind in
the words which follow here :—

Ei pev yap divaca Bacrdcat odov tov Lvyov Tod Kupiov, TédeELos
gon’ <i 8 ov dvvacat, 6 dvvy, TODTO Tole.

Tlepi dé ris Bpdcews, 6 Sivaca Bdotacov’ ard 8 Tod cidwdo-
Odtov Aiay tpdcexe’ AaTpeia yap eat. Oedv vexpSv.

These words form the transition from the first to the
second part of the Teaching, and they deserve to be studied
with care. We must begin by asking ourselves, What
Apostolic sanction could the writer have found for this
doctrine of a higher and a lower observance, and for the
precept “Do what thou canst” ? We naturally think
first of the Conference at Jerusalem, which refused to lay
on the Gentiles a yoke that even Jews found too heavy
to bear, but yet insisted that they must by all means
abstain from meats offered to idols. Here we discover
much of the phraseology of our passage: émGeivar Cuyoy
émt Tov TpaxnAov Tov paOyTav, Ov ovTE OL maTépes HLdV ovTE Hmets
icxvoapev Baordca, Acts xv. 10; and in v. 28, dréyerOar
cidwrobtrwv, x.7.A. Further, “* the yoke of the Lord”? recalls.
“My yoke ”’ (Matt. xi. 29).

G

90 APPENDIX A

But although the passage in the Acts is indubitably
in the writer’s mind, it does not really sanction two possible
courses, a higher and a lower, but rather makes a distine-
tion between Jewish and Gentile converts in regard to
ritual requirements. Such a sanction is, however, found
in St Paul’s advice concerning Virgins in 1 Cor. vii. 25-40,
where we have a series of examples in which the Apostle
offers two permissible courses, of which one in his judgment
is the better and more consonant with Christian devotion.
I should not venture to put St Paul’s 6 6é\a, rover
(1 Cor. vii. 86) side by side with our author’s 6 dvvy, rotro rote,
if it were not that there is strong reason for believing that
considerable use has been made in the Teaching of this
part of the Corinthian Epistle.1 The very next topic to
which the Apostle turns is the question of idol-meats,
and there is a curious coincidence, if it be nothing more,
in the language of 1 Cor. viii. 4, wept ris Bpdcews odv tay
cidwrobirwr, oidapev dtu ovdev eidSwrAov ev Koo MM, K.T-A.

But indeed I think we shall have to admit that there is
more than coincidence, or at any rate that there are at
this point more coincidences than one. Let us observe
how the Apostle divides this part of his Epistle into sections
introduced by the formula ‘‘ Now concerning’. . .”

Tlepit 8¢ dv éypdare . . . vii. 1.

Tlept d¢ tdv wapPeévev . . . vii. 25.

Ilept d¢ rdv cidwAoPirwv . . . viii. 1 (with subsection epi rhs
Bpdoews odv .. » Vii. 4).

Ilept 8& rOv mvevpariKGv .. . Xi. 1.

Ilept d¢ THs Aoyias . . . Xvi. 1.

Ilept S¢ "AzoANW Tod adeApod . . . Xvi. 12,

It is certainly curious that, as soon as our author has
done with his document, the Two Ways, and begins to
write with a free hand, he adopts a similar method ;—

Ilept de ris Bpdoews . . . Vi 3.
Ilept 8¢ rod Bamwrioparos ... vil. 1.

1 St Paul’s argument is based on the transitoriness of the present
world; mapdyet yap 7d oxfjua Tod Kéopuov TobTov (1 Cor. vii. 31): a thought
which finds exprossion later in the Teaching (x, 6), in the strange
mapervérw 6 Kdours obtes.

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 91

Tlept dé ris edxapiorias . . . ix. 1 (with subsections Ipaézov
Tept Tov ToTypiov . . . ix. 2: Iept 8@ rod kAdoparos. .« ix. 3),
Ilept 8& trav drooréAwy Kat tpopyTadv ... xi. 2.

The observation of this parallel in structure may incline
us to give more weight than we otherwise should to the
parallels in language which we have already noted, and
to those which will presently come before us.

Our author now proceeds to treat the subject of
Baptism. We have already observed that the earlier
portion of the book is regarded as the instruction which
the Apostles gave to the Gentiles before baptising them,
and that the formula is that which is given in Matt. xxviii.
19. We have only to add that, in view of later correspond-
ences, there is reason to think that the “ living water ”
(i8wp dv), which is ordered to be used if possible, is a
phrase which has been borrowed from St John.

The mention of the pre-baptismal fast leads our author
on to speak of fasting more generally. He is now back
again at the Sermon on the Mount; and the injunction,
** Let not your fasts be with the hypocrites ; for they fast
on the second day of the week and on the fifth; but do
ye fast the fourth day and the preparation,” shows how he
can seize upon the sacred words and yet depart entirely
from their spirit in the new application which he is con-
cerned to make of them.

“ Fasts”’ and “ hypocrites ’ suggest the next topic:
** Neither pray as do the hypocrites ; but as the Lord hath
commanded in His Gospel, so pray ye: Our Father. . .”
** The Gospel ” is mentioned again in xi. 8, xv. 8, 4. The
Twelve Apostles can assume that the Gospel in a written
form is already in the hands of their converts. It is
probable that the writer supposed that St Matthew’s
Gospel was in circulation in the lifetime of the Twelve
Apostles ; for it is to that Gospel that he is plainly referring.
But it is certain that he himself was acquainted also with
the Gospels of St Luke and St John. He will not even
give the Lord’s Prayer without a difference: for he
changes év Trois otpavois into év 7G otpave and 7a dedjpara
into riv édeAyjv, and the doxology which he adds is in
the unusual form, 671 vod éorw % dvvayus Kal 4H dda eis rods

2

92 APPENDIX A

aiavas. He does not add ’Apnv, a word which he reserves
for the Eucharist. It is of course possible that his
variations represent a liturgical tradition, for which he
thus claims Apostolic sanction.

The precept to pray three times a day (pis tijs H<pas,
as in Dan. vi. 11) would find sufficient Apostolic authority
in the Acts: at the third hour, when the Apostles are
assembled, presumably for prayer, the Holy Spirit
descends at Pentecost (ii. 15); at the sixth hour Peter
prays at Joppa (x. 16); at the ninth Peter and John go
up to the temple (ili. 1), and the Gentile Cornelius prays
at Cesarea (x. 3).

We now come to the Eucharist : Iept 62 rs edyapiorias,
otTws evyapioTyoaTe’ TpaTov wept Tod worypiov. Then after
a brief Thanksgiving we have zepit d@ tod KAdoparos,
followed by another brief Thanksgiving. Here two points

surprise us: first, the Cup is placed before the Bread ; /

secondly, the word xAdopa in such a connexion is exceed-
ingly odd. The first point is illustrated by 1 Cor. x. 16,
ties

Td mrornpiov THS edAoyias 5 evAOyotpeEV, Odx? Kowwvia eotiv TOD
aiparos TOD XPLETOD 5 TOV aprov ov khopev, ovxi Kowovia TOD
caparos Tod xpirrod éorw ; Ore els Gpros, ev capa ol mo\Aot éoper,
ob yap TavTes €x TOD Evds apTov meTEeXopev,

The only other parallel for this order in early Christian
literature is Lk. xxii. 14 f. We have seen enough of our
author to be ready to believe that this is a piece of literary
perversity on his part, and does not represent the practice
of any Christian community. A few lines later he recurs
to the usual order when, he writes, Mydels d& dayéro
}) miérw ard THS €dxapiotias budv, GAN ot Bamricbévres K.T.r. 5
just as, indeed, St Paul himself does in xi. 28, Soximagérw de
dvOpwros éavtdv, Kal odtws x TOD dptov éaOrérw Kai Ex TOd ToTNpLOU
TLVET,

The passage in St Paul has provided our author with
something more than this derangement of the usual order.
It is possible that it has suggested to him the blessing of
the Cup and of the Bread separately, each with a special
Thanksgiving. And itis very probable that his picturesque

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 938

illustration of the grains of corn scattered on the moun-
tains and brought together into one loaf is a fancy
elaborated to match St Paul’s illustration of the unity of
those who partake of the portions of the one loaf. We
shall return to our author’s illustration presently and
examine its phraseology.

Meantime we must consider kAdcua. To such a use
of the word as we have here there is no parallel, says
Harnack, to be found in the literature of the first two
centuries. Again our author is perverse: if he does not
use ofvos but zoryjpiov, according to custom, he will not
use dptos but invents a new technical term xAdopa. What
has suggested it to him? The plural xAdcpuara is used in
all the Gospels for the fragments which remain over when
the multitude has been fed. St John who regards the
incident as a symbol of the Eucharist uses cAdopara twice
in the passage: he also says etyapiornoas (instead of
eiAdynoev); and éverAnobyocav (instead of exopracbycar),
which is to be compared with the pera dé 75 eurdnobjvae
which has raised much discussion in the Teaching (iv. 1).
That this is the source of xAdopa we shall probably be
prepared to admit, when we have examined the language
of the Prayer which follows the second of the Thanks-
givings. Let us first set the two Thanksgivings side by
side ;—

For the Cup. For the Broken Bread.
Eiyapiorodpév cou, tatep Hpav, Eixapiorotpyéy cor, ratep Hav,
brep THS aylas aumédov AaBid brép THS Cwns Kal yvocews,

a ,

TOV TALOOS GOV,
a 2 , ea oe! a An cal 2 , e. : a a
7s eyvopuras Huiv dia Incod rod = js eyvdpicas auty dua “Inood

/ a ,

Taloos wou" TOU Tatoos wov"

‘ e / > A on S +e > \ n°”
OoL y d6€a €lLS TOUS AlWwvas. aoou y doa ELS TOVS ALWVAS,

It has been held that the Eucharistic formule of the
Teaching were probably borrowed from some current
liturgical use and were not the free composition of our
author. This view has been based on the unmistakable
sions of Johannine vocabulary which they present, and
the supposed absence of any traces of St John’s Gospel
in the rest of the book. It has further been held that the
phraseology is to be accounted for not by direct use of the

94 APPENDIX A

Fourth Gospel, but by the prevalence of such phraseology
in the district in which both these formule and the
Johannine writings came into existence. But I think we
shall find that the Gospel of St John has been directly
used here and elsewhere in the book, and that these
Thanksgivings are quite characteristic of our author.

We note first that zdérep jdv comes from the Lord’s
Prayer, which has already been given in full. Next we
observe the use of vats as a title of our Lord. This is not
what we should expect in a Johannine milieu. But our
author is familiar with the Acts, and with the Apostolic
prayer of Acts iv. 24-80: and there (though probably
nowhere else in all literature) we find the same juxta-
position of Aaveld rod zaidds cov and tov adywv raida cov
‘Incodv (also below, dd rod dvdpatos tod dyiov madds cov
*Iycod).

- We proceed to examine the Prayer which immediately
follows the Thanksgiving for the cAdopa :—

"Norep jv TovTo (70) KAdopa SerKopmicpevoy erdvw Tdv dpewy,
kal ovvayOev éyévero &v* ovTw crvaxOytw cov 7% éxkAnola ard tov
Tepatwv THS y7s «is THV Orv Bactreiav’ Ott God eotw % Sdka Kal H
Svvapus dua Inood Xpioroi eis rods aidvas.

This Prayer is a literary tour de force. We have seen
that St Paul, in the passage quoted above, after speaking
of the blessing of the Cup and the breaking of the Bread,
added words which concern the Bread alone ; and we have
suggested that our author’s metaphor is a perverse imita-
tion, almost a parody, of St Paul’s metaphor of the unity
of the loaf. We have traced the xAdcpa, which is here
said to be cvvayév, to an equally perverse use of St John’s
Suvaydyere 7a kXdopata. But we have yet to account
for the awkward participle d:ecxopmopévov, which appa-
rently means to say that the xAdoua is composed of
grains of wheat which once were widely scattered and then
were brought together into one loaf (cuvay@év éyévero &).
When we observe that the exposition of the metaphor is
the gathering together of the Church from all parts of the
world, we cannot mistake the reference to St John’s
interpretation of the prophecy of Caiaphas (xi. 52);

¥ N \ Vd a a \ re / > 9
wa Kat Ta Téxva TOD Peod Ta SvecKopmicpéva Cvvaydyn «cis E&Y,

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 95

And we shall find further reason later for thinking that
the high priest’s prophecy had taken hold of our author’s
imagination.

We have now to consider the closing group of Thanks-
givings and Prayers, ordered to be said } peta. 70 éutrynoOjjvar.
It is really fruitless to inquire whether the writer had in
view the combination of the Eucharist with a meal or not :
such a situation would be offered to him by 1 Cor. xi.
But the word éurAyocOjvo cannot be pressed to indicate
this, now that we have traced it back together with
xcAdopa to St John’s narrative of the Feeding of the
Multitude.

First, then, we have two Thanksgivings :—

Btxapurrodpev oe, TaTEp dyte, imép Tob dylov dvdpards cov, ob
KaTerKnvoras év Tals Kapdtats Tpav, Kal bmep THS yorens Kat
migrews Kat dfavacias, 7 Hs eyvdpucas pty Sia. Inood tod masdds cov"
cot 7 d0éa eis TOUS aidvas.

XW, Seorora mavtoKparop, etwas TH TavTa eveKev TOD dvopards
cov’ Tpopyy Te Kal wordy eOwKas Tots avOpwrors cis dddavow, va
cot ebyapioTncwow’ Huiv O& éxapiow mvevpatiKny Tpopyy Kal ToTOY
kat Cony aidvioy da tod raids Gov. mpd TavTwv ebyapicTodjev Cot,
Ort duvards el* col 7 Oda eis Tods aidvas.

We observe that the writer is systematic in the use of
his doxologies: the short form (beginning with oo/) he
uses four times in Thanksgivings; the longer form
(beginning with 67. cot éorw) is used at the close of the
two Prayers, as he has already used it with the Lord’s
Prayer.

Next we note echoes of St John: comp. xvii. 11, wdrep
aye, THPNTOV adTods ev TA dvduari cov, d dédwxds por, and 26,
eyvapica abrots To dvoua cov kat yvwpicw. Also Pauline
echoes: comp. 1 Tim. vi. 16, d0avaciav, and 17, émi 66 73
mapéxovTe Hiv mdvra mAovolws «is dardAavow (cf, iv. 3, 4y
Bpwpdrov & 6 Oeds Exricev cis peradynpyw pera edyapiotias .. . -
ore wav Ktiopa Oeod Kadov, kat oddey drdBAnTov peTa edxaptorias
AapBavopevor) : and in 1 Cor. x. 4, qvevpatixov Bpdya and
TY EV[LATLKOV TO [Oe

The phrase dvduards cov of xareoxvivocas IS found in the
LXX. of Neh. i. 9, Jer. vii. 12; and dvvards e?, Kvpre, is in
Ps. Ixxxviil. (Ixxxix,) 9. With Xt, déorora mavtoKpdrop,

96 APPENDIX A

éxtisas Ta mévra We may compare the Apostolic prayer from
which our author has already drawn: Acts iv. 24, Aéorora,
ov 6 Toujras Tov ovpavoy, K.T.D. i

After these two Thanksgivings comes the following
Prayer :—

MvyjoOnrt, Kipue, rhs éxxAnolas cov Tov pioacba adrnv azo
TavTOs TovNpod Kal TeACLOoaL adTHy év TH &ydry cov’ Kal atvagov
aitiy amd trav tecodpov dvénwov THv dyacbeicay eis THY OHV
Bacireiav, iv Wrotpacas aity* ott cod éotw % Sivas Kal 7 Sofa
cis TOs aldvas.

With this we may compare Matt. vi. 18, xxiv. 31,
xxv. 84, and 1 John iv. 18 (od rereAedwrau &v rH dydary).

Last of all, we have a remarkable group of ejacula-
tions :—

"ENOerw xXapis Kat TapeAOérw 6 KOa}Los OvTOS.

‘Qoavva 7 Ged Aa Bid. <

Ei tis dys eotw, epxecOw el Tis ovK oT, peTavoeiTw*
papay abd.

2 ,

Apa.

The first of these ejaculations may remind us of
1 Cor. vii. 31, rapdyer yap 1d oyxjpa Tod Kécpov TovToV.
The second is plainly from Matt. xxi. 9, 15; but with a
modification, after our author’s manner, probably based
on Matt. xxii. 45,“ If David therefore calleth him Lord,
how is he his son ? ”

With the third we must compare, for structure as well
as phraseology, 1 Cor. xvi. 22, Hi tus od dude? tov Kvproy,
ito dvddeua papay ac. After what we have seen of our
author’s indebtedness to 1 Corinthians we can have no
doubt that this verse is in his mind at this point.

Lastly, the ’Ayjv with which he closes his Eucharistic
formule, and which he has carefully refrained from using
up to this point, doubtless comes from 1 Cor. xiv. 16,
"Emel édy eddoyis ev Tvedpati, 6 avamrdAnpdv Tov Térov TOD Budrov
mOs épet 7d “Aprvy éxl rH of edxaptia; This passage also
gives us the clue to the brief sentence with which he ends
his directions as to the Eucharist—one of the most un-
expected sentences in the whole of the book: Tois

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 97

8& mpodyras emirpémere edxapicrety doa Oédovew. Why
are the Prophets suddenly introduced here, when no
mention of them has been made hitherto? And what
warrant is there anywhere for the celebration of the
Eucharist by a Prophet? If cdxapioria in this passage
of St Paul be taken in the later technical sense of the
Eucharist, and if by “ blessing in the spirit” St Paul is
supposed to mean the blessing of the elements by a Prophet,
we have at once the required Apostolic sanction not only
of the celebration of the Eucharist by Prophets, but also
of a certain freedom in their performance of the rite.

When we have travelled thus far, and have recognised
how intimately acquainted the writer of the Teaching was
with the First Epistle to the Corinthians, how he has
imitated its subdivisions, borrowed its words and phrases,
and modified its thoughts to suit his own purposes, we
are inclined to ask whether certain other notable features
of his book, besides the celebration of the Eucharist by
the Prophets, may not be derived from the same source.
For example, the fact has been much insisted on that he
addresses his injunctions to the community and not to
any officers of the community, even when he prescribes
rules for Baptism and the Eucharist. The Two Ways
is addressed to a single disciple (réxvoy pov): when the
close of this is reached, the singular number is kept for a
couple of sentences; but then we come to [lepi 6ée
tod Bamticparos, o'rw PBarricare, and with a few excep-
tions the plural is henceforth employed. It is quite
likely that this mode of giving injunctions even as to
ecclesiastical ceremonies in the form of an address to the
whole community is simply taken over from St Paul,
and is therefore to be regarded as a trick of the writer and
no proof at all that he recognised any “ sovereignty of the
community ” in such matters. _

I am tempted to go a step further and enter on more
controversial ground. The Apostles, Prophets, and
Teachers, of whom so much has been written since the
book was discovered, have appeared to me increasingly
unreal the longer I have contemplated them and the more
I have tried to find any true parallel to them in any part
of the Church. The Apostles are particularly shadowy

98 APPENDIX A

personages, and the little that is said of them is simply
grotesque. Here is the whole of it :—

“Now concerning the apostles and prophets, according to the
command of the Gospel, so do ye. And let every apostle coming
to you be received as the Lord. But he shall not remain save one
day, and if there be necessity a second also; but if he remain three,
he is a false prophet. And when he goeth forth let the apostle take
nothing, save only bread till he find lodging ; but if he ask for money,
he is a false prophet.”

Who are these extraordinary beings, bearing an
honoured name, of whom nothing but a most depreciatory
warning is uttered ? Hilgenfeld was driven to think they
were Montanist apostles: ‘‘ Harnack,” he says, “‘ regards
them as itinerating evangelists, but he cannot show that
such evangelists were called apostles by Catholic writers.”
I confess that I think it more probable that they are a
free creation of the writer, who had in his mind St Paul’s
words in 1 Cor. xii. 28, ‘‘ God hath set in the church first
apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers.”” How
was his picture of the Church to which the Twelve Apostles
addressed their injunctions to be duly drawn, if he left out
Apostles and proceeded at once to Prophets, of whom
doubtless he knew something, though but little to their
advantage ? He knew, as we know, that in the New
Testament other Apostles are mentioned besides the
Twelve ; not only true Apostles, but also “‘ false apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles
of Christ ” (2 Cor. xi. 18). He may possibly have known
of travelling evangelists, passing to mission-fields, and
may have thought the term “apostle”? applicable to
them: but if so, his experience of their kind was not
fortunate, for he thought it quite likely that they might
only prove to be another form of false prophet. At any
rate, St Paul had given to Apostles, Prophets, and
Teachers the first places in the Church: therefore some-
thing must be said about Apostles.

The Prophet was more of a reality. He is somewhat
in awe of him, and is afraid to judge of his utterances,
St Paul, indeed, had spoken of Siaxpioes avevudrwv
(1 Cor, xii. 10), and had given the injunction, zpodfrar de

f

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE — 99

Svo 7) tpets Aadrcirwoav, Kat of dAdou Staxpwérwcay (xiv. 29).
It may be that our author limited of dAdo to the
other Prophets; at any rate he forbids the community
to judge: ravra rpodyryv Aadodvra év tvedpmare ov weipdoere
ovde Siaxpivetre—for this, he adds from Matt. xii. 31, is the
unforgivable sin. Some of them acted in a way that
ordinary men would not be justified in imitating: yet
perchance they were but following the precedent of some
of the Old Testament prophets, whose strange actions
were meant for a sign: their judgment was with God.
His only resource against the numerous class of deceivers
is to enjoin that they be well tested before they are
accepted as true prophets, and to lay down the simple
rule that greediness is the sure sign of the false prophet.

From St Paul he had gathered, as we have seen, that
Prophets might “ bless in the spirit” at the Eucharist,
and therefore could not be limited to prescribed formule.
This is a sufficiently surprising statement, but now follows
something more startling still: “they are your high
priests.’ This is not said in reference to the Eucharist,
though he twice speaks of that as a sacrifice, borrowing the
word from Malachi. It is said in reference to the reception
of firstfruits. He is making provision for a Prophet
who desires to settle in a community. To him the Lord’s
words will apply, “he is worthy of his meat.” ‘“* Every
firstfruit therefore of the produce of wine-press and
threshing-fioor, thou shalt take and give to the prophets ;
airol ydép eciow of apxuepets tpdv.” In further enumerating
kinds of firstfruits he twice uses the expression “ give
according to the commandment.” No such command-
ment can be deduced from our Lord’s words in St
Matthew’s Gospel: where then has he found his sanction
for transferring the Jewish system of firstfruits to provide
for the sustenance of Christian Prophets? If we turn
again to the First Epistle to the Corinthians, we find what
we want in a command of the Lord which was certain to
attract his attention Le 13) :-—

Ovx oldare Ore of Ta tepa epyatopevor Ta €x TOD lepov eoOiovaw,
ob To Gvovacrnpiy mapedpevovres 7 Pvovacrypiv ouvpepilovran 5
otrws Kat 6 Kipios diéracey Tols Td evaryyeAvoy KarayyéAAovow ék
tod evayyehiov Civ.

100 APPENDIX A

The Lord had said that they who preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel, and St Paul had given as the
reason for this that the priests in the temple were accus-
tomed to live of the altar. This is enough for our author,
who transfers a list of firstfruits from the Book of
Numbers, where they are ordered to be given to the priests,
and thus makes an abundant provision for the Prophets,
“ for they are your high priests.” We have thus accounted
for the provision, but not altogether for the designation.
Why dpxepets, and not simply tepets as in the Old
Testament passage from which he has drawn? We have
already seen how he has borrowed a striking phrase from
the interpretation given by St John to the words of
Caiaphas (xi. 51 f., va... ta Suecxopmicpeva cvvayayy eis
év). Now the very same passage declares that the high
priest, in virtue of his office, spoke as a prophet: rotvo de
ad éavtod ovk erev, GAG Gpyiepers dy Tod eviavTod éxeivou
érpopytevoev. If their high priests were prophets, the
Prophets “ are your high priests.”

The Teacher is added to the Prophet in a rather
perfunctory way. He is just mentioned in xiii. 2, ocavrws
diddoxaros GAVOwds é€otw adios Kal adtos domep 6 epydrys THs
tpopys avrod¥. Our author knows that Teachers come
next to Prophets in St Paul’s list, and he links them with
Prophets in xv. 1, 2. But he has nothing to tell us about
them as a separate class.

But if Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers are the promi-
nent personages of the Church, whether as occasional
visitors or as making a prolonged stay, what of the
ordinary government of a Christian community ? Had the
Twelve Apostles left no directions about that ? When he
has done with the Prophets, and has given some rules as
to the Sunday Eucharist and its preliminaries of confession
and reconciliation, he proceeds to speak of those who
would ordinarily be responsible for worship and discipline :
‘“* Appoint therefore for yourselves bishops and deacons,
worthy of the Lord, men who are gentle and without
covetousness and true and proved: for they also minister
to you the ministry of the prophets and teachers. There-
fore despise them not, for they are your honoured ones
together with the prophets and teachers.” He had

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 101

Apostolic warrant for Bishops and Deacons in Phil. i. 1
and in the Pastoral Epistles. From the latter source he
draws his epithets, though somewhat in disguise; in
1 Tim. iii. 3 we find émvecxys and ddpirdpyvpos of the Bishop,
and of the Deacons we read (v. 10) doxipagécbwoav mpdrov.
But what chiefly interests us is the ground which he
assigns for their authority: tyiv ydp Aerovpyoter Kat adroit
tiv Aerovpyiav tdv mpopyTdv Kat SidacxdAwv. How are
we to explain Aerovpyev in such a connexion? We
have seen that he could find but little to say about
Teachers, and that he merely linked them on to the
Prophets. Now apart from 1 Cor. xii. 28 there is only
one passage which brings Prophets and Teachers im-
mediately together: for in Eph. iv. 11 Evangelists and
Pastors come in between. This passage is Acts xiii. 1, 2,
“* There were at Antioch, in the church there, prophets and
teachers . . . and as they were ministering to the Lord,”
ete. St Luke has derived his phrase Aerovpyotvroy To
cupid from. the: LX&..-after, bis manner, taking it over
from 1’ Sani. ii}. ‘Tz where the -yéamg. prophet Samuel was
‘* ministering to.the Lord ”” (jv ‘Aeroupyaiv’ xO-xipiv). It is
interesting to seé how far:the phrase has travelled.

The writer of the ‘Eeachins had doubtless to face the
fact that the funrtions which he ascribes to Prophets were
in his own day--héing’ performed ‘by. Bishops. But he had
no Apostolic warrant for the teiebration of the Eucharist
by a Bishop, such as _ he had contrived to find in St Paul ©
for its celebration by a Prophet. He succeeds, however,
by the aid of Acts xiii. 1, 2, in building a sort of bridge
between Prophets and Teachers on the one ‘side and
Bishops and Deacons on the other. What was the actual
constitution of the Church in which he lived, he does not
enable us to determine. He may have identified Bishops
and Presbyters, as he makes no mention of the latter ; but
such a conclusion is precarious. And as the instructions
which he gives are those of the Twelve Apostles who are
addressing “‘ the Gentiles’ generally and not any par-
ticular community, we can draw no argument from his
use of the plural “‘ bishops and aeacons ”’ to decide whether
he thought of a single Church as ruled by one Bishop
or by several.

102 APPENDIX A

If our conclusions are justly drawn, it must be recog-
nised that the writer of the Teaching, so far at any rate as
matters of Church organisation are concerned, confines
himself as strictly as he can to what the Twelve Apostles
might reasonably be held to have enjoined, and bases his
instructions on what he believes he can draw from the
Apostolic writings. He disguises his borrowings indeed ;
but he also disguises the actual conditions of his own time.
The result is that he contributes almost nothing, except
doubtful exegesis, to advance our knowledge of the early
Christian ministry. ™
' This inquiry is far from being exhaustive. I have
pointed to a method of composition which the writer of
the Teaching has certainly employed. That method can
be traced farther than I have traced it here: for I have
not attempted to cover the whole ground, and indeed have
not touched upon the apocalyptic section with which the
book closes. My purpose has been to indicate an.element
which has heen. strangely overlooked: ix the erjticism of
this much-queted.1 rariwal; i. J wish.to-provoke ‘discussion.

If what'I have’ said be, in the: -main accepted, certain
prominent features of the book: will¢édse to be more than
literary curiosities. And then we’ must ask what notable
features remain unexplained, and incapable of explanation,
on the principle of ‘deduction front Apostolic writings.
The kinds of water allowable for Baptism, and the
bi-weekly fast—these at once suggest themselves: and
(though the writer perhaps thought he found Apostolie¢
sanction for them) the custom of praying thrice a day and
the recognition of the professional Prophet may also be
regarded as positive features, characteristic of the writer’s
situation. On the other hand “ silences ” of the Teaching
will be no secure guide. We shall not be at liberty to
conclude that the writer knew nothing of a liturgical
consecration of the eucharistic elements as the Body and
Blood of the Lord, or of carrying the Eucharist to the
absent, or of the Paschal fast and the Easter festival.
For he may have been quite familiar with these things,
and have omitted them simply for want of what he
considered a definite Apostolic sanction.

Other questions to be considered afresh will be ; Why

ee * vee ee > G. ene eee «
« ee « . e e

THE PROBLEM OF THE DIDACHE 1038

is there no reference to Christian theology or soteriology
in connexion with the preparation for Baptism? Why
are there no allusions to persecution by the heathen ?
Why is St Paul never mentioned, although his epistles
are laid under contribution ? What after all was the
writer’s object in composing the book ?

I do not propose to follow Dr Bigg, who for quite
different reasons from any which I have been suggesting
placed the Teaching in the fourthcentury.1_ I should find
it rather hard to conceive that it was written after
Montanism had attained any considerable vogue. For
from the orthodox standpoint there is too much said
about Prophets, and from the Montanist standpoint there
is too little; and there is nothing at all about women.
Apart from pointing this out I make no suggestion as to
a date, though I am ready to believe that both Barnabas
and Hermas have been used.

I ask for a reconsideration of the problem. The
question is not whether this or that feature of the book is
susceptible of a better explanation than I have offered,
but whether the writer’s method was in reality such as I
have supposed. Some of the points which I have taken
may be dismissed as over-subtle; but if even half of
what I have put forward be admitted by serious students,
the pen must be drawn through many a sentence, and
indeed through whole pages, of some recent. descriptions of
early Church life and organisation.

1 Tt may be well to add that I had not seen Dr Bigg’s little book,
“The Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles’? (London, 8.P.C.K., 1898),
until after I had written the above. The popular form in which his
work was published may perhaps be the reason why his trenchant
criticisms have received so little attention,

Xvill. la
ores Gi)
eC
3) Le
i

51x. —b-@
b52 ED
” Lac
» 2a

9
99 a

APPENDIX B

TABLE OF PARALLELS

BARNABAS

But let us pass on to another knowledge
(gnosis) and teaching.

There are two ways of teaching and power,
that of light and that of darkness ;

and there is great difference between the
two ways.

For on the one are stationed light-giving
angels of God, but on the other angels of Satan.

And the one is Lord from eternity and unto
eternity, but the other is ruler of the time of
iniquity that now is.

The way of light then is this ;

if any be willing to travel on the way and
speed by his works to the appointed place.

The knowledge (gnosis) then that has been
given to us to walk therein is as follows :

Thou shalt love Him that made thee,

thou shalt fear Him that formed thee, thou
shalt glorify Him that redeemed thee from

death.
[B. 31x.,5 «.]

[Cf. B. xix. 1 c.]

104

9?

la
ib

2b

TABLE OF PARALLELS 105

_DIDACHE

There are two ways, one of life and one of
death ;

and there is great difference between the
two ways.

The way of life then is this ;

[Cf. D.i.3 a: Now of these words the teaching
is this.]

First thou shalt love the God that made
thee ;

secondly thy neighbour as thyself.

And all things whatsoever thou wouldst not
have done to thee, do not thou to another.

Now of these words the teaching is this.

Bless them that curse you (Lk. vi. 28),

and pray for your enemies (cf. Mt. v. 44,
Lk. vi. 28, 27),

and fast for them that persecute you (ef.
Mt. v. 44) :

for what thank is it (Lk, vi, 32)

106 APPENDIX B

BARNABAS

[Hermas, Mand. ii. 4-7. Work that which is good,
and of thy labours which God giveth thee, give to all that
are in want simply (arAés), not doubting to whom thou
shalt give and to whom thou shalt not give. Give to all:
for to all God desireth that there should be given of His
own bounties. They then that receive shall render
account to God, why they received, and to what end:
for they that receive in distress shall not be judged, but
they that receive by pretence (év iroxpice) shall pay the
penalty. He then that giveth is guiltless; for as he
received from the Lord the ministration to perform it, he
hath performed it in simplicity (ads), making no
distinction to whom he should give or not give.]

xix, 2¢ Thou shalt be simple in heart and rich in
spirit,

3 f

3g
Bh

TABLE OF PARALLELS 107
DIDACHE

if ye love them that love you (Mt. v. 46,
Lk. vi. 32) ?

Do not even the Gentiles the same (Mt. v. 47)?

But do ye love them that hate you (Mt. v. 44,
LK. vi. 27),

and ye shall not have an enemy.

Abstain thou from fleshly and bodily lusts
(1: Pet.:ii..11).

If any man give thee a blow on thy right
cheek, turn to him the other also (Mt. v. 89),

and thou shalt be perfect (cf. Mt. v. 48) ;

if a man impress thee to go with him one
mile, go with him twain (Mt. v. 41);

if a man take away thy cloak, give him thy
coat also (Lk. vi. 29, cf. Mt. v. 40) ;

if a man take from thee that which is thine,
ask it not back (Lk. vi. 30) :

for neither art thou able.

To every man that asketh of thee give, and
ask not back (Lk. vi. 30) ;

for to all the Father desireth that there
should be given of His own free-gifts. Blessed
is he that giveth according to the command-
ment; for he is guiltless. Woe to him that
receiveth ; for if a man receiveth having need,
he shall be guiltless ; but he that hath no need
shall give satisfaction why and wherefore he
received; and being put in confinement he
shall be examined concerning the deeds that
he hath done, and he shall not come out thence

until he have paid the uttermost farthing

(Mt. v. 26).

But indeed concerning this it hath been said :
Let thine alms sweat into thy hands until thou
know to whom thou shouldst give.

And the second commandment of the
teaching (is this) :

108

x1x, 2d

2e

APPENDIX B
BARNABAS

Thou shalt not be joined with them that
walk in the way of death.

Thou shalt hate everything which is not
pleasing to God. Thou shalt hate all hypo-
crisy.

2f Thou shalt not forsake the commandments

3a
3b

3C

Aa

4b

of the Lord.

Thou shalt not exalt thyself,

but shalt be humble-minded in all things.
Thou shalt not assume glory to thyself.

Thou shalt not take evil counsel against thy
neighbour.

Thou shalt not give daring to thy soul.

Thou shalt not commit fornication, thou

shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not
corrupt boys.

The word of God shall not go forth from
thee in the uncleanness of some.
[B. xix. 5 d.]
Thou shalt not respect persons to reprove
any for a transgression.
[B. xix. 6 a.]
[Cf. B, xix. 5 b.]
[B. xix. 4 g.]
[B. xix. 7 a.]

[Cf. B. xix. 8]

[B. xix. 6 B.]

aaa

3)

$3

TABLE OF PARALLELS 109

DIDACHE

[D. iv. 12: Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy and
everything which is not pleasing to the Lord.

[D. iv. 13 a: Thou shalt not forsake the com-
mandments of the Lord.]
[D. ili. 9a: Thou shalt not ewalt thyself.

[D. ti. 6c: Thou shalt not take evil counsel
against thy neighbour.]

[D. ii. 9b: Thou shali not give daring to thy
soul.]

Thou shalt do no murder, thou shalt not
commit adultery, thou shalt not corrupt boys,
thou shalt not commit fornication.

Thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not practise
magic, thou shalt not use drugs.

Thou shalt not murder a child by abortion,
nor shalt thou kill it when it is born.

[D. iv. 8c: Thow shalt not respect persons to
reprove for transgressions.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s

goods.

Thou shalt not forswear thyself (Mt. v. 33),
thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not
speak evil.

Thou shalt not bear a grudge.

Thou shalt not be double-minded nor double-
tongued ;

for the double tongue is a snare of death.

Thy word shall not be false nor empty, but
fulfilled by action.

Thou shalt not be greedy of gain,

nor a plunderer nor a hypocrite nor evil-
disposed nor arrogant,

110 APPENDIX B
BARNABAS

[B. xix. 3¢.]

[Cf. B. xix. 5 ¢.]

xix, 4d Thou shalt be meek,

» 4e thou shalt be quict,

» 4&f — thou shalt be trembling at the words which
thou hast heard.
[B. xix. 3 a.]
[B. xix, 3 d.]

ii,

6¢

ae
76

i2C

. 1-6

Ta
7b
8a

8b
8c
8d

9a
9b

TABLE OF PARALLELS ae
DIDACHE

Thou shalt not take evil counsel against thy
neighbour.

Thou shalt not hate any man,

but some thou shalt reprove, and for some
thou shalt pray,

and some thou shalt love more than thine
own soul.

My child, flee from all evil and all that is like
unto it. Be not angry, for anger leadeth to
murder; nor jealous nor contentious nor
wrathful: for of all these things murders are
engendered.

My child, be not lustful, for lust leadeth to
fornication; nor foul-speaking nor with up-
lifted eyes: for of all these things adulteries
are engendered.

My child, be not a dealer in omens, since it
leadeth to idolatry; nor an enchanter nor an
astrologer nor a magician, neither be willing
to look at them : for of all these things idolatry
is engendered.

My child, be not a liar, since lying
leads to theft; nor avaricious nor vain-
glorious: for of all these things thefts are
engendered.

My child, be not a murmurer, since it leadeth
to blasphemy; nor self-willed nor a thinker
of evil thoughts: for of all these things
blasphemies are engendered.

But be thou meek,

since the meek shall inherit the earth (Mt.v.5).

Be thou longsuffering and pitiful and without
malice

and quiet

and kindly (éya60s)

and trembling at the words continually
which thou hast heard.

Thou shalt not exalt thyself

nor give daring to thy soul,

112

9°

4g

APPENDIX B
BARNABAS

Thou shalt not bear a grudge against thy
brother.

Thou shalt not be of a double mind, whether
it shall be or no.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in
vain.

Thou shalt love thy neighbour more than
thine own soul.

Thou shalt not murder a child by abortion,
nor again shalt thou kill it when it is born.

Thou shalt not withdraw thy hand from thy
son or from thy daughter, but from their youth
up thou shalt teach them the fear of God.

Thou shalt not be found coveting thy
neighbour’s goods,

thou shalt not be greedy of gain.

Neither shalt thou be joined from thy soul
to the lofty, but shalt have thy conversation
with the humble and just.

The operations which befall thee thou shalt
accept as good, knowing that nothing cometh
to pass without God.

Thou shalt not be double-minded nor
double-tongued.

Thou shalt be subject to masters as to a type
of God in shame and fear.

Thou shalt not command thy servant or
handmaid in bitterness, who set their hope on
the same God, lest haply they should not fear
the God who is over you both: for He came
not to call with respect of persons, but unto
those whom the Spirit had prepared.

Thou shalt share in all things with thy
neighbour, and shalt not say that they are
thine own: for if ye are sharers in that which
is incorruptible, how much more in the
corruptible things.

9c

10

TABLE OF PARALLELS 113

DIDACHE
[D. ii. 8b: Thow shalt not bear a grudge.]

[D.iv.4a: Thou shalt not be of a double mind,
whether té shall be or no.]}

(Cf. D. ii. 3a: Thow shalt not forswear thyself
(Mt. v. 38).]

[D. ii. 7¢: and some thou shalt love more than
thine own soul.

[D. ii. 2¢: Thou shalt not murder a child by
abortion, nor shalt thou kill it when it is born.]

[D. iv. 9: Thou shalt not withdraw thy hand
from thy son or from thy daughter, but from their
youth up thou shalt teach them the fear of God.

[D.ii.2d: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's
goods.

[D. ii. 6a: Thow shali not be greedy of gain.]

Thy soul shall not be joined to the lofty,
but thou shalt have thy conversation with the
just and humble.

The operations which befall thee thou shalt
accept as good, knowing that nothing cometh
to pass apart from God.

[D. ii. 4a: Thow shalt not be double-minded
nor double-tongued.

[D. iv. 11: And ye servants shall be subject to
your masters as to a type of God in shame and
fear.]

[D. iv. 10: Thou shalt not command thy
servant or handmaid, who set their hope on the
same God, in thy bitterness, lest haply they should
not fear the God who is over you both: for He
cometh not to call with respect of persons, but unto
those whom the Spirit had prepared.)

[D. iv. 8: Thou shalt not turn away from Les
that is in want (cf. B. xx. 2, D. v. 2—the Evil
Way), but thow shalt share "all things with thy
brother, and shalt not say that they are thine own :
for if ye are sharers in that which is immortal,
how much more in the mortal things.

114

$9

99

10a

10 b

10¢
10d

10 e€

lla

11d

lle
lid
12a

APPENDIX B
* BARNABAS

Thou shalt not be forward in tongue,
for the mouth is a snare of death.

So far as thou canst, thou shalt be pure for
thy soul’s sake.

Be not found stretching out thy hands to
receive, and drawing them in to give.

Thou shalt love as the apple of thine eye
every one that speaketh unto thee the word of
the Lord.

Thou shalt remember the day of judgment
night and day,

and thou shalt seek out each day the persons
of the saints,

either labouring by word

and going forth to exhort them and studying
to save a soul by the word,

or with thy hands shalt thou work for a
ransom of thy sins.

Thou shalt not doubt to give nor murmur in
giving, but shalt know who is the good recom-
penser of the reward.

Thou shalt keep the things that thou hast
received, neither adding nor taking away.

Thou shalt utterly hate that which is evil.

Thou shalt judge justly.

Thou shalt not make a division, but shalt
be at peace, bringing together them that
contend,

[B. xix. 11 d.]
[B. xix, 4¢.]

29
8

3b
3d

TABLE OF PARALLELS 115

DipAcHE* *

[D. ui. 46: [(thow shalt not be double-minded
nor double-tongued),1 for a double tongue? is a
snare of death.

[D. iv. 5: Be not found stretching out thy
hands to receive and drawing them in to
give.

My child, him that speaketh unto thee the
word of God

thou shalt remember night and day,

and shalt honour him as the Lord; for
whencesoever the Lordship is spoken of, there
the Lord is.

And thou shalt seek out daily the persons of
the saints,

that thou mayest find rest in their words.

[D. iv. 6: If thou hast (ought) through (? the
work of) thy hands, thou shalt give a ransom of
thy sins.

[D. iv. 7: Thou shalt not doubt to give nor
murmur in giving, for thow shalt know who is
the good recompenser of the reward.

[D. iv. 136: but thou shalt keep the things that
thow hast received, neither adding nor taking
away.

[D. iv. 3b: Thou shalt judge justly.
Thou shalt not make a division, but thou
shalt pacify them that contend.

Thou shalt judge justly.
Thou shalt not respect persons to reprove for
transgressions.

1 Seo B. xix. 7 a. 2 4 dvy~Awoola.

116 APPENDIX B
BARNABAS
[B. xix. 5 a.
[B. xix. 9 a.]

[B. xix. 10 ,]
[B. xix. 11 a.]
[Cf. B. xx. 2—the Evil Way.]

[B. xix. 8 a.]

[B. xix. 5 e.]

[B. xix. 7 ¢.]

1B. xix. 7 03
[B. xix. 2 e.]
[B. xix. 2 f.]
[B. xix 110.)
xix,12b Thou shalt make confession of thy sins.
Thou shalt not draw near to prayer in an evil

conscience.
This is the way of light.

2?

92

Sa

8b

10

11
12

18a

l4a

TABLE OF PARALLELS 117
DIDACHE

Thou shalt not be of a double mind, whether
it shall be or no.

Thou shalt not be found stretching out thy
hands to receive, and drawing them in to give.

If thou hast (ought) through (? the work of)
thy hands, thou shalt give a ransom of thy
sins.

Thou shalt not doubt to give nor murmur in
giving, for thou shalt know who is the good
recompenser of the reward.

Thou shalt not turn away from him that is
in want (cf. B. xx. 2, D. v. 2—the Evil
Way),

but thou shalt share all things with thy
brother, and shalt not say that they are thine
own: for if ye are sharers in that which is
immortal, how much more in the mortal
things.

Thou shalt not withdraw thy hand from thy
son or from thy daughter, but from their youth
up thou shalt teach them the fear of God.

Thou shalt not command thy servant or
handmaid, who set their hope on the same God,
in thy bitterness, lest haply they should not
fear the God who is over you both: for He
cometh not to call with respect of persons, but
unto those whom the Spirit hath prepared.

And ye servants shall be subject to your
masters as to a type of God in shame and fear.

Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy and everything
which is not pleasing to the Lord.

Thou shalt not forsake the commandments
of the Lord,

but thou shalt keep the things that thou
hast received, neither adding nor taking away.

In church thou shalt confess thy trans-
gressions, and thou shalt not draw near to
prayer in an evil conscience.

This is the way of life.

118 APPENDIX B
BARNABAS

xx. la But the way of the Black One is crooked and
full of curse :

» 1b for it is the way of death eternal with
punishment, wherein are the things that
destroy their souls :

» 1 ¢. (1) idolatry D. (8).

(2) boldness D. (19).
(3) exaltation of power, ef. D. (20).
(4) hypocrisy D. (10).
(5) doubleness of heart D. (11).
(6) adultery D. (2).
(7) murder D. (1).
(8) plundering D. (8).
(9) arrogance D. (13).
(10) transgression.
(11) craft D. (12).
(12) malice D. (14).
(13) self-will D. (15).
(14) sorcery D. (7).
(15) magic D. (6).
(16) covetousness D. (16).
(17) absence of the fear of God D, (Lat.)!

[In the list of evil persons which follows, D. v. 2 agrees

with B. xx. 2 both in text and order, except in these cases :—

B. (8) loving lies; D. loving a lie.

B. (7) paying no heed to the widow and the orphan;
D. omits.

B. (8) wakeful not unto the fear of God but for that
which is evil; D. wakeful not unto that which
is good but unto that which is evil.

B. (9) from whom gentleness and forbearance are far
off and removed; D. omits ‘“‘ and removed.”

B. (10) loving vain things; D. has the verb second.

B. (14) ready in scandal; D. omits.]

1 Deum non timentes; thus heading the list of evil persons

which follows in § 2,

TABLE OF PARALLELS 119
DIDACHE

Vv. la _ But the way of death is this: first of all it
is evil and full of curse;

x» 126 (1) murders B. (7).
(2) adulteries B. (6).
2(3) lusts.
(4) fornications.
(5) idolatries B. (1).
(6) magic arts B. (15).
- (7) .sorceries B. . (14).
: (8): ‘phundeiings BR CS)
3(9) ‘false testimonies. *: - ° ee
(10): hypocrivies RB. (4).
(12): Acublenessof-heart B. (5).
:. (12) .craft B. (11),
: (18) atroganéd B: ets
(14) malice B. "(13): §
(15) self-will B. (13).
(16) covetousness B. (16).
2(17) foul speaking.
2(18) jealousy.
(19) boldness B. (2).
(20) exaltation, cf. B. (8).
(21) boastfulness.

2 These three vices (not in B.) wo
interpolated passage D. iii. 1-6.
® See D, ii, 3 a, “Thou shalt n

§, LOMITED: *

Sen

3

: LON.

WILLIAM OLOWES-£ND

sr

ae

DATE DUE

ss
coy]
o>
CH
> gas =

LO-45220

HIGHSMITH

ERAL THE

6h

00017534

Heb ETAT ACAD,

Sth
